Behavior Management Traditional and  Expanded Approaches Edited by Norris M. Haynes UNIVERSITY PRESS OF AMERICA,  INC. Lanham  Boulder  New York  Toronto  Plymouth, UK

Copyright  2013 by University Press of America, Inc. 4501 Forbes Boulevard Suite 200 Lanham, Maryland 20706 UPA Acquisitions Department 301 459-3366 10 Thornbury Road Plymouth PL6 7PP  United Kingdom All rights reserved Printed in the United States of America British Library Cataloging in Publication Information Available Library of Congress Control Number:  2012941253 ISBN: 978-0-7618-5960-4 clothbound : alk. paper eISBN: 978-0-7618-5961-1  The paper used in this publication meets the minimum  requirements of American National Standard for Information  SciencesPermanence of Paper for Printed Library  Materials, ANSINISO Z39.48-1992.

iii Foreword  v Ruth Eren Introduction  1 Norris M. Haynes  1   Overview of Learning Theories That Undergird Traditional  Behavior Management Approaches  3 Norris M. Haynes  2  The Seven Step Approach to Behavior Management  14 Norris M. Haynes  3  Data Collection and Analysis Procedures  39 Norris M. Haynes with Nicole Shlomo  4   Behavioral Interventions for Autism: A Brief Review of  Two Approaches  62 Matthew Curry, Nicole Messina, and Nicole Shlomo  5   Response to Intervention and Positive Behavior Intervention  and Supports  79 Taylor Carroll, Randi Lawlor, and Justin Phee  6  Cognitive Behavior Management  91 Ashley Camera, Kathleen Esposito, and Catherine OBrien  7   Social and Emotional Learning and Character  Education Approaches  109 Ludmila Rodrigues, Inva Merolli, Jesse Crandall, and  Norris M. Haynes  Contents

iv  Contents  8   Yoga with Children: A New Approach to Behavioral Intervention 124 Alysia Tanasi, Cindy Videira, Jenelle Newcomb, and Adriana Diaz  9   Implementing Behavior Management Approaches in Supportive  School Contexts: Addressing High-Risk Behaviors among  At-Risk Students  139 Patricia De Barbieri, Joy E. Fopiano, and Norris M. Haynes 10   Systemic Personalized and Developmentally Appropriate  Behavior Management  149 Norris M. Haynes Index  163

v Given the complexity of our times and the diversity of the student population  in todays schools, it is no wonder that teachers, school psychologists, counselors and administrators struggle to meet the emotional needs of the children  they serve. As a former teacher, school psychologist and administrator, I  constantly sought effective interventions that would be successful in meeting  the broad array of emotional needs and addressing the problem behaviors  presented by troubled youngsters. Behavior Management: Traditional and  Expanded Approaches is a source that would have been helpful to me in my  quest to find interventions that I might consider for individual students . Dr. Haynes has constructed a text with contributions from practicing professionals, colleagues and graduate students that will be of immediate use to  the practitioner in the schools, making that important link between research  and practice. He addresses the traditional behaviorist learning theories operant instrumental learning, social learning, and cognitive factors that impact  behavior as well as some non-traditional approaches. But most importantly,  he includes case studies and practical application of these theories. His seven  step approach to behavior management is easily understood and can be immediately implemented within a public school setting with very thorough  data collection and analysis procedures.  Although this book is not specific to diagnostic identification labels, it does  include a chapter specific to behavioral interventions for autism, highlighting  a program which illustrates effective implementation of applied behavioral  analysis strategies for this population.  This book would not be complete if it did not link to current school initiatives. Chapters five, six and seven elaborate on response to intervention  RTI, positive behavior intervention and supports PBIS, cognitive behavior  Foreword

vi  Foreword management and character education. Many of these interventions are currently being implemented in schools. This book not only discusses research  related to these interventions, but again, gives practical implementation direction and procedures for their use.  There is no one intervention that will work for all children and the use of  an evidence based practice does not, in itself, always ensure success. In our  quest to provide effective interventions we must always balance the use of  evidenced based practices with new ideas that have yet to be validated. We  must not believe unsubstantiated claims of such interventions without clear  data and a strong body of research to support their effectiveness . Dr. Haynes  gives voice to such a novel approach to a behavioral intervention, that is not  evidenced based, by including a chapter on the use of yoga.  The final two chapters in this book sum up Dr. Haynes premise that behavior management is not narrowly characterized by a basic behavior stimulus  response paradigm but rather embraces a childs cognitive, emotional and  behavioral response to the challenges heshe faces in a complex world. Traditional, evidenced based approaches to behavior management continue to be  the foundation of intervention but for some individuals, we may allow room  for additional approaches to address unique needs. This book is an important contribution to the field of behavior management  in todays schools. It offers a wealth of research and practical implementation  strategies for those who work in schools, making that ever so important link  between research and practice. Without this link, in texts such as this, school  professionals will continue to be frustrated with failed attempts to successfully address the social emotional needs of the children they serve and the  resulting behaviors that disrupt their opportunity for educational success.  Ruth Eren, Ed.D. Associate Professor Director: Center of Excellence on Autism Spectrum Disorders Southern Connecticut State University New Haven, Connecticut
Problem behaviors continue to be a major source of concern in schools and  classrooms, on playgrounds, in communities and in many homes. Uncontrolled, unregulated and unaddressed undesirable behaviors are disruptive and  harmful. In schools and classrooms, these behaviors interfere with teaching  and learning and undermine students ability to achieve at their highest potential. On the playground and in communities, undesirable behaviors often  result in fighting, bullying, and other forms of violence and victimization. In  homes, negative and difficult behaviors interfere with family dynamics, reduce parents authority and control, and often cause stress and anxiety among  parents and children. It is important to note that behavioral concerns are not limited to children  but extend also to adolescents and adults in a variety of settings. Anxiety,  addictions, obsessive and compulsive behaviors, anger, procrastination and  impulsivity are among the many behaviors that can be successfully treated  using different behavior management strategies. Therefore, there is a compelling need and reason for behavior management strategies to be taught and  understood by concerned and qualified individuals.  Many of the behavior management approaches being used are based on traditional behaviorist learning theories such as the classical learning and operantinstrumental learning theories. These theoretical models place significant  emphasis on stimulus response relationships and see behavior as a function  of environmental factors that either precede the behavior or follow the behavior. Other traditional behavior management approaches include some consideration of the importance of cognitive factors in mediating the influence  of environment on behavior. Most notable among these approaches are the  social learning or modeling approaches. These more traditional approaches  are discussed in chapters one to four. In chapter four the authors examine in  Introduction Norris M. Haynes
Introduction detail the application of traditional behaviorist approaches to working with  individuals who have autism. Most recently, significant developments have taken place in how behavior  problems are viewed and in how they are addressed. Some of these developments are discussed in chapters five to eight. These chapters include a  closer and deeper examination of more systemic approaches such as positive  behavior supports and response to intervention in school settings, cognitive  behavior management strategies, social and emotional learning, character  education and the use of yoga. In Chapter nine, the discussion of the application of behavior management strategies to high-risk and challenging  behaviors among at-risk youth in schools and classrooms provides a valuable  contribution to this book. The authors provide rich and practical insights into  how school psychologists, school counselors, special education teachers and  other school-based support personnel may use the methods and techniques  of the range of behavioral strategies to address challenging behaviors among  children and youth. In the final chapter of this book, chapter ten, the author  makes a strong case for seeing and treating behavior management, and the  various approaches and strategies discussed in this book, as part of a more  systemic, personalized and holistic effort to address the multifaceted nature  of challenging behaviors. He emphasizes the importance of including, examining and addressing childrens development along critical developmental  pathways, and underscores the need to consider the socio-cultural contexts  in which children learn and develop when designing behavior management  programs. 
There are three basic learning theories that undergird traditional behavior  management strategies. Traditional behavior management strategies are being defined in this book as those that are premised on the notion that undesirable behaviors have been learned and can be unlearned. There is a relationship among three elements that need to be changed. The three elements are  1 the environmental conditions or stimuli that precede the behavior 2 the  behavior to be changed 3 the consequences or results of the behavior. The  three basic learning theories are: 1 classical learning 2 instrumental or  operant learning 3 social learning. Sawyer, 2006; Schunk, 2007; Kazdin,  2008 These three learning theories are discussed in greater detail below. MAJOR LEARNING THEORIES Classical LearningConditioning Ivan Pavlov 18491936, a Nobel-Prize winning Russian physiologist is perhaps the most notable theorist associated with the classical learning theory.  Pavlov stumbled onto classical learning, as it were, as he studied the salivating reflexes of dogs. Pavlov noticed that when a dog was presented with food,  the dog salivated. He also noticed that even before food was presented, the  dog would salivate in the presence of other stimuli that repeatedly occurred  just before the food was presented in anticipation, as it were, of receiving the  food. It was as if these stimuli signaled that food was coming. Pavlov referred  to this as psychic salivating. The food came to be called the unconditioned  stimulus because it naturally stimulated the dog to salivate. Salivating to the  Chapter One Overview of Learning Theories That  Undergird Traditional Behavior  Management Approaches  Norris M. Haynes
Chapter One food was not based on any conditions. It was a natural response. The salivating elicited by the food came to be called the unconditioned response. The  stimulus such as a bell or metronome that was paired with the food several  times and then came to elicit the salivating response without the presentation  of the food, came to be called the conditioned stimulus. Its power to elicit  salivating was based on the condition that it was paired with food repeatedly  first. The salivating elicited by the bell or metronome came to be called the  conditioned response. Classical learningconditioning involves several steps  that are described in tables 1.1 and 1.2.  Principles of Association and Generalization In the classical learning paradigm, there are two general principles that operate. The principles of association and generalization. In the case of  Pavlovs experiment, the bell became associated with food and elicited a  similar response from the dog as food did. In the case of the student being  tested, the test becomes associated with classical music and elicits a similar  Table 1.1.  Steps in the Classical Learning Paradigm Pavlovs Experiment Applied to Students Step One: Pavlovs Experiment    Dog presented with Food   Dog salivates    Food sight, smell  taste causes  salivating   Food is unconditioned stimulus   Salivating is unconditioned response  Step One: Applied to Students   Classical music is played in  classroom   Students feel relaxed   Classical music elicits relaxed feeling   Classical music is unconditioned  stimulus   Students relaxed feeling is  unconditioned response Step Two: Pavlovs Experiment   Pair Bell with Food   Bell is rung   Food is presented to dog   Dog salivates   Food is unconditioned stimulus   Salivating is unconditioned response   Bell is conditioned stimulus Step Two: Applied to Students   Pair test with classical music   Classical music is played   Students feel relaxed   Music is unconditioned stimulus   Relaxed feeling is unconditioned  response   Test is conditioned stimulus Step Three: Pavlovs Experiment   Bell is rung   No food is presented   Dog salivates   Bell in conditioned stimulus   Salivating is conditioned response Step Three: Applied to Students   Test is given   No classical music is played   Students feel relaxed   Test is conditioned stimulus   Feeling relaxed is conditioned  response

Overview of Learning Theories  5 response from the students as classical music does. The conditioned response  is in essence the unconditioned response that becomes generalized to the  conditioned stimulus. The stronger the response elicited by food or classical  music, and the stronger the association between the food and the bell, or the  test and classical music, the stronger the response that the bell will elicit in  the absence of food and the test will elicit in the absence of classical music. Fading and Extinction Repeated presentation of the bell without food, or tests without classical music will result in the decrease or fading and eventual cessation of salivating in  the case of the bell and the dog and in relaxed feelings in the case of the classical music and students. Fading is the gradual decrease of the conditioned response, salivating when the conditioned stimulus bell is presented, or relaxed  feeling when the conditioned stimulus test is presented, due to the continuous  absence of the unconditioned stimulus food or classical music. Extinction  is the eventual cessation of the conditioned response, salivating or relaxed  feeling due to the continuous absence of the unconditioned stimulus food or  classical music, when the conditioned stimulus bell or test is presented. Practical Applications Classical learning approaches based on principles of association and generalization are used to gradually reduce fade and stop extinguish undesirable  behaviors. For example, in the case of smoking cessation programs, this may  involve pairing smoking with noxious or unpleasant stimuli such as a bitter  taste, a horrifying visualization of a diseased lung or even shock. In the case  of overeating it may involve pairing certain foods with unpleasant tastes or  negative imagery to produce a reduction in eating of those foods, and in the  case of a child who hits other children, the hitting behavior may be paired  with an unpleasant sound, or withdrawal of attention to reduce the hitting  behavior. Classical learning approaches and principles of association and  generalization are also used to establish desirable behaviors. For example, in  the case of increasing confidence in flying, the sound and sight of an airplane  may be paired with deep breathing and muscle relaxation to produce feelings  Table 1.2.  Summary of the Classical Learning Paradigm Pavlovs Experiment Applied to Students   Unconditioned Stimulus: Food   Unconditioned Response: Salivate   Conditioned Stimulus: Bell   Conditioned Response: Salivate   Unconditioned Stimulus: Classical Music   Unconditioned Response: Feeling Relaxed   Conditioned Stimulus: Test   Conditioned Response: Feeling Relaxed
Chapter One of relaxation and a reduction in anxiety. This process is often used in systematic desensitization and may be viewed as the classical learning version of  shaping. In the case of getting a class to respond positively to a substitute  teacher, this may involve pairing a substitute teacher with a teacher who is  loved and respected over a period of a few days to produce positive regard  for and cooperation with the substitute teacher. Activity 1 A.  Think of at least three situations in which the classical learning approach  to behavior management may be applied to extinguish an undesirable  behavior. Identify the unconditioned stimulus US, the unconditioned  response UR, conditioned stimulus CS and conditioned response CR  in each situation. B.  Explain in detail the three steps in the classical learning approach as  shown above. Activity 2 A.  Think of at least three situations in which the classical learning approach  to behavior management may be applied to establish and increase a desirable or desired behavior. Identify the unconditioned stimulus US, the  unconditioned response UR, conditioned stimulus CS and conditioned  response CR in each situation. B.  Explain in detail the three steps in the classical learning approach as  shown above. Operant Conditioning or Instrumental Learning Burrhus F. Skinner 1904-1990 is the theorist most notably associated  with operant conditioning or instrumental learning. This approach is called  operant conditioning because proponents believe that the organisms or individuals become conditioned to operate on their environments to influence the  outcomes. The approach is also called instrumental learning because organisms and individuals learn to use their behavior as instruments to get what  they need and want. Skinners experiments with rats and pigeons helped to  demonstrate the aptness of these two designations of operant conditioning  and instrumental learning. The experiments helped to establish the relationships among stimulus, response and reinforcement. In Skinners experiments,  rats learned to act in ways that allowed them be rewarded by receiving food  or by avoiding being shocked escape learning. The basic premise that Skinners experiments established was that in certain situations and under given 

Overview of Learning Theories  7 conditions antecedent the rats acted behavior to influence the outcome  consequences. Antecedents are precursor conditions or situations stimuli  that produce, stimulate, facilitate, encourage or nurture certain behaviors.  Consequences are the results of behavior that can serve as reinforcers by  strengthening a given behavior or as punishers by reducing a given behavior.  In the case of Skinners rats, the following antecedent, behavior and consequence ABC relationship applied: Antecedent: In Maze and Hungry Behavior: Run Through Maze  Press Lever Consequence: Food This ABC paradigm is basic to the application of operant conditioning instrumental learning in behavior management approaches with individuals  in a variety of situations. In given situations Antecedents individuals act  Behavior to influence the outcomes Consequences. For example, many  students study diligently to get good grades. Antecedent: School work  Behavior: Study Consequence: Good Grades Generally individuals use their behavior as instruments to achieve want they  want i.e. reinforcers or to avoid want they do not like punishers. Hence,  the term instrumental learning. They operate on the environment to influence  the outcome hence the term operant learning just as skinners rats pressed  the lever to get food and just as students study hard to get good grades. They  also act to avoid punishment just as skinners rats ran away to avoid shock  and just as students do not cheat in school to avoid failure. Skinner, 1953. Reinforcement and Punishment Reinforcers are consequences that increase the probability that a given behavior may occur. They may be primary directly satisfy a physiological or  emotional need or secondary paired with and exchanged for primary reinforcers. Secondary reinforcers are used mostly in token economy systems  approaches to behavior management. Reinforcement is not just the application of reinforcers. Reinforcement may be positive when a reinforcer is applied or negative when a punisher is removed. Punishers are consequences  that reduce the probability that a given behavior may occur. Punishment is not  just the application of punishers. Punishment may be positive when a punisher is applied or negative when a reinforcer is removed. In this context  positive means applied and negative means removed. 
Chapter One An explanatory paradigm of positive and negative reinforcement is presented in table 1.3. Schedules of Reinforcement Interval schedules of reinforcement are based on the passage of time without  regard to number of responses or the number of times the behavior occurs as  long as the response or behavior occurs at least one time within the established timeframe. Ratio schedules of reinforcement are based on the number  of responses or times that the behavior occurs in a given time frame. Interval  and ratio Schedules can be fixed or variable. With fixed interval schedules a  fixed amount of time must pass before the reinforcement is given as in giving a student social reinforcement, such as praise, after every fifteen minutes  that heshe sits still. With variable interval schedules the amount of time that  must pass before the reinforcement is given varies or changes, such as after  five minutes, then after one minute, then after twenty minutes. An example  would be varying the amount of time that the student must sit still before giving praise. With fixed ratio schedules a fixed number of responses must be  observed before the reinforcement is given e.g. giving praise after every five  times the behavior occurs e.g. grading nightly homework assignments. With  variable ratio schedules the number of responses that must be observed before  the reinforcement is given varies or changes such as after the behavior occurs  five times, then after one time then after twenty times e.g. varying the number  of times a student must sit still before giving himher praise. An explanatory  paradigm of reinforcement schedules is presented in table 1.4. Practical Applications  In behavior management programs, operantinstrumental conditioninglearning is used to reduce negative and undesirable behaviors among students and  Table 1.3.  Summary of Reinforcement and Punishment Types Positive Applied  Negative Removed Result Reinforcement reinforcer  appliedpositive  reinforcement punisher  removednegative  reinforcement Behavior Increase Punishment punisher  appliedpositive  punishment reinforcer  removednegative  punishment Behavior Decrease Direction 

Application of  Reinforcement Punishment Removal of Punishment Reinforcement

Overview of Learning Theories  9 increase positive and desirable behaviors. Some important principles should  be considered when applying operant, instrumental learning approaches:  Target behaviors must be observable and measurable.   The consequence reinforcer or punisher must be carefully selected for  appropriateness and effectiveness.  The consequence must follow the behavior as soon as possible. Additionally, it is important to set realistic, reasonable and achievable behavioral goals using shaping when necessary to achieve the desired ultimate  behavioral outcome. Shaping is the reinforcement of successive approximations to a behavioral goal. Often, in school and classroom settings, token  economy systems are used to modify students behaviors. In a token economy  system students are given tokens stars or points as reinforcers for desirable  behavior that they accumulate and then exchange for other more primary reinforcers such as a snack or a toy. Another variation in the use of reinforcers  is the use of an activity that the individual likes to do to serve as a reinforcer  for a desirable behavioral objective. This is called the premack principle according to which an activity is used as a reinforcer as opposed to an object.  For example, if Sue raises her hand instead of shouting out the answer, the  teacher may allow her to spend an extra ten minutes doing art which she enjoys. In addition to manipulating the consequence of the behavior, it is also  possible to change the behavior by manipulating or changing the antecedent  conditions that precede the behavior. This is called stimulus control and involves manipulating or changing the antecedent conditions that trigger and  encourage undesirable behavior or by changing the stimulus situation to one  that will trigger and encourage desirable behavior. Activity 3 A.  Think of at least three situations in which the operant conditioninginstrumental learning approach to behavior management may be applied  Table 1.4.  Summary Table of Reinforcement Schedules Type of  Reinforcement Fixed Variable Basis Ratio Fixed  of responses  required for  Variable  of responses  required Based on  of  times behavior  occurs Interval Fixed amount of time  must elapse Variable amount of  time must elapse Based on time  elapse Variation Does not Vary Varies
Chapter One to reduce or eliminate an undesirable behavior. Identify the antecedent  condition A, the target behavior B and the consequence C. B.  Explain in detail the ABC relationship in each of the three situations  presented. Activity 4 A.  Think of at least three situations in which the operant conditioninginstrumental learning approach to behavior management may be applied to establish or increase a desirable or desired behavior. Identify the antecedent  condition A, the target behavior B and the consequence C. B.  Explain in detail the ABC relationship in each of the three situations  presented. Social Learning Theory Albert Bandura 1925-present is the theorist who is most prominently associated with social learning theory. He maintains that behaviorism, as represented by classical and operant learning approaches, is too simplistic an  approach to understanding and explaining behavior, such as aggressive acts.  He sees behaviorism as focusing too much and perhaps only on observable  and measurable variables while avoiding more internal and subjective mental  processes. So he added cognitive or mental variables to his theory. He criticizes the notion that the environment causes behavior, such as in the stimulusresponse paradigm of behaviorism, as being too one-sided and limiting. He  asserts that behavior also causes the environment, just as the environment  causes behavior. He calls this reciprocal determinism. The environment and  the behaviors of the individual affect each other. Bandura further emphasizes the interaction among there elements in considering personality and behavior. He considered the environment, the behavior and the mental or cognitive processes, such as language and imagery,  which mediate those two. So one may consider Banduras position as: S-P-R  stimulus-psychological processesbehavior as opposed to S-R stimulusresponse as in the strict behaviorist tradition. Given Banduras emphasis  on cognitive or psychological processes, he is often considered to be one of  the fathers of cognitivism or cognitive behaviorism. Banduras emphasis on  cognitive processes, including imagery, provides the basis for two key and  important concepts that form the backbone of most of social learning theory.  These are observational learning or modeling and self-regulation. Bandura,  1969, 1977.

Overview of Learning Theories  11 Observational LearningModeling  Banduras original demonstration of observational learning and modeling  was through his bobo doll studies. He filmed a young woman aggressively  assaulting a bobo doll an inflatable balloon-like figure shaped like an egg  weighted in the bottom so that it bobs back up when it is knocked down.  The confederate, who was one of Banduras students, punched and kicked the  figure as she shouted sockeroo! She then sat on the inflatable figure, hitting it with a hammer all the while in an aggressive and threatening manner.  Bandura then showed the film to kindergartners who then went out to play in  a play room with a bobo doll and some hammers. Some observers took notice  of what the kindergartners did. Many of the children punched, kicked and hit the inflatable doll with the  hammers, as they shouted sockeroo just as the adult confederate had done.  They were in fact imitating the confederates behavior. The childrens behavior changed without any external rewards and just through observation.  Observational learning or modeling had taken place. According to Bandura,  based on findings from his studies, several steps are involved in observational  learningmodeling: 1.  Attention. First, for learning to occur, the learner must be paying attention. In the cases of the bobo doll experiment, the children paid attention  to what the confederate did. They replicated the confederates behavior  almost exactly. Attention is influenced by characteristics of the model  such as whether the model is attractive, deemed to be powerful, competent or in some important ways similar to the learner. For young children,  other characteristics might be important such as if the model is colorful  or dramatic. 2.  Retention. Second, the learner must be able to retain or remember the  information to which heshe paid attention. The cognitive processes introduced by Bandura, such as imagery and language, play a crucial role  in retention. Being able to store observed behavior in memory as imagery  and describe the observed behavior using language helps to facilitate the  reproduction of the observed behavior.  3.  Reproduction. Third, the learner has to be able to reproduce or perform the  behavioral acts that heshe observed and remembers. There may be a level  of physical and skill readiness needed in order to reproduce the observed  behavior. Practicing a given behavior may help to improve the learners  ability to reproduce it.  4.  Motivation. Fourth, there has to be some kind of incentive for the learner  to imitate the observed behavior. Bandura identified three kinds of 
Chapter One incentives which he called reinforcements. Unlike traditional behaviorists,  Bandura maintained that reinforcements do not cause individuals to learn  as much as they inspire or motivate the learner to demonstrate what he or  she has learned. The three kinds of reinforcements are as follows:    vicarious reinforcement: observing the individual whose behavior is being imitated receive reinforcement for the imitated behavior. It is as if  the learner himself or herself internalizes the relationship between the  observed behavior and the reinforcement.   promised reinforcements: expecting, hoping or imagining being reinforced for performing the imitated behavior.    past reinforcement: having been reinforced in the past for performing  the imitated behavior. Similarly, the learner learns not to imitate certain behaviors based on  three types of punishments which are the converse of the three types of  reinforcements identified above.   vicarious punishment.   promised punishment.   past punishment.  Practical Applications  Social learning through modeling and imitation occurs much more frequently  than is often recognized. Individuals generally, but particularly children,  learn both appropriate and inappropriate behaviors continually in a variety of  settings and through various media sources. Children are especially susceptible to the influence of modeled behavior on television and in their immediate physical environments. The intentional application of Banduras social  learning approach can have significant value and benefit in ways that the  more traditional behavioral approaches may not. A major advantage in applying the social learning approach to behavior management is the recognition  and incorporation of cognitive processes such as language and imagery in the  behavior change paradigm. Individuals, including students in schools and classrooms, can learn appropriate behaviors by observing the behaviors of other individuals and the  outcomes of those behaviors, remembering and being able to describe the  relationship between the observed behavior and outcomes, and then reproducing the desired behavior. For example, in a classroom in which an aggressive students behavior is disruptive, this student may learn to act in a  socially acceptable way by observing a live model or a videotaped model act  appropriately and be reinforced for doing so.

Overview of Learning Theories  13 Activity 5 Think of at least three situations in which the social learning approach to behavior management may be applied to decrease or eliminate an undesirable  or undesired behavior. Identify and explain the Attention A, Retention R,  Reproduction R, and Motivation M steps. Activity 6 Think of at least three situations in which the social learning approach to  behavior management may be applied to establish or increase a desirable or  desired behavior. Identify and explain the Attention A, Retention R, Reproduction R, and Motivation M steps. REFERENCES Bandura, A. 1969. Principles of behavior modification. New York: Holt, Rinehart   Winston. Bandura, A. 1977. Social learning theory. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. Hill, W. 1985. Learning: A survey of psychological interpretations. 4th. Ed. New  York: Harper and Row. Kazdin, A. 2008. Behavior modification in applied settings. Long Grove: Waveland  Press, Inc. Sawyer, R. K. Ed. 2006. The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, Volume One. Cambridge University Press. Schunk, D. H. 2007. Learning theories: An educational perspective 5th Edition.  New York: Prentice Hall. Skinner, B.F. 1953. Science and human behavior. New York: Macmillan. 
The seven steps discussed in this chapter are designed to increase the probability that individuals and groups acquire and practice behaviors that are  effective in achieving appropriate behavioral goals Zirpoli, 2005. The steps  generally incorporate methods for addressing important questions to be considered when seeking to modify behaviors. These questions may be classified  in terms of: nature, frequency and intensity, place and time, effects, intervention and evaluation of intervention. NATURE STEP 1  How would I describe the behavior of concern?   How is the behavior different from what I would expect or hope for in the  situation? FREQUENCY AND INTENSITY STEPS 2 TO 4  How often does the behavior occur?  How strong is the behavior on a scale from 1 to 5? PLACE AND TIME STEPS 1-4  Where does the behavior occur?  When does the behavior occur? Chapter Two The Seven Step  Approach to Behavior Management Norris M. Haynes

The Seven Step Approach to Behavior Management  15 EFFECTS STEP 5  What happens when the behavior occurs?  Who is affected by the behavior and in what way?   What is likely to happen if the behavior is not addressed? INTERVENTION STEP 6  What are the available options in attempting to modify the behavior?  Which option is best and why?  How should I go about implementing the best option? EVALUATION OF INTERVENTION STEP 7  How would I know if the intervention is effective? The seven steps, based on Zirpoli 2005 are: STEP 1 DECIDE IF A PROBLEM EXISTS The purpose of step one is to make an initial determination as to whether or  not a behavioral problem does in fact exist, and if one does exist, what the  nature of the problem behavior is based on referrals or expressions of concern  from teachers, parents or other persons who are concerned about the possible  existence of a behavior problem. During step one the following should occur:  The target behavior is identified and described.  An objective observation of the behavior is conducted.  The child or adult whose behavior is of concern is interviewed.   Significant others involved with the child or adult with regard to the behavior of concern are interviewed.   Other data on the behavior are collected, using checklists and rating scales  see chapter three. STEP 2 DETERMINE IF INTERVENTION IS WARRANTED The purpose of step two is to establish whether the behavior of concern is  serious enough to warrant the development of an intervention plan. If more 
Chapter Two than one behavior problem are identified, then during this step, the behaviors  are ranked for intervention based on the degree of their seriousness including  their frequency, intensity and effects. During step two the following should  occur:   The frequency, intensity and effects of the target behaviors are identified  and described.   If there are more than one behavior of concern, they should be rank ordered  in terms of frequency, intensity and effects.  What happens when the behavior occurs should be determined.   How others are affected by the behavior and in what ways should be determined.   A determination should be made of what is likely to happen if the behavior  is not addressed.   Other more extensive and in-depth data on the target behaviors should be  collected, based on interviews with the child or adult whose behavior is of  concern, as well as with significant others involved with the child or adult,  with regard to the behavior of concern. Checklists and rating scales can also  be used see chapter three. STEP 3 DETERMINE IF MEDICAL ANDOR  PSYCHOLOGICAL REASONS EXIST THAT  CONTRIBUTE TO THE PROBLEM BEHAVIOR The purpose of step three is to determine whether there are any identified  or identifiable physical or mental health conditions that may be causing or  affecting the target behavior. The reason for this is that the intervention to  address a behavior that is medically induced may require medical intervention or a combination of drugs and behavioral therapy. It is also important to  know whether the individual, whose behavior is of concern, is being treated  for a medical condition, and whether the treatment itself may be causing the  behavioral symptoms. During step three the following should occur:   Significant others involved with the child or adult, with regard to the behavior of concern, should be interviewed to determine the existence of any  medical or mental-health related conditions.   Medical and psychological records where appropriate should be legally and  confidentially examined.

The Seven Step Approach to Behavior Management  17 STEP 5 CURRICULUM BASED ASSESSMENT CBA The purpose for conducting a curriculum based assessment is to determine  the goodness of fit between the curriculum, or what is being taught in a  classroom, and students academic readiness to receive what is being taught.  The notion is that if there is a disconnect between the material being taught  in a classroom and students cognitive capacity to receive it, the result could  be that students may display behavior problems as a way to ask for help or    Other data on the behavior should be collected, using checklists and ratings  as warranted and needed. STEP 4 CONDUCT A FUNCTIONAL ASSESSMENT The purpose for conducting a functional assessment is to determine the relationships among the antecedent conditions which form the context in which  the behavior occurs A, the behavior itself B, and the consequences of the  behavior C. This is often referred to as an ABC analysis. Knowing the function that a behavior serves, that is, what need the behavior satisfies for the  individual, through the consequences that follow the behavior, can help the  interventionist to modify the behavior by addressing the function. Functional  assessment is an effective means to identify the antecedents and consequences  associated with the occurrence of a students undesired behaviors. Cooper,  Heron  Heward, 2007;Chandler  Dhalquist, 2002;  Alberto and Troutman, 2003. Represented in Table 2.1 is an example taken from Chandler   Dhalquist 2002. In the example presented in Table 2.1, the student wants the  teachers attention. The function of the behavior is attention. Table 2.1.  Functional Behavior Assessment FBA Paradigm Antecedents Behavior Consequences Teacher enters classroom Student throws paper Teacher reprimands student Teacher enters classroom Student throws paper Teacher praises other students Function of behavior not met Teacher enters classroom Student greets teacher  politely  Teacher smiles at student Function of behavior met
Chapter Two to escape from the learning situation. This may apply to students who are  under-prepared for the material and for whom the material is too advanced or  to students for whom the material is not advanced enough and who may be  bored or feel unchallenged. CBA provides a mechanism for teachers to assess  how students are performing when a given curriculum is used. It generates  information needed to modify the curriculum to obtain desired performance  results among students. The curriculum-based assessment helps to answer several important questions in an effort to determine the reason for a students misbehavior or offtarget behavior in the classroom. The questions are:   Could the fact that the curriculum is too difficult or not challenging enough  be the cause of the students misbehavior or off-task behavior?    Are concepts being taught and explained clearly enough for the student and  if not can this be the cause of the students misbehavior?   Are there other factors in the learning environment that the teacher can  control that may be contributing to the students misbehavior?  During step five the following should occur:   The students present performance level PPL or level of academic work  at which the student succeeds at near 100 should be assessed. This is an  assessment of the students mastery level of assessed subject matter.   The inter-student variability or differences in PPL among students should  be assessed.   The intra-student variability or differences in PPL in different subject areas  for the same student should be assessed.   A determination should be made as to whether there is a curriculum mismatch or disparity between the students PPL and the curriculum.   The teacher can use probes which are exercises designed to determine the  aspects of the curriculum that the student has mastered and thus determine  the students entering skills.    The teacher can use error analysis which is a process that indicates the  types of errors students make on their academic assignments.  STEP 6 BEHAVIOR MANAGEMENT INTERVENTION The purpose of behavioral interventions is to modify, reduce and eliminate  undesirable behaviors and to establish and increase desirable behaviors. The 

The Seven Step Approach to Behavior Management  19 behavior management approach used is based on several factors: the nature  of the behavior problem, characteristics of the individual demonstrating the  behavior problem, the goals for behavior change and proven effectiveness  of specific intervention strategies with the target behavior. In some cases, a  combination of different approaches to behavior management may be most  effective than just one approach. In this chapter more traditional approaches  to behavior management are discussed. Traditional approaches combine  elements of operant instrumental learning, classical learning and to some  extent, elements of social learning. In subsequent chapters, less traditional approaches that incorporate more emphasis on cognitive and affective intervening variables are discussed. These include Cognitive Behavior Management  CBM, Social and Emotional Learning Approaches, Character Education  and Yoga. The basic premise of traditional approaches to behavior management is  that individuals use their behavior as instruments to achieve want they want  i.e. reinforcers or to avoid want they do not like punishers, hence the  term instrumental learning. They operate on the environment to influence  the outcome, hence the term operant learning just as Skinners rats pressed  the lever to get food and just as students study diligently to get good grades.  They also act to avoid punishment. Just as Skinners rats ran away to avoid  shock, students may not cheat in school to avoid automatic disqualification  and failure. Behavior management approaches are used to reduce negative  and undesirable behaviors among students and increase positive and desirable  behaviors. Some important principles must be observed:  Target behaviors must be observable and measurable.   The consequence reinforcer or punisher must be carefully selected for  appropriateness and effectiveness.  The consequence must follow the behavior as soon as possible. There are several basic concepts, processes and techniques that characterize traditional behavior management approaches. These are presented and  discussed below: Reinforcement  Reinforcement is a widely used concept and aspect of traditional behavior  management approaches. Effective reinforcement results in the increase of a  desirable behavior when a reinforcer or reinforcing event follows the behavior. A reinforcer is any stimulus that immediately follows a behavior and that  serves to maintain or increase the behavior. 
Chapter Two Reinforcers are consequences that increase the probability that a given  behavior may occur. They may be primary directly satisfy a physiological  or emotional need or secondary paired with and exchanged for primary reinforcers. Secondary reinforcers are used mostly in token economy systems  approaches to behavior management. Reinforcement may be positive when  a reinforcer is applied or negative when a punisher is removed. Punishment Punishment is an important concept, the use of which is not as widely practiced or encouraged as is reinforcement in traditional behavior management  approaches. Effective punishment results in the decrease of an undesirable  behavior when a punisher or punishing event follows the behavior. A punisher is any stimulus that immediately follows a behavior and that serves to  decrease the behavior. Punishers are consequences that reduce the probability  that a given behavior may occur. Punishment may be positive when a punisher is applied or negative when a reinforcer is removed. Schedules of Reinforcement How and when reinforcement is given is a critically important aspect of  traditional approaches to behavior management. The reinforcement schedule  used is based on: the nature of the target behaviors for change, the individual  whose behavior is being targeted, the context in which the behavior change  is expected to occur and the specific behavioral goals of the behavioral intervention. The schedules that are often used are described below:   Interval Schedules: reinforcement is based on the passage of time without  regard to number of responses or the number of times the behavior occurs  as long as the response or behavior occurs at least one time.    Ratio Schedules: reinforcement is based on the number of responses or  times that the behavior occurs in a given time frame.   Fixed Interval: A fixed amount of time must pass before the reinforcement  is given, as in giving a student social reinforcement, such as praise, after  every 15 minutes that heshe sits still. This would be represented as FI 15.   Variable Interval: The amount of time that must pass before the reinforcement is given varies or changes within specified time periods, such as after  5 minutes, then after 7 minutes, then after 12 minutes. An average amount  of time may be calculated. This may be represented as VI 8 243.   Fixed Ratio: A fixed number of responses must be observed before the reinforcement is given, such as giving praise after every 5 times the behavior  occurs. This would be represented as FR 5. 

The Seven Step Approach to Behavior Management  21   Variable Ratio: The number of responses that must be observed before  the reinforcement is given varies or changes, such as after the behavior  occurs 5 times, then after 1 time, then after 3 times. An average number  of responses may be calculated. This would be represented as VR 3 93. Differential Reinforcement DR Schedules Differential reinforcement schedules are used to reduce undesirable behaviors or increase desirable behaviors. These are called differential schedules  because they focus on differentiating the target behavior from other behaviors that may co-occur with the target behavior. The various DR schedules  include:   Differential Reinforcement of Zero 0 Rate of Responding DR0. With  this schedule, the goal is to completely eliminate the target behavior. Example, John swears at other children at least 10 times during the school day.  The goal is to eliminate Johns swearing. A DR0 schedule of reinforcement  is used. John receives a token each day he does not swear and if he accumulates five tokens for the week he can exchange them for a treat of his choice  from among a collection of healthy treats.   Differential Reinforcement of a Low Rate of Responding DRL: With this  schedule, the goal is to reduce the occurrence of the target behavior to an  acceptable level. This may be used as part of a shaping approach. Example,  John swears at other children at least 10 times during the school day. The  goal is to reduce Johns swearing toward eventually eliminating it over the  course of several weeks. A DRL schedule of reinforcement is used. John  receives a token each day he does not swear and if he accumulates three  tokens during the first week he can exchange them for a treat of his choice  from among a collection of healthy treats. During the second and third  weeks he must receive four tokens and during the fourth week he must  receive five tokens, one each day, in order to receive the treat at the end of  the week. Therefore for the first three weeks John is on a DRL schedule  which shifts to a DR0 schedule during the fourth week.    Differential Reinforcement of a High Rate of Responding DRH: With this  schedule, the goal is to increase the occurrence of the target behavior. Example, John does not complete his assignments on time. The goal is to get  John to complete and submit as many assignments as possible and to get  then right. A DRH schedule of reinforcement is used. John receives a token  each day he completes and submits all assignments and gets then all right.  If he accumulates five tokens during the week he can exchange them for a  treat of his choice from among a collection of healthy treats. 
Chapter Two   Differential Reinforcement of an Alternate Response DRA: With this  schedule, the goal is to increase the occurrence of an alternate target behavior. Example, the teacher would like John to raise his hand when he  wants to speak instead of just shouting out. John receives a token each day  he raises his hand whenever he wants to speak without exception. If he accumulates five tokens during the week he can exchange them for a treat of  his choice from among a collection of healthy treats.   Differential Reinforcement of an Incompatible Response DRI: With this  schedule, the goal is to increase the occurrence of an alternate target behavior that is incompatible with the target behavior that is being reduced or  eliminated. Example, John swears at other children at least 10 times during  the school day. The goal is to get John to be polite instead of swearing and  to say hello to at least 10 of his peers each day. Saying hello is incompatible  with swearing. A DRI schedule of reinforcement is used. John receives a  token each day he says hello to ten of his peers and if he accumulates five  tokens during the week he can exchange them for a treat of his choice from  among a collection of healthy treats.  Shaping  Shaping is the reinforcing of successive approximations to an overall behavioral goal. The overall goal is broken down into smaller achievable sequential  behavioral objectives. Shaping is the reinforcing of the achievement of each  subsequent behavioral objective in the set of behavioral objectives. Zirpoli,  2005, 203-204 identified the following as steps in shaping:   Determine the terminal behavior or behavioral goal.   Determine the successive approximations or steps necessary to complete  the terminal behavior.   Identify a starting point or behavior that the student currently performs that  approximates either the terminal behavior or the first step to the terminal  behavior.   Reinforce closer approximations to the terminal behavior until the behavioral criterion for each successive approximation or step has been achieved  reinforce improvement, not perfection.   Move from one step to the next until the terminal behavior has been  learnedshaped. Withhold reinforcement for behaviors that are not clear  steps toward the terminal behavior.

The Seven Step Approach to Behavior Management  23 Chaining The purpose of chaining is to connect discrete behaviors to one another in a  sequence to form a chain of discrete behaviors. Each behavioral link in the  chain is sequentially reinforced and serves as the discriminating stimulus for  the next behavioral link until the behavioral chain is established. Chaining of  behaviors may be done in a forward progression or in a backward regression.  Examples of forward and backward chaining, involving teaching students  how to work on computers in a media center to access a website and complete  a task on that website, are presented below: Forward Chaining In forward chaining the behavioral links are taught beginning with the first  link and ending with the last link. The chain is successfully learned when the  student is able to perform all of the seven behavioral steps links satisfactorily. Step 1: Entering the media center. Step 2: Turning on the computer. Step 3: Logging in. Step 4: Accessing the designated website. Step 5: Completing the assigned task. Step 6: Logging out. Step 7: Turning off the computer. In the example above, the student will be taught and reinforced for entering the media center appropriately step 1. Then the student will be taught  how to turn on the computer step 2. The student receives reinforcement  for performing both steps 1 and 2 satisfactorily. The student continues to be  taught each subsequent step through step 7 and is reinforced for successfully  performing subsequent combination of steps accurately.  Backward Chaining  In backward chaining the behavioral links are taught beginning with the last  link Step 7 and ending with the first link step 1. Again, the chain is successfully learned when the student is able to perform all of the seven behavioral steps links satisfactorily. Step 7: Turning off the computer. Step 6: Logging out.
Chapter Two Step 5: Completing the assigned task. Step 4: Accessing the designated website. Step 3: Logging in. Step 2: Turning on the computer. Step 1: Entering the media center. In the example above, the student will be taught and reinforced turning off  the computer appropriately step 7. Then the student will be taught how to  log out step 6. The student receives reinforcement for performing both steps  7 and 6 satisfactorily. The student continues to be taught each subsequent  step through step 1 and is reinforced for successfully performing subsequent  combination of backward steps accurately. Other forms of chaining include serial training in which behavioral links in  the chain are taught sequentially and one at a time based on a set of criteria;  concurrent training in which more than one behavioral link in the chain are  taught at the same time; total task training in which all behavioral links in the  behavior chain are taught simultaneously. Token Economy System  In a token economy system, individuals, usually students in a school setting, or children in a home environment, receive tokens stars or points  as secondary reinforcers, for desirable behavior, that they accumulate then  exchange for other more primary reinforcers. The token economy program is  a symbolic reinforcement system Kazdin, 1982. Tokens serve as symbolic  secondary reinforcers that can be exchanged for the more valued primary reinforcers. Ziporli 2005 identified the following as elements of an effective  Token Economy Program:   Tokens should be something that students can see, touch, count.   Tokens should not be so small or large that young children cannot store  them, handle them, and count them. Tally marks or checks may be effective  with some, especially older students.  Students must be able to exchange the tokens for actual reinforcers.   Students should not be able to obtain tokens from sources other than their  teacher. If stealing is a potential problem, the teacher may choose to store  the tokens.   Students must understand that the tokens they earn can be exchanged for  various reinforcers. To learn how the system works, some children, especially young children may have to be walked through the exchange process  immediately after earning tokens.

The Seven Step Approach to Behavior Management  25   Tokens should not be so small or large that young children cannot store  them, handle them, and count them. Tally marks or checks may be effective  with some, especially older students.  Students must be able to exchange the tokens for actual reinforcers.   Students should not be able to obtain tokens from sources other than their  teacher. If stealing is a potential problem, the teacher may choose to store  the tokens. Teachers must respect the differences in their students spending habits. Some students will prefer to save their tokens; some will prefer  to spend all of their tokens at each exchange.   Each student should have the opportunity to earn at least one token per  exchange period. Also, no maximum should be placed on the number of  tokens a student may earn.   Students who earn only a few tokens or even just one should have the opportunity to exchange their tokens for small reinforcers. Zirpoli, 2005 PP.  203-204. Stimulus Control While the majority of the traditional behavior management interventions  focus on manipulating the consequences of behavior, some approaches also  include attention to the antecedent or stimulus conditions that precede the  behavior. Removing or modifying the antecedent conditions that trigger and  encourage an undesirable behavior, or changing the stimulus situation to  one that will trigger and encourage desirable behavior, could be an effective intervention strategy. For example, in a situation in which a recovering  smoker relapses when she drinks, removing drinking as a precursor may help  to prevent smoking relapse. Similarly, in a situation in which a recovering  alcoholic relapses when he smokes, removing smoking as a precursor may  help to prevent alcoholism relapse. In a classroom situation, when a student  misbehaves when seated next to a particular other student, changing the seating arrangements may help to change the misbehavior. Contingency Contracting  A helpful and highly recommended behavior management technique that is  often included as part of an overall behavior management approach is the  establishment of a written behavioral contract between the individual whose  behavior is the target for change and the interventionist who is trying to help  the individual change the behavior. A contingency is established between  the expected behavior and an outcome in the form of reinforcement. The  reinforcement is contingent or dependent on the behavior occurring. In a 
Chapter Two classroom setting, a teacher may establish a contract with a student regarding improvements in attendance, attention and time on task, or academic  performance or all three in exchange for specific consequences. In a counseling setting, a counselor may establish a contract with a client regarding  improvements in procrastination, lying or tardiness in exchange for specific  consequences. Zirpoli 2005 noted that contracts provide a means for teachers and students to place in writing behavioral expectations, reinforcers, and  other consequences. p. 211. Specific Strategies for Reducing and  Eliminating Undesirable Behaviors Extinction: is a process that involves gradually reducing the frequency and or intensity of a previously reinforced target behavior by withholding reinforcement over a period of time. Sometimes during the extinction process,  there is a temporary recurrence or uptake of the behavior being extinguished  even though the behavior is not being reinforced. This is called spontaneous  recovery. Also, sometimes immediately following extinction there may be a  temporary increase in the frequency or intensity of a target behavior. This is  known as extinction burst.  Timeout: is used when unacceptable or inappropriate behavior occurs in a  situation that may be reinforcing it. It involves removing an individual from  the reinforcing situation for a period of time contingent on the performance  of inappropriate behavior. The guidelines for timeout suggest that for young  children for example, younger than five years old, timeout should be limited  to two to eight minutes and for older children for example between five and  ten years old, the time children spend in timeout should be increments of I  minute per year of age.  There are different types of time-out that are usually subsumed under two  broad categories: Non-exclusion Timeout and Exclusion Timeout. Non-exclusion timeout: in this group of timeouts the individual is not removed from the reinforcing situation but attention and other reinforcers are  removed from the individual. Types of non-exclusion time-out include:    Planned Ignoring in which social attention that is reinforcing the undesirable behavior is removed. John whines to get his mothers attention whenever she is talking on the phone. Johns mother ignores his whining.   Removal of Specific Reinforcers from a situation that are sustaining or  influencing an undesirable behavior. John whines when he sees cookies 

The Seven Step Approach to Behavior Management  27 on the table in order to gain sympathy and get a cookie. Johns mother  removes the cookies from the table.    Time-Out Ribbon in which a colored ribbon identifies the individual as  having acted inappropriately. In the classroom during circle time, John  whines and disturbs the listening of other children. Johns teacher after  repeated warnings pins a red ribbon on Johns shirt.  Exclusion timeout: in this group of timeouts, the individual is physically  removed from the reinforcing situation. Types of exclusion timeout include:    Contingent Observation Time-Out: the individuals attention is directed  away from the reinforcing situation such as having the individual turn his her back and face the opposite direction. John whines when he sees cookies on the table in order to gain sympathy and get a cookie. Johns mother  directs John to turn away from the cookies and face the opposite direction.    Isolation-Time-Out: the individual is directed away from the reinforcing  situation perhaps in another section of the room where the reinforcing situation or event may be occurring. John whines when he sees cookies on the  table in order to gain sympathy and get a cookie. Johns mother directs John  to go away from the table to the opposite end of the room.    Seclusion Time-Out: the individual is completely removed from the reinforcing situation to another location. John whines when he sees cookies on  the table in order to gain sympathy and get a cookie. Johns mother directs  John to go to his room and stay there for five minutes until she comes to  get him in five minutes.  Response Cost: When an inappropriate behavior occurs, the individual performing the behavior has to pay a price. The price that the individual pays  is the response cost. It is the removal of reinforcers that is contingent on the  performance of inappropriate behavior. Restitution or Simple Correction: When an inappropriate behavior results in  the environment in which it occurs being changed or modified in some way,  the individual performing the inappropriate behavior is required to restore the  environment to its original state before the individuals behavior changed it. Restitutional Overcorrection: When an inappropriate behavior results in the  environment in which it occurs being changed or modified in some way, the  individual performing the inappropriate behavior is required to restore the  environment to not just to its original state before the individuals behavior  changed it but to a state even better than the original.
Chapter Two Positive Practice: This involves an individual practicing an appropriate behavior as a consequence of having practiced or performed an inappropriate  behavior. Positive Practice Overcorrection: This involves an individual practicing an  appropriate behavior repeatedly as a consequence of having practiced or performed an inappropriate behavior. Shea  Bauer, 2007; Zirpoli, 2005; Darch   Kameenui, 2004; Cipani, 2004. STEP 7 EVALUATING THE INTERVENTION Behavioral interventions should be evaluated for two basic reasons. First, to  determine whether or not the intervention is being implemented with fidelity and how well it is working formative evaluation. Second, to ascertain  the impact of the intervention after adjustments have been made based on  the findings from the formative evaluation. The evaluation designs that are  usually used are single subject designs because most behavior management  programs are targeted at the behavior of individuals and not groups. In some  instances, the behavior of more than one individual may be targeted with the  same intervention or different interventions. Generally, descriptive rather  than inferential data analyses are conducted to demonstrate the extent or degree, if any, of behavioral change. Some of the most frequently used single  subject designs are described below: A-B Design  In this design baseline data A on the behavior are collected then the behavioral intervention is introduced B and data are collected again.   A: Baseline Condition: A  B: Intervention Condition: B A-B-A Design In this design, baseline data A on the behavior are collected, the behavioral  intervention is introduced B, the intervention is withdrawn and there is a  return to the baseline condition A and data are collected again. 

The Seven Step Approach to Behavior Management  29  A: Baseline Condition: A  B: Intervention Condition: B  A: Withdrawal of Intervention and Return to Baseline Condition: A  Reversal Designs  In this design, baseline data A on the behavior are collected, the behavioral  intervention is introduced B, the intervention is withdrawn, there is a return  to the baseline condition A, data are collected, then the intervention B is  reintroduced.  A-B-A-B  A: Baseline Condition: A  B: Intervention Condition: B  A: Withdrawal of Intervention and Return to Baseline Condition: A    B: Withdrawal of Baseline Condition A and reintroduction of Intervention Condition B AlternatingChanging Conditions Design  without Baseline between Conditions In this design, baseline data A on the behavior are collected, the behavioral  intervention B is introduced, the intervention is then withdrawn, and a new  intervention C is introduced.   A: Baseline Condition: A  B: Intervention Condition: B  Introduction of Intervention Condition C AlternatingChanging Conditions Design  with Baseline between Conditions In this design baseline data A on the behavior are collected, the behavioral  intervention B is introduced, the intervention is withdrawn, there is a return  to the baseline condition A, data are collected, and then a new intervention  C is introduced.   A: Baseline Condition: A  B: Intervention Condition: B  A: Withdrawal of Intervention and Return to Baseline Condition: A 
Chapter Two   C: Withdrawal of Baseline Condition A and introduction of Intervention  Condition C APPLYING THE SEVEN STEPS: A CASE STUDY MICHELLE FACTS ABOUT MICHELLE Michelle:    Is10 years old and in the third grade. She is below grade level given her  chronological age.  Is falling behind in her school work.  Has been diagnosed with a learning disability.  Is reported to be a difficult student to teach in her regular classes.  Is reported by her teacher to be unmotivated.  Enjoys music.  Is most comfortable and productive in music classes.  Was referred by her teacher. How did Michelle come to your attention? Michelles teacher referred her to the PPT. Therefore, Michelles teacher  should be the first source of information in helping to clarify her concerns  about Michelle. STEP 1 DETERMINE IF A PROBLEM EXISTS Purpose: Screening for Behavior Problems. Collect data from: 1.  Michelles Teacher who referred her: Interview Michelles teacher to get  a general sense of Michelles behavior in class. Ask Michelles teacher  to complete teacher rating and teacher ranking instruments using the Systematic Screening for Behavior Disorders SSBD or the Early Screening  Project ESP or some other appropriate rating instrument. For descriptions of these instruments, see pages 45-46 in Zirpoli 2005. 2.  Michelle Herself: interview Michelle about her school interests and extracurricular interests and about her likes and dislikes.  3.  Observations of Michelle in her classroom to determine how Michelle  behaves in the classroom and how she interacts with others. 

The Seven Step Approach to Behavior Management  31 STEP 2 DETERMINE IF INTERVENTION IS WARRANTED Purpose: Social Validation of Target Behavior and Ranking of Problem Behaviors. Collect data from: 1.  Michelles Teacher Who Referred Her: Interview Michelles teacher to  operationalize what she means by Michelle is difficult to teach and what  she means by Michelle is unmotivated. What does Michelle do or not  do that makes her difficult to teach? What does Michelle do or not do  that makes her seem to be unmotivated? Get specific behaviors from the  teacher. Ask Michelles teacher to complete a behavior checklist andor  behavior rating scale such as the Walker-McConnell Scale of Social Competence and School Adjustment, the Behavioral and Emotional Rating  Scale BERS or the Behavior Assessment System for Children BASC.  For descriptions of these instruments, see pages 57-59 in Zirpoli 2005. 2.  Identifying and Rank Ordering of Michelles Target Behaviors: Use ranking questions such as those in Zirpoli 2005 to help rank order behaviors  and determine if intervention is warranted. In Michelles case, based on  the limited information provided it would appear that the answer to question  2 is yes. Michelle is falling further behind. She is difficult to teach.  More information about Michelles behavior should be known after her  teacher completes the rating scales above. 3.  Classroom Observations: Observe Michelle during interactions with her  classmates. STEP 3 DETERMINE IF MEDICAL AND OR  PSYCHOLOGICAL REASONS EXIST THAT  CONTRIBUTE TO MICHELLES PROBLEM BEHAVIORS Purpose: Identify Physical and Mental Health Conditions That May Affect  Michelles Behavior. Note: Michelle is suspected of having ADHD and is diagnosed with a  learning disability. Collect data from: 1.  Checklists andor Ratings Completed by Michelles Parents andor her  Teacher using for example, the Scale for Assessing Emotional Disturbance SAED, Child behavior Checklist CBCL, or the Teacher 
Chapter Two Rating Form TRF. These instruments are described on page 65 in Zirpoli  2005. 2. Naturalistic Behavioral Observations. 3.  Psychometric Assessment of Michelles Global Intelligence and Academic  Achievement. Michelle is diagnosed with a learning disability. STEP 4 CONDUCT A FUNCTIONAL BEHAVIOR  ASSESSMENT FBA OR AN A-B-C ANALYSIS Purpose: Identify the antecedents and consequences associated with Michelles undesirable behaviors. 1.  Define Michelles Problem Behaviors: Interviews with Michelles teacher,  Michelles teachers and Michelles parents ratings, observations of Michelle, and interviews with Michelle will clarify and operationalize Michelles teachers statement of the problem when she noted in her referral  that Michelle is unmotivated and difficult to teach. 2.  Gather Information Regarding Michelles Environment and Her Behavior: Talk with Michelles teacher and observe what happens in the  classroom, the time of day that Michelle is most difficult and most unmotivated, how Michelle does with the existing curriculum and what happens  as a consequence of Michelles behaviors. 3.  Hypothesize the Function of Michelles Behavior: Michelle is at least  one grade level and probably two grade levels behind for her age. She is  10 years old and in the third grade. The majority of 10 year olds in the  United States are in the fifth grade. It is possible that Michelles lack of  motivation and difficulty to teach is due to the fact that the work may not  be challenging enough for her or may be too challenging for her given  her learning disability. This would be the antecedent condition A.  Therefore, Michelle may be resisting and avoiding work B either to find  something more challenging to do or to avoid the embarrassment of failure  C. It is possible too that Michelles suspected ADHD which may have  been confirmed in Step Three, may be contributing to her problems. We  will work with the hypothesis that Michelles behavior is one of avoidance to avoid embarrassment based on the psychometric assessment of her  global intelligence and academic achievement.

The Seven Step Approach to Behavior Management  33 STEP 5 DETERMINE IF MICHELLES PROBLEM IS  A RESULT OF A SKILL DEFICIT: CONDUCT  A CURRICULUM BASED ASSESSMENT CBA Purpose: Identify any and all learning, academic or social skills deficits that  may be related to the target behaviors.  Given that Michelle is 10 years old and in the third grade, and given that  she is diagnosed with a learning disability, Michelles PPL will be determined and a curriculum based assessment will be conducted to establish at  what level and in what way the teacher should best engage Michelle.  STEP 6 DEVELOP A BEHAVIORAL MANAGEMENT INTERVENTION  PLAN FOR MICHELLE Purpose: Reduce Michelles undesirable behaviors and establish and support  positive and desired behaviors.  Given the hypothesis that Michelles behavior is one of resistance and  avoidance to prevent failure and embarrassment, Michelles PPL will be  determined and the curriculum adjusted to better meet her academic needs.  A behavior plan will be developed to provide Michelle with continuous reinforcement for producing desired work. Continuous reinforcement will be  used in the beginning to establish the desired behavior of being engaged in  work and performing tasks. Gradually, continuous reinforcement will be discontinued, and a variable ratio interval schedule of reinforcement will be used  to reward Michelle for performing desired work. The variable ratio schedule  is expected to produce a high rate of performance on Michelles part. Given  that Michelle likes music, the opportunity to listen to and to play music will  be used as a reinforcer. Music as reinforcement will be used to help shape  Michelles behavior to the desired goal of performing at the expected level  for her age, given the limitations imposed by her Learning disabilities and her  ADHD. The plan will include a contract with Michelle and her parents that  Michelle will perform desired behaviors as the teacher stipulates, including  doing her school work in the expected manner in exchange for the reinforcement. Michelles parents will provide the support needed at home to successfully implement the plan. Michelle, her teacher and Michelles parents will  sign the contract.
Chapter Two STEP 7 CONDUCT ONGOING EVALUATION OF THE  BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTION USED WITH MICHELLE  Purpose: Determine if the behavioral management intervention plan used  with Michelle is effective. Baseline data A on Michelles work productivity and performance will  be collected before beginning the Behavioral Intervention Plan. The Plan B  will then be implemented and data will be collected during the intervention to  see if Michelles productivity and performance increase. After three months  the reinforcement will be removed and there will be a return to baseline condition A to see if Michelles productivity and performance stay the same  or decrease. The Plan will be reinstated B if it is determined that it needs  to be i. e. if Michelles behavior begins to deteriorate significantly. The external reward of extra music time may be replaced by social reinforcement  and eventually by the internal reward in the form of personal satisfaction that  Michelle gets from doing well. The goal is to establish desirable behavior on  Michelles part even when there is no external reinforcement.  OBTAINING CONSENTASSENT  Childs Participation It is important to obtain consent from the legal guardian of a child prior to  proceeding with step one in the seven step approach. This indicates that a  legal guardian has voluntarily agreed to the participation of a child in the  process.  Consent Statement Example: I  willingly give consent  for my child  to participate  in the behavior management process being implemented by  . I have been informed and fully understand the attached seven steps that are involved in implementing the behavior  management program. If I have any questions or concerns I know that I am  free to call Nameat telephone numberor  to e-mail at email address. Signatures: Parent: Interventionist:

The Seven Step Approach to Behavior Management  35 Supervisor ifneeded: Date: Adults Participation It is important to obtain consent from an adult prior to proceeding with step  one in the seven step approach. Obtaining assent indicates that an adult has  voluntarily agreed to participate in the process. Assent Statement Example: I  willingly agree to  participate in the behavior management process being implemented by  . I have been informed and fully understand the  attached seven steps that are involved in implementing the behavior management program. If I have any questions or concerns I know that I am free to  call Nameat telephone numberor to email at email address. Signatures: Parent:  Interventionist:  Supervisor if needed: Date:  APPENDIX  BEHAVIOR MANAGEMENT PROCESS FORM BMF A behavior management form BMF such as the one used in the case of  Michelle and in the case presentation of J by Nicole Shlomo chapter  3, helps with the collection, organization and management of information. Below is an example of a recommended BMF. I. Background Information: Name:  Birth Date:  Age:  Gender: Male Female Ethnicity:  how does the client describe himselfherself Address: 
Chapter Two OccupationProfession: 

Student: Yes No If Yes, Name of School: Grade:  II. Formal Behavioral Assessment Plan Step 1: Decide If a Problem Exists: Yes No A. Identify and Describe the Problem. B. Identify and Specify Target Behavior for Change. C. Source of Information for 1A above. D. Collect Baseline Data Using Data Collection Form.  What data to collect?  When to collect data?  From whom will data be collected?  In what form will data be collected?  Where will data be collected?   How do data appear in tabular and graphic form? Step 2: Determine If Intervention Is Warranted: Yes No A.  Explain Why Intervention Is Necessary what could happen if there is  no Intervention?. B.  Source of Information for 2A above. Step 3: Determine If Medical andor Psychological Reasons Exist That Contribute to the Problem Behavior: Yes No A.  Describe the medicalpsychological contributions to the target behavior. B.  Sources of Information for 3A above. Step 4: Perform a Functional Assessment  A.  Antecedents: Describe the Antecedents i. e. preexisting conditions  related to the target behavior. B.  Behavior: Restate the Behavior. C.  Consequences: Describe the Consequences of the Behavior what are  the results of the behavior?. Step 5: Determine if the Problem is the Result of a Skill or Performance  Deficit: Yes No  A.  Describe the Nature of the Deficit and Its Relationship to the Behavior. B. Source of Information for 5A above.

The Seven Step Approach to Behavior Management  37 C.  Was A Curriculum-Based Assessment Performed and With What Result? Step 6: Develop Behavior Management Intervention A. State Behavioral Goals B. Describe Behavioral Intervention  What will be done to change the behavior?  Where will the intervention occur?  How often will the intervention occur?  What theoretical model applies classical, operant, modeling, token  economy, cognitive behavioral?  What is the reinforcement or punishment will be used if any?  Who will be involved in implementing the intervention? Step 7: Conduct Ongoing Evaluation Continue to collect data from Step 1C above.  What data are you collecting?   When are you collecting the data?  From whom are you collecting data?   In what form are the data that you are collecting?  Where are you collecting the data?  Analyze data using tables and graphs.  How do data appear in tabular and graphic form?  What do the data show? Answer the question: What pattern of change, if any, do you see in the  target behavior? REFERENCES Alberto P.A.  Troutman A.C. 2003 6th edition. Applied behavior analysis for  teachers. Upper Saddle River: Pearson, Merrill Prentice Hall. Chandler L. K.  Dahlquist, C. M. 2002. Functional assessment: Strategies to prevent and remediate challenging behavior in school settings. Upper Saddle River:  Pearson, Merrill Prentice Hall. Cipani, E. 2004. Classroom management for all teachers: 12 plans for evidencedbased practice. Upper Saddle River: Pearson, Merrill Prentice Hall. Cooper, J. D., Heron, T. E.  Heward, W. L. 2007. Applied behavior analysis.  Columbus: Pearson, Merrill Prentice Hall.
Chapter Two Darch, C. B.  Kameenui, E.J. 2004 2nd edition. Instructional classroom management: A proactive approach to behavior management. Upper Saddle River:  Pearson, Merrill Prentice Hall. Kazdin, A. 1982. The token economy: A decade later. Journal of Applied behavioral  Analysis, 15 3, 431445. Walker, J., Shea, T. M.  Bauer, A.M. 2007. Behavior management: A practical  approach for educators. Upper Saddle River: Pearson, Merrill Prentice Hall. Zirpoli T. I. 2005 4th edition Behavior management: Application for teachers.  Upper Saddle River: Pearson, Merrill Prentice Hall.
Critical to the implementation of behavior management programs are the  collection and analysis of data. Effective programs are data driven in that  they collect data prior to the introduction of the intervention diagnostic and  baseline data, during the intervention process or formative data and at the  end of the intervention outcome or impact data. Rich sources of data can  inform the identification, description and targeting of specific behaviors, and  the development of the behavior management plan, with clearly articulated  behavior change goals. In this chapter, data collection, recording and analysis  methods are discussed. Cooper, Heron,  Heward, 2007. DATA COLLECTION AND RECORDING METHODS Interviews One of the first sources of information about a behavior problem is the  interview with the individual whose behavior is targeted for change. This  interview can yield valuable information about the antecedent conditions that  trigger or support the behavior, the function of the behavior and elements of  the behavior itself that can inform the development of the behavior management program. In addition, interviews should be conducted with significant  others who are knowledgeable about the individual and the behavior. These  individuals may include parents, siblings, teachers, friends and peers depending on the nature of the behavior, the situation in which the behavior occurs,  and the context in which the intervention is to be implemented. Chapter Three Data Collection  and Analysis Procedures Norris M. Haynes with Nicole Shlomo
Chapter Three Observations Observing the behavior of interest in context is a valuable and objective  source of information. An observation protocol or a checklist can be very  helpful in recording observations about the target behavior. ArchivesFiles These include notes, records and referral documents provided by schools and  individuals who are legally authorized to keep and disclose this information.  Accessing these data must be done legally, ethically and with the full and voluntary assent of the subject whose behavior is being modified, or consent of a  legal guardian of a child or dependent, who has legally recognized authority  to share the information.  Peer Nominations Another important way to gain information about specific behaviors in school  and classroom settings is by asking students to nominate other children with  regard to certain characteristics and behaviors. This is akin to conducting a  socio-metric analysis of the social structure of the group or classroom. For  example, the trigger questions may be: who would you be most likely and  least likely to select to be the leader of this classroom or group and why?  or who do you think is most likely and least likely to be disruptive in class? Checklists and Rating Scales A number of screening and assessment instruments are used to identify, assess, diagnose and classify target behaviors at different steps in the seven step  behavior management approach discussed in chapter two. Zirporli 2005  provides a fairly in-depth examination of these assessment instruments with  clear explanations of how and why specific instruments are used. Presented  below is a brief overview of some of these checklists and rating scales that  may be used at steps one to three in the seven step process based on Zirpoli  205, 41-75. OVERVIEW OF CHECKLISTS AND RATING SCALES SCREENING FOR BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS STEP 1   Checklists and Rating by Others Systematic Screening for Behavior Disorders: SSBD; Early Screening: Project ESP.

Data Collection and Analysis Procedures  41  Teacher Rankings SSBD, ESP.  Self-ratings Skill streaming.  Sociometric Techniques Peer rating, Peer nomination, Peer evaluation.   Interviews with Parents, Target Students and Others Who Know the Child  informal: phone calls, conferences.  Behavioral Observations SSBD, ESP. SOCIAL VALIDATION OF TARGET BEHAVIORS STEP 2  Ranking of problem behaviors.  Data collection methods:   Checklists and ratings by others Skill streaming Checklists, Social Skills  Rating System: SSRS, Walker-McConnell Scale of Social Competence:  W-M; Behavior Assessment System for Children: BASC.  Naturalistic observations target student and peers.  Ranking target behavior questions. IDENTIFY PHYSICAL AND MENTAL HEALTH  CONDITIONS THAT MAY AFFECT BEHAVIOR STEP 3   Checklists and ratings by others Scale for Assessing Emotional Disturbance:  SAED; Child Behavior Checklist: CBCL; Teacher Rating Form: TRF.   Clinical and naturalistic behavior observations Daily School Behavior Record Card, Kazdin Behavioral Codes; Behavioral Avoidance Test: BAT.   Psychometric assessment intelligence tests, tests of academic achievement.  Laboratory measures GDS. A summary of data collection methods at steps one to three in the seven step  process is presented in table 3.1. Table 3.1.  Summary of Data Collection Methods at Steps One to Three in the Seven  Step Process Behavior Assessment  Model Step: ChecklistRating  Scale Self Rating Observation Interview I. Does Problem Exist? x x x X II. Is Intervention  Necessary? x x III. Are There Medical Psychological Reasons? x x X
Chapter Three DATA COLLECTION FORM Data collection forms are helpful in recording data for later use and analysis.  They should be as simple as possible but designed in a manner to allow for  the recording of as much valuable information as possible. Below is an example of a data collection form: Behavior Data Collection Form  Name of Person Completing This Form:  Title of Person Completing This Form:  Name of Client:  Target Behavior: 

When did behavior begin onset Where does behavior occur? location context How often does behavior occur? frequency How long does behavior last? duration How is behavior displayed? topography What time of day does behavior occur? temporal context What events immediately precedes the target behavior? antecedentsprecursors  What events immediately follow the target behavior? consequences Who is affected by behavior and how? impact DATA RECORDING SAMPLES Data can be recorded in a variety ways. The appropriate data recording  method depends on the behavior being observed, the data collection approach, the intervention plan including behavior change goals and the evaluation plan including the planned research design and data analysis. Sample  data recording sheets are presented in tables 3.2 to 3.5. A sample data recording sheet by day and by time segments is presented  in table 3.2. A sample data recording sheet by day and by time of day is presented in  table 3.3. A sample data recording sheet showing behaviors displayed during fiveminute observation periods is presented in table 3.4.

Table 3.2.  Data Recording Sheet: Day by Time Segments Five Minute  Segments Day 1 Date: Day 2 Date: Day 3 Date: Day 4 Date: Day 5 Date: Day 6 Date: Day 7 Date: Total Time 1 Time 2 Time 3 Time 4 Time 5 Time 6 Total Note: will show data for a given behavior during six time segments for each day during a seven day period. Table 3.3.  Data Recording Sheet: Day by Time of Day  Time of  Day Day 1 Date: Day 2 Date: Day 3 Date: Day 4 Date: Day 5 Date: Day 6 Date: Day 7 Date: Total Total Note: will show data for a given behavior during specific times of each day during a seven period. Table 3.4.  Behaviors Displayed During Five-Minute Observation Period  DayBehavior 1 2 3 4 5 Total T 2 0 2 1 0  5 C 0 2 3 1 1  7 D 1 1 0 0 3  5 G 1 2 0 1 0  4 A 2 1 1 2 2  8 Total 6 6 6 5 6 29 Note: shows the total number of each behavior TCDGA for one subject. Adapted from Zirploi p. 109.
Chapter Three A sample data recording sheet showing multiple behaviors for three individuals during a fiveminute period is presented in table 3.5. DATA ANALYSIS With single-subject evaluation designs, which are characteristic of behavior  management interventions, the analysis tends to be mainly descriptive, consisting of tabular and graphic displays of data with narrative explanations. In  essence, the analyses are presentations of profile changes in behavior over  time starting with baseline data and moving through implementation to post  intervention data. To demonstrate this, a case study example prepared by a  school psychology graduate student, Nicole Shlomo, as part of an assignment  in an applied behavior interventions class is presented below. The example  moves through each step in the seven step process and demonstrates the integration and display of data.  FORMAL FUNCTIONAL ASSESSMENT AND BEHAVIOR  MANAGEMENT PROCESS FORM FABMF EXAMPLE I. BACKGROUND INFORMATION: Name: J Birth Date: Confidential         Age: Confidential  Gender: Male: X               Female:  Ethnicity: Confidential Address: CT  OccupationProfession: Associate  Student: YesX        No If Yes, Name of School: University Grade: Student Table 3.5.  Multiple Behaviors for Three Individuals during Five-Minute Period 1 2 3 4 5 Name 30  secs 30  secs 30  secs 30  secs 30  secs 30  secs 30  secs 30  secs 30  secs 30  secs Jeremy T D G G T A A G D A Jason G T C C T C T D C Justin A A D A C C C A A Note: shows the total number of each behavior TCDGA for each person: Jeremy, Jason and Justin. Adapted from Zirploi p. 109.

Data Collection and Analysis Procedures  45 II. FORMAL BEHAVIORAL ASSESSMENT PLAN STEP 1 Decide If a Problem Exists YesX    No Identify and Describe the Problem J had trouble feeling awake and alert throughout the day without caffeine.  J reported that he had been drinking caffeinated drinks for the past 4 years.  He tended to have an average of 5 caffeinated drinks a day in order to feel  as if he was functioning normally. If he did not drink caffeinated beverages  throughout his day J felt less energized and sluggish. He also reported that  his caffeine drinking habit had become expensive as he purchased several  drinks a day. Js sleep patterns did not seem to be affecting his problem because he reported that he was getting enough sleep at night.  Identify and Specify Target Behavior for Change The target behavior for change was Js frequent caffeinated beverage purchasing and drinking throughout the day. An effort was made to reduce Js  drink intake to 1 caffeinated beverage a day.  Source of Information for 1A above: The information on the nature of the problem and its frequency was collected through an oral interview with the client, J. Collect Baseline Data Using Data Collection Form  Baseline data on the frequency of Js caffeine drinking behavior were collected and recorded by J on a daily basis for two weeks. These data were  collected on forms with columns that included the date and the number of caffeinated drinks consumed each day. An energy level rating scale from 1-7 was  also used to collect data and reported by J at the end of each day to determine  his perceived level of drowsiness. The data collector then displayed the data  in Table 3.6 and Table 3.7 and in Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.2. During the two-week data collection period, J drank a total of 68 caffeinated beverages with an average of 4.86 drinks per day. There was no clear  pattern of the behavior observed. The data showed that J drank 6 caffeinated  drinks on September 29th and 30th, 5 caffeinated drinks on October 1st-6th, 4  drinks on October 7th, 3 on October 8th, 4 on October 9th, and 5 drinks on  October 10th-12th. Js perceived energy level was low, as indicated by his  energy level rating scale, which shows he believes he is lacking energy. Js  average daily energy level was 2.43 on a scale from 1-7. Additionally, Js  perceived energy level was highest on October 8th, the day he consumed the  least amount of caffeinated beverages. 

Table 3.6.  Number of Caffeinated Beverages Consumed  September 29th to October 12th Date Number of Caffeinated Drinks Per Day Wednesday, September 29 6  Thursday, September 30 6  Friday, October 1 5  Saturday, October 2 5  Sunday, October 3 5  Monday, October 4 5  Tuesday, October 5 5  Wednesday, October 6 5  Thursday, October 7 4  Friday, October 8 3  Saturday, October 9 4  Sunday, October 10 5  Monday, October 11  5  Tuesday, October 12 5  Total number of caffeinated drinks: 68. Average number of drinks per day: 4.86. Figure 3.1.  Number of Caffeinated Beverages Consumed September 28th to October  11th.

Data Collection and Analysis Procedures  47 STEP 2 Determine If Intervention is warranted YesX    No Explain Why Intervention Is Necessary what could happen if there is no  Intervention? In this case, an intervention to decrease Js caffeine consumption behavior  was warranted. J had reported that he felt that his caffeine drinking behavior  was unhealthy and did not make him feel energized at the end of the day. J  reported feeling a crash and his perceived energy level was low at the  Table 3.7.  Perceived Energy Level September 29th to October 12th  Date Perceived Energy Level 1-7 Wednesday, September 29 3 Thursday, September 30 2  Friday, October 1 1  Saturday, October 2 3  Sunday, October 3 3  Monday, October 4 2  Tuesday, October 5 4  Wednesday, October 6 3 Thursday, October 7 2  Friday, October 8 6 Saturday, October 9 2 Sunday, October 10 2 Monday, October 11  3  Tuesday, October 12  2 Note: Average energy level: 2.43. Figure 3.2.  Perceived Energy Level September 28th to October 11th.
Chapter Three end of the day. Moreover, J was not pleased with how much money he was  spending on a daily basis to support his behavior. He felt that change needed  to take place. He did not believe his sleeping habits were the cause of his low  energy, since he got an average of 7 hours of sleep at night. Source of Information for 2A above: The source of this information was an interview with the client, J.  STEP 3 Determine If Medical andor Psychological Reasons Exist That Contribute To  the Problem Behavior Yes    No X DESCRIBE THE MEDICALPSYCHOLOGICAL  CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TARGET BEHAVIOR There were no medical or psychological problems that seemed to exist at  the time. J stated that he did not have a medical condition that caused his  drowsiness and further stated that he got at least 7 hours of sleep each night.  Sources of Information for 3A above The source of this information was an interview with the client, J.  STEP 4 Perform a Functional Assessment: Antecedents: Describe the Antecedents i.e. preexisting conditions related to  the target behavior J felt tired and inattentive. Since he dealt with customers all day at work  and had to stay focused in classes at night, he used caffeine to make himself  feel more alert prior to taking part in these activities.  Behavior: Restate the Behavior J consumed caffeinated beverages to give himself energy throughout the  day.  Consequences: Describe the Consequences of the Behavior what are the  results of the behavior?

Data Collection and Analysis Procedures  49 After consuming caffeinated beverages, J initially felt energized and alert.  Particularly in the morning, J reported feeling more focused and alert after  consuming a caffeinated beverage. However, as his days went on, J felt that  he needed to continue consuming these beverages in order to maintain his  energy level. Yet, the drinks did not have the same effect and by the end of  the day, Js perceived energy level was low. J also spent too much money  supporting his behavior and this made him unhappy.  STEP 5 Determine if the Problem is the Result of a Skill or Performance Deficit:  YesNoNot Applicable X Describe the Nature of the Deficit and Its Relationship to the Behavior  NA Describe the source of Information for 5A Above NA Was A Curriculum-Based Assessment Performed and With What Result? NA STEP 6 Develop Behavior Management Intervention State Behavioral Goals The behavioral goal was to decrease Js daily consumption of caffeinated  beverages to 1 per day.  Describe Behavioral Intervention What was done to change the behavior? The behavioral intervention included several components. Based on the  functional behavioral assessment, it was determined that Js caffeine consumption behavior served the purpose of allowing J to initially feel more  alert and energized. The main antecedent to Js behavior was determined to  be feeling drowsy and tired. Therefore, it was necessary to change this antecedent. In order to do so, J had to become energized before going to work. 
Chapter Three J reported that drinking a glass of orange juice in the morning helped him  feel more energized. Therefore, J replaced his coffee drinking with orange  juice in the mornings. Also, instead of eliminating this behavior altogether,  J gradually reduced his caffeine intake by one drink per day. The first week  of the intervention, J was allowed to consume no more than 4 caffeinated  beverages a day, the second week he was limited to 3, the third week he was  limited to 2, and the fourth and final week he was only be allowed 1 caffeinated beverage per day. J was expected to report whether or not he met his  goal each day. As part of his intervention, an operant conditioning model  was used in which J could obtain positive reinforcement in the form of verbal  praise by the behavioral interventionist. If J met his daily goal he would tell  his interventionist, Nicole, and she would praise his behavior. Lastly, J had  mentioned that his behavior was expensive to maintain as he spent too much  money on caffeinated beverages each day. In his interview, he also said that  he really liked to collect watches. Therefore, a behavioral intervention in the  form of a token economy was used. J self-monitored the number of caffeinated  beverages he drank and gave himself a tally each time he met his daily limit.  If he exceeded his expectations and reduced his intake to less than the goal,  he would give himself two tallies. At the end of the intervention, each tally  could be traded in for the monetary amount of one beverage, approximately  three dollars. At the end of the intervention, all the money he had saved up  could be used to purchase a new watch to add to his collection.  Where did the intervention occur? The intervention occurred at Js home, his place of work, as well as at  school.  How often did the intervention occur? The intervention occurred each day for four weeks. What theoretical model applied classical, operantinstrumental, modeling,  token economy, cognitive behavioral? Operantinstrumental learning positive reinforcement and a token economy were used in the behavioral intervention. What reinforcement or punishment was used, if any? Positive reinforcement was used. J was rewarded with verbal praise from  Nicole, the interventionist, each time he met his caffeine limit. Furthermore,  positive reinforcement was used in a token economy in which J could earn the  money he did not spend on beverages to buy a watch that he desired.

Data Collection and Analysis Procedures  51 STEP 7  Conduct Ongoing Evaluation In conducting an on-going evaluation of the behavioral intervention that the  behavioral interventionist, Nicole Shlomo, used with J, she was guided by a  series of step by step evaluation questions and responded to them as follows:  What data were collected?  A single-subject A-B design was used in this behavioral intervention. The  data were collected over the course of a two-week baseline period. This data  included information on the number of caffeinated beverages J drank per  day as well as his perceived energy level. The information was collected via  charts and scales recorded by J. Data also collected data during the fourweek intervention period. When were the data collected? J collected the data each day during the two-week baseline period and  four-week intervention. From whom were the data collected?  The data were collected by the client, J. In what form were the data collected? Data collection forms were provided by the behavioral interventionist,  Nicole. A table for each week was used with columns that included the date  and the number of caffeinated beverages consumed each day. J used his own  sheets to record his energy level at the end of each day. A final table was  used to record whether or not J met his caffeine limit for each day. This table  included a column with the date and an additional column for the tally marks  that were part of the token economy. Where were the data collected?  Data were collected by J in his home, workplace, and university.  How were the data analyzed? The data were analyzed using descriptive frequency analyses and presented in table 3.8 through table 3.19 and in figure 3.3 through figure 3.14.
Chapter Three TABLES Week 3 data are presented in tables 3.8 and 3.9. Table 3.8.  Number of Caffeinated Beverages Consumed  October 13th to October 19th Date Number of Caffeinated  Drinks Per Day Wednesday, October 13 3 Thursday, October 14 4 Friday, October 15 4 Saturday, October 16 3 Sunday, October 17 4 Monday, October 18 4 Tuesday, October 19 3 Note: Total number of caffeinated drinks: 25. Average number of drinks per day: 4. Limit: 4 caffeinated  beverages per day. Table 3.9.  Perceived Energy Level October 13th to October 19th Date Perceived Energy Level 1-7 Wednesday, October 13 3 Thursday, October 14 2 Friday, October 15 4 Saturday, October 16 4 Sunday, October 17 2 Monday, October 18 4 Tuesday, October 19 3 Note: Average energy level: 3.14. Week 4 data are presented in tables 3.10 and 3.11. Table 3.10.  Number of Caffeinated Beverages Consumed  October 20th to October 26th Date Number of Caffeinated  Drinks Per Day Wednesday, October 20 3 Thursday, October 21 4 Friday, October 22 3 Saturday, October 23 3 Sunday, October 24 2 Monday, October 25 3 Tuesday, October 26 3 Note: Total number of caffeinated drinks: 21. Average number of drinks per day: 3. Limit: 3 caffeinated  beverages per day.

Data Collection and Analysis Procedures  53 Table 3.11.  Perceived Energy Level October 20th to October 26th Date Perceived Energy Level 1-7 Wednesday, October 20 4 Thursday, October 21 5 Friday, October 22 6 Saturday, October 23 5 Sunday, October 24 5 Monday, October 25 5 Tuesday, October 26 6 Note: Average energy level: 4.43. Table 3.12.  Number of Caffeinated Beverages Consumed  October 27th to November 2nd Date Number of Caffeinated  Drinks per Day Wednesday, October 27 2 Thursday, October 28 1 Friday, October 29 2 Saturday, October 30 2 Sunday, October 31 2 Monday, November 1  2 Tuesday, November 2 2 Note: Total number of caffeinated drinks: 13. Average number of drinks per day: 1.86. Limit: 2 caffeinated  beverages per day. Week 5 data are presented in tables 3.12 and 3.13. Table 3.13.  Perceived Energy Level October 27th to November 2nd Date Perceived Energy Level 1-7 Wednesday, October 27 4 Thursday, October 28 6 Friday, October 29 7 Saturday, October 30 6 Sunday, October 31 5 Monday, November 1  6 Tuesday, November 2 6 Note: Average energy level: 5.71.
Chapter Three Week 6 data are presented in tables 3.14 and 3.15. Table 3.14.  Number of Caffeinated Beverages Consumed  November 3rd to November 9th Date Number of Caffeinated  Drinks per Day Wednesday, November 3 1 Thursday, November 4 1 Friday, November 5 2 Saturday, November 6 1 Sunday, November 7 1 Monday, November 8  2 Tuesday, November 9 1 Note: Total number of caffeinated drinks: 9. Average number of drinks per day: 1.28. Limit: 1 caffeinated  beverage per day. Table 3.15.  Perceived Energy Level November 3rd to November 9th Date Perceived Energy Level 1-7 Wednesday, November 3 6 Thursday, November 4 7 Friday, November 5 4 Saturday, November 6 7 Sunday, November 7 7 Monday, November 8 5 Tuesday, November 9 6 Note: Average energy level: 6. The data for all weeks are presented in tables 3.16 to 3.19. Table 3.16.  Number of Caffeinated Beverages Consumed by Week Week  Total Number of Caffeinated Drinks Week 1 37 Week 2 31 Week 3 25 Week 4 21 Week 5 13 Week 6 9

Data Collection and Analysis Procedures  55 GRAPHS Graphs for Week 3 week 1 of Intervention are presented in figures 3.3 and  3.4. Graphs for Week 4 week 2 of intervention are presented in figures 3.5  and 3.6. Graphs for Week 5 week 3 of intervention are presented in figures 3.7  and 3.8. Graphs for Week 6: week 4 of intervention are presented in figures 3.9  and 3.10. Overall data graphs are presented in figures 3.11 to 3.14. Table 3.17.  Total Number of Caffeinated Beverages per Day for All Weeks Day Week 1  Week 2 Week 3 Week 4 Week 5 Week 6 Wednesday 6 5 3 3 2 1 Thursday 6 4 4 4 1 1 Friday 5 3 4 3 2 2 Saturday 5 4 3 3 2 1 Sunday 5 5 4 2 2 1 Monday 5 5 4 3 2 2 Tuesday 5 5 3 3 2 1 Table 3.18.  Average Energy Level by Week Week  Average Energy Level Week 1 2.57 Week 2 2.86 Week 3 3.14 Week 4 4.43 Week 5 5.71 Week 6 6. . Table 3.19.  Total Perceived Energy Level per Day for All Weeks Day Week 1  Week 2 Week 3 Week 4 Week 5 Week 6 Wednesday 6 5 3 3 2 1 Thursday 6 4 4 4 1 1 Friday 5 3 4 3 2 2 Saturday 5 4 3 3 2 1 Sunday 5 5 4 2 2 1 Monday 5 5 4 3 2 2 Tuesday 5 5 3 3 2 1
Chapter Three Figure 3.3.  Number of Caffeinated Beverages Consumed October 12th to October  18th. Figure 3.4.  Perceived Energy Level October 12th to October 18th. Figure 3.5.  Number of Caffeinated Beverages Consumed October 19th to October  25th.

Figure 3.6.  Perceived Energy Level October 19th to October 25th. Figure 3.7.  Number of Caffeinated Beverages Consumed October 26th to November  1st. Figure 3.8.  Perceived Energy Level October 26th to November 1st.

Figure 3.9.  Number of Caffeinated Beverages Consumed November 2nd to November  8th. Figure 3.10.  Perceived Energy Level November 2nd to November 8th. Figure 3.11.  Total Number of Caffeinated Beverages Consumed Week 1 to Week 6.

Figure 3.12.  Total Number of Caffeinated Drinks per Day for All Weeks. Figure 3.13.  Perceived Energy Level Week 1 to Week 6.
Chapter Three Figure 3.14.  Total Energy Level per Day for All Weeks. The data during the baseline period showed that Js caffeinated beverage  consumption was excessive with approximately 5 caffeinated beverages being consumed per day. The data show that the frequency of the Js caffeine  drinking behavior declined from a baseline rate of 37 drinks per week to 9  drinks per week at the conclusion of the intervention. The data indicate that  Js caffeine drinking declined at a gradual rate, with approximately 7 less  beverages consumed each week, beginning from week one of intervention until the end of the intervention at week 6. J was able to meet his limited weekly  consumption goal each week except week 6, when he had 9 caffeinated drinks  instead of the desired 7. Overall, however, the intervention was effective in  reducing Js caffeinated beverage drinking behavior and his average number  of drinks decreased each week.  Additionally, Js perceived energy level also increased at a steady rate of  approximately 1 point per week, resulting in a rating of 6 on the 7-point scale  from the baseline average of 2.715. Although Js caffeine drinking was not  reduced to the desired 1 drink per day, it was significantly reduced and he  felt more energized.  What pattern of change, if any, was seen in the target behavior? The data show a pattern of gradual decline in the target behavior starting  immediately from the first week of the intervention and continuing until the  last week. This steady decrease in beverage consumption culminated in week  6, where J was almost able to meet the behavioral goal of 1 caffeinated bevData Collection and Analysis Procedures  61 erage per day. Overall the data show a steady decline in the target behavior  with an approximate reduction of 7 caffeinated beverages per week. Furthermore, Js perceived energy level increased at a steady rate of approximately  1 point per week, resulting in a rating of 6 on the 7-point scale from the  baseline average of 2.715.  CONCLUSIONS Overall the behavioral intervention program that was implemented to reduce  Js caffeine intake appeared to be effective since his behavior did in fact  steadily decrease. Furthermore, J stated that he felt more alert at the end  of each day. He also reported being satisfied that he was able to spend the  money he had saved from not buying caffeinated beverages on other things,  such as the watch that he most desired.  REFERENCES Cooper, J. D., Heron, T. E.  Heward, W. L. 2007. Applied behavior analysis.  Columbus: Pearson, Merrill Prentice Hall. Zirpoli, T. J. 2005. Behavior management: Applications for teachers. Upper Saddle  River: Prentice Hall.
Autism Spectrum Disorders ASD are developmental disorders usually  diagnosed after the age of two in early childhood. Experts estimate that  almost 500,000 individuals under the age of 21 are living with ASD Fombone, 2005. This means that between 1 in 500 and 1 in 166 children are  born with autism every year Fombone, 2005. The primary symptoms of  autism include difficulties with social interaction, problems with verbal and  nonverbal communication, and repetitive behaviors or narrow and obsessive  interests Fombone, 2005. Behavioral treatments have become the principal  approach for promoting the social, adaptive, and behavioral functioning of  children with autism and are primarily implemented to reinforce adaptive responses and suppress maladaptive ones Bregman, Zager,  Gerdtz, 2005.  From a behavioral perspective, autism is a disorder in which behavioral  deficits and excesses have a biological basis, but can be changed through  structured interactions with the environment Arick, Krug, Fullerton, Loos   Falco, 2005. Behavioral strategies can be useful methods for addressing  the needs of individuals with autism. Both the Strategies for Teaching Based  on Autism Research STAR program Arick et al., 2005 and the programmatic use of the Differential Reinforcement of Other Behaviors Gongola   Daddario, 2010 utilize an overall behavioral intervention approach for  addressing ASD.  STRATEGIES FOR TEACHING BASED  ON AUTISM RESEARCH STAR As the number of children with ASD continues to grow nationwide, teachers  must become increasingly proactive in implementing programs that adapt to  Chapter Four Behavioral Interventions for Autism:  A Brief Review of Two Approaches Matthew Curry, Nicole Messina,  and Nicole Shlomo

Behavioral Interventions for Autism  63 the needs of students with ASD. The program, Strategies for Teaching Based  on Autism Research STAR was developed by Arick, Loos, and Falco in  1977 Arick et al., 2005 while working together to provide consultation  services to a variety of programs for children with ASD. Applied behavioral analysis ABA forms the programs theoretical base. Specifically,  the STAR program provides curriculum for teachers to effectively implement ABA instructional strategies Arick, et al., 2005. Arick et al. 2005  describe the ABA process in depth. As a general method of instruction for  children with ASD, the ABA process begins with the identification of a  single problem behavior in a child with autism known as the target behavior. This is followed by a baseline assessment of the target behavior. The  observer must then hypothesize the function of this behavior. A behavioral  intervention is then implemented based on this initial data and hypothesis.  Data is collected during the intervention. Finally, the data collected during  the intervention is reviewed and assessed. If necessary, changes can be made  to the intervention based on the collected data. Finally, the target behavior is  reassessed. The reassessment of the target behavior may include an analysis  of the generalization of improvement to the target behavior. The process is  repeated as necessary.  Within the ABA framework, the STAR program addresses six curriculum  areas: expressive language, receptive language, spontaneous language, functional routines, preacademic skills, and play skillssocial interaction skills  Arick, et al., 2005. Expressive language refers to the ability to produce  speech and communicate a message Arick, et al., 2005. Receptive language, on the other hand, is the comprehension of the language. The basis  of receptive language involves listening to what is being communicated, and  understanding the message of that communication Arick, et al., 2005. For  example, a teacher may use expressive language and say to a child, Show  me the red car. The child demonstrates receptive language skills when he she gestures toward the red car. Spontaneous language refers to a childs use  of specific verbal utterances following a stimulus that does not specifically  require a verbal response Arick, et al., 2005. For example, a child saying,  play with me in response to the presence of a game, demonstrates spontaneous language. The use of functional routines in the curriculum refers to the  everyday routine that a child experiences throughout hisher day Arick, et al.,  2005. Some examples of functional routines may include: arrival at school,  breakfast, and circle time. According to Arick et al. 2005, pre-academic  skills are the childs current mastery of skills in their school curriculum.  When working with children with autism, the basic pre-academic skills may  vary according to the severity of the ASD; however common skills include:  matching, sorting, sequencing, alphabet, numbers, counting, mathematics, 
Chapter Four and reading Arick, et al., 2005. Additionally, children with autism are found  to have substantial delays in appropriate play skills Arick, et al., 2005. For  example, the use of symbolic play may be inappropriate in that a child may  use a banana as a telephone or a block as a car. Aside from delays in play  skills, children with autism also have substantial delays in social interaction  skills, which are usually displayed by the childs interaction with others  Arick, et al., 2005. For example, the child may have difficulties taking  turns with others as well as showing empathy and being polite. These skills  are addressed by the STAR programs focus on playsocial interaction skills  Arick, et. al., 2005. The STAR program is unique in that it uses three primary instructional  techniques within the ABA framework: Discreet Trial Training, Pivotal Response Training, and Teaching Functional Routines Arick et al., 2005. In  Discreet Trial Training, skills are taught and addressed in a logical sequence  so that concepts and behaviors can be identified and broken down into simplest forms in order to facilitate learning Arick et al., 2005. Specifically, the  child is presented with an instructional cue and the child is then expected to  respond Arick et al., 2005. Giving the child a consequence, usually a positive reinforcer immediately follows this cueresponse pattern and the interaction is then concluded with a pause.  Pivotal Response Training follows the same cue, response, consequence,  pause, and pattern; however trials within PRT are incorporated into the  natural environment so that behaviors take on a functional factor within the  childs world Arick et al., 2005. Using Pivotal Response Training, the child  will choose an activity in which to engage and the reinforcer is a natural  consequence of engaging properly in that activity Arick et al., 2005. This  allows the child to engage in multiple activities and locations throughout the  day while being rewarded for improving their potentially maladaptive behavior Arick et al., 2005.  Functional routines are predictable events that involve a chain of behaviors Arick et al., 2005. These routines include natural behaviors, such as  using the bathroom or eating a meal; whereby the functional outcome of the  routine serves as the reinforcer Arick et al., 2005. However, children with  ASD frequently require additional reinforcement beyond the functional outcome Arick et al., 2005. For example, a child with ASD may struggle with  the routine of introductions to strangers. Each individual step of the routine  would be taught to the child through chaining Arick et al., 2005. The child  would be reinforced for identifying the appropriate social situation in which  an introduction should occur and then again for approaching a person that the  child does not know Arick et al., 2005.

Behavioral Interventions for Autism  65 DIFFERENTIAL REINFORCEMENT OF OTHER BEHAVIORS While intensive programs such as STAR may demonstrate excellent outcomes for children with ASD, there are some drawbacks as well. These programs are very expensive in terms of training staff and purchasing materials.  A one-time group training session for the STAR program costs approximately  250 per person Strategies for Teaching based on Autism Research, n.d.  Additionally, to be fully trained, an individual is required to attend multiple  training sessions. Parents are frequently unable to afford to be trained themselves and additionally public school systems are unable to pay to train their  staff in such a specific area of expertise. Since this program can be costly to  public school systems, it is important to be able to integrate other programs  into the curriculum that do not include such stringent requirements. Gongola  and Daddario 2010 have recently proposed training teachers to implement  the Differential Reinforcement of Other Behaviors DRO procedure with  children diagnosed with ASD in their classrooms.  The basic principle of the DRO procedure is to reinforce a child for engaging in any response other than the target behavior for a set interval of time.  Reinforcers are never removed to punish a student. Educators have been  criticized for using punishment procedures as the primary intervention option  when working with student with disabilities Shea, 2004. While punishment  has been found to aid in reducing inappropriate behaviors, reinforcement  based procedures are considered to be best practice when working among students with disabilities Anderson  Spaulding, 2007. They are also found to  have more ethical appeal as the current trend in Positive Behavioral Supports  PBS places emphasis on the use of reinforcement based strategies Anderson  Spaulding, 2007. Furthermore, the Individuals with Disabilities  Education Act IDEA, 2004 states that individualized education plans must  consider positive behavioral interventions in the case of student behavior that  impedes learning. According to Dr. Gongola  The beauty of DRO is that Ive found it works for any population and range of  ability levels. I used DRO with students that have very low functioning autism  and the intervention worked rapidly with them. Ive also used DRO with my  husband. Furthermore, the DRO intervention does not need to only target a child  with ASD. The intervention can be applied to a class-wide setting. This becomes  very important in current educational climate in which more children with specialized needs are being placed in full-inclusion classrooms and classrooms with  children with multiple disabilities. In terms of a behavior1al intervention, DRO  is fairly easy for teachers to implement in such a complex educational setting.  personal communication, November 1, 2010
Chapter Four Overall, DRO allows teachers to maintain instructional momentum, rather  than discontinuing classroom activities to address the behavior of a child  with ASD. DRO is possibly the most widely investigated behavioral intervention for  ASD Bregman, Zager,  Gerdtz, 2005. Recent trends in the research literature support the implementation of the DRO procedure in three different ways  depending on the severity of the childs ASD and specific needs of the child.  Within the first approach to the DRO procedure, an adult is always responsible for dispensing the reinforcer to the child. Some children, specifically  those with higher cognitive function and a basic introduction to the DRO  process, may be taught to self-monitor their behavior and self-administer a  reinforcer appropriately following the DRO procedure. Finally, if a childs  behavior directly affects peers in their environment, practitioners have shown  peers how to implement the schedule of rewards of the DRO procedure. IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES STAR When exploring the three main instructional strategies of the STAR program,  it is important for teachers, as well as for parents to understand the interaction of instructional strategies and the curriculum areas that were previously  mentioned. Having a clear understanding as to how the STAR program works  enables teachers and parents to be able to monitor the progress of the student child. These instructional strategies can also be used outside of the classroom,  such as in peer settings and in the students home. Discreet Trial programs are  designed to teach the child to associate words with objects, people, actions,  and events Arick, et al, 2005. This technique is most frequently used to  teach expressive and receptive language skills. For example, a single discreet  trial for a child with ASD who is learning to talk may begin with a teacher  giving the cue, Speak. The child will then respond by either making a vocalization or not. If the child makes a vocalization, he or she will be rewarded  with a positive reinforcer such as a small piece of candy. This is followed by  a pause and then the process will be repeated in another discreet trial.  The next main instructional strategy that is utilized in the STAR program  is called Pivotal Response Training. This method is behavioral-based and  the main goal is for the child to be engaged throughout all activities and  locations throughout the day Arick, et al., 2005. It also enables the child to  learn to respond in a more child-centered way, unlike Discreet Trail Training where the child is more dependent on the teacher and on cuesprompts.  This school-based model uses this instructional method to target expressive 

Behavioral Interventions for Autism  67 language and play skills by enabling the child to direct the trials by having the  teacher work within the students preferred activities Arick, et al., 2005. An  example of Pivotal Response Training in a classroom setting may be where  the student chooses an activity involving a red truck. The teacher would then  work within that activity by eliciting language skills and responses that may  include truck; I want truck; red, etc. The student is then reinforced  by the teacher for active attempts with the correct responses. The student is  also encouraged for spontaneous actions spontaneous language, in which  the actions are aided by the teachers control where the teacher waits until  the student responds correctly before reinforcement occurs Northup, et al.,  2009. This may be where the student sees the red truck on the desk and says,  I want while gesturing toward the red truck. This instructional method has  been shown to also be an effective method for teaching functional and symbolic play skills and socio-dramatic play Arick et al., 2005.  The last instructional strategy that is found to be effective within the STAR  program is Functional Routines. A beneficial way to access learned skills that  may have been learned by Discreet Trial Training or Pivotal Response Training, is to teach the skills within a functional routine. When teaching skills  within a functional routine, the childs behaviors are more easily controlled by  the natural cues in the environment rather than by direct cues from a teacher  Arick, et al., 2005. Functional routines may include: arrival at school, transitions between classes, snack time, using the bathroom, playground time, and  others. Each functional routine should be broken down into small steps for the  child and taught in an appropriate way; usually by chaining the sequence of  behaviors together. For example, a bathroom routine may consist of a cue for  bathroom by going to the front of the class, grabbing the picture card with a  toilet on it, taking the card to the bathroom, and placing the card in the slot on  the door so that the other children know that the bathroom is occupied. The goal  of using functional routines is so that the child will learn to eventually rely on  natural cues and reinforcers to support his or her behavior Kuhn, et al., 2008.  Through the use of Discreet Trial Training and Pivotal Response Training, the  child then has learned some receptive and expressive language skills which  then could be integrated into their Functional Routine. An example of this may  include the use of the skill of being able to respond to the cue get bag, which  could be utilized with the departure routine at the end of the school day.  DRO DRO is a procedure where positive reinforcement is provided only when  the target behavior is not displayed for a specified period of time Gongola  and Daddario, 2010. Thus, when using a DRO procedure, reinforcement is 
Chapter Four provided for the zero occurrence of the target behavior for a specified period  of time. According to Gongola and Daddario 2010, the DRO procedure is  implemented through a distinct step-by-step process. First, the behavior of  concern is defined in very specific, observable terms. This is followed by a  functional behavioral assessment to determine how often the behavior occurs on the average per minute, hour, or period and the potential function of  the problem behavior. Once this interval is determined, an interval slightly  lower than it should be set as the length of time the child must withhold the  undesirable behavior in order to be reinforced. During this time, the student  is engaged in normal, everyday tasks. If a reward other than verbal praise is  involved, contingency contracting should be used so that the student understands why he or she is being rewarded. If the behavior does occur during  the designated time period, tell the student that the time interval is beginning  again. Whole interval DRO is generally used to initiate the procedure. Under  this design, behavior should not occur at all through the whole interval of time.  If the behavior occurs the time is reset and the process begins again. As the  behavior improves, the teacher can increase the length of the intervals. After  data shows an improvement, the child may be switched to momentary DRO.  Once the time is set, the student may display the behavior during the interval,  however the behavior cannot occur during the moment the timer stops. While DRO has yet to be evaluated as a stand-alone program, there is a  large body of evidence to support the implementation of the DRO procedure  in three different ways depending on the needs of the child. These include the  needs of the child in terms of his or her target behaviors and his or her cognitive and socio-emotional capabilities. Children who are just beginning the  process of the behavior intervention need to be introduced to the basic DRO  procedure which involves reinforcement being applied by a monitoring adult  Taylor, Hoch,  Weissman, 2005. Some children, specifically those with  higher cognitive function and a basic introduction to the DRO process, may  be taught to self monitor their behavior and reward themselves for appropriately following the procedure Tiger, Fisher,  Bouxsein, 2009. Finally, if  a childs behavior directly affects peers in their environment, practitioners  have shown that they can work with these peers to implement the schedule of  rewards of the DRO procedure Reese, Sherman,  Sheldon, 1998. EVALUATION AND RESEARCH EVIDENCE STAR Recent research shows that the use of the three aforementioned instructional  strategies used in the STAR program are demonstrably effective with chilBehavioral Interventions for Autism  69 dren with ASD. One study found that the use of Discreet Trial Training was  very useful; reporting that as many as 47 of children who were enrolled  in the structured program were able to mainstream into general education  and succeed academically McGee, Morrier,  Daly, 2000. Another study  similarly found that the use of Pivotal Response Training was very effective  among children with ASD. Those children were under the age of 5 and had  no functional communication. Fifty percent of these children learned to use  speech to communicate after being enrolled in the program using Pivotal  Response Training Stahmer, Collings,  Palinkas, 2005. A more extensive  study on the STAR program was conducted in the state of Oregon as part of  the Autism Outcome Study. Out of the 67 children that were monitored, the  majority of the children showed significant progress in social interaction,  expressive speech, and language concepts as well as a significant decrease  in behaviors displayed in children with ASD Arick, et al., 2005. The same  researchers also conducted another study evaluating the effectiveness of the  STAR curriculum methods and instructional strategies which monitored the  progress of 25 children with ASD from five different classroom settings. The  results of the study indicated that children who were engaged in this curriculum, on average, gained more than a month of language age for every month  of instruction Arick et al., 2005. In addition to these findings, the authors  noticed an increase in childrens functional communication and social skills.  The above mentioned studies have outlined the positive effects of the  STAR program as well as the instructional strategies that are utilized  within the program. Some of these positive outcomes include: significant  increase in language skills receptiveexpressive, academic skills resulting  in mainstreaming to general education, improved social behavior, as well as  a decrease in negative behaviors that are associated with ASD. The STAR  program is a valuable program for providing a comprehensive curriculum  appropriate to young children with ASD. Like most programs, some of the  components of the STAR program have some limitations that were mentioned. However, there are many benefits to implementing this program.  Some of the benefits are that the STAR program is easy to implement in  classrooms as well as at home for parents to use as well. The lesson plans  that are used in the STAR program can easily be tailored to meet the needs  of individual students, and the program also meets the needs of students  at various developmental levels within the three instructional strategies  that are utilized Strategies for Teaching based on Autism Research,  n.d. While the aforementioned studies illustrated the effectiveness of the  STAR program and its components, further longitudinal research needs to  be conducted.
Chapter Four DRO Gongola and Daddario 2010 have proposed the use of DRO in class wide  settings. In an interview with Dr. Gongola 2010, personal communication  she noted that while a class wide DRO program has yet to be studied with  specific focus on autism inclusion, it would be an effective and important  program to implement. In addition, she emphasized the significance of recent  literature regarding DRO with ASD children. DRO has been used to address  a variety of concerns relevant to individuals with autism spectrum disorders.  For example, DRO has been used to reduce stereotypical behavior that may  interfere with an autistic childs ability to learn new skills Shabani, Wilder   Flood, 2001. This stereotypical behavior is usually repetitious and nonfunctional, such as the case of body rocking Shabani, Wilder  Flood, 2001.  As indicated by the research, DRO has been used in three distinct ways with  individuals with ASD: adult reinforces the behavior, participant self-monitors  the behaviors, and a peer monitors the behavior.  An adult reinforced DRO schedule was used by Taylor, Hoch and Weissman 2005 to examine the treatment of the vocal stereotypy behavior of a  4-year-old girl with autism. In their study, preferred toys those that produced auditory stimulation were used as reinforcers for the non-occurrence  of the behavior and were given to the child by teaching staff and research  assistants who were trained in the intervention procedures. Their study compared a fixed time schedule of reinforcement FT to DRO to reduce vocal  stereotypy. The duration of the DRO time interval was increased in 1-minute  intervals beginning with an initial interval of 1-minute. The time interval was  monitored through the use of a timer that was reset each time by the adult  implementer. The results showed that FT revealed no effect, whereas the  DRO schedule led to a reduction of the behavior during treatment sessions  and across the school day. Prior to the implementation of DRO treatment,  vocal stereotypy occurred at a mean of 82, and decreased to a mean of 9  following the intervention.  The strength of this study lies in the fact that once the DRO schedule  was successful during 10-minute treatment sessions, it was implemented in  the classroom during typical preschool activities and the DRO interval was  eventually increased to five minutes, which is a practical and manageable  time interval to be used in a classroom. This type of study, that observes DRO  in a natural setting, serves as a precedent to Dr. Gongolas class wide DRO  program suggestion. Limitations to this study include the use of auditory stimulating toys as  reinforcers. Several of these toys produced movement in addition to the auditory stimulation, which makes it difficult to assess whether it was just the  auditory stimulation that made them preferred reinforcers Taylor, Hoch,  

Behavioral Interventions for Autism  71 Weissman, 2005. Also, only using toys limits the study of other reinforcers,  such as adult attention or edibles Taylor, Hoch,  Weissman, 2005. Lastly,  this study only examined data on the reduction of inappropriate behaviors,  in this case vocal stereotypy, but did not formally address the effects of the  intervention on appropriate vocalizations Taylor, Hoch,  Weissman, 2005.  Since a significant deficit for children with autism is limited language skills,  it is important to document that intervention procedures do not inadvertently  decrease the production of appropriate vocalizations Taylor, Hoch,  Weissman, 2005.  Another study of adult reinforced DRO conducted by Waters, Lerman, and  Hovanetz 2009 showed that DRO was successful in decreasing transitionrelated problem behavior of two children diagnosed with autism. Their  findings indicate that DRO alone would not have been successful, because  the participants never met the reinforcement criterion until extinction was  introduced. Extinction in combination with DRO was necessary to decrease  the undesired behaviors, such as response bursting Waters, Lerman,   Hovanetz, 2009.  Tiger, Fisher, Bouxsein 2009 focused their research study on the use  of self-monitoring DRO. They evaluated the effectiveness of DRO in the  treatment of the self-injurious skin picking behavior of a young man who  had been diagnosed with Asperger syndrome. Initially, the therapist implemented the DRO and then trained the young man, Jack, to subsequently  monitor his own behavior. Jack was told that he could earn a ticket that  could be exchanged for 0.10, after each 5-minute period that he did not  engage in skin picking. In the first sessions, the therapist mediated the  use of the timer and the delivery of the tickets. Subsequently, however,  Jack was taught to reset the timer following an instance of skin picking  and reward his behavior with a ticket each time the timer sounded. The  DRO intervals increased from 5 minute to 10-minute periods during the  therapists observations of Jacks behavior and eventually to 15-minute  intervals during Jacks self-monitoring. In addition, according to data collected during the study, Jack implemented the DRO procedure with 91  accuracy. Results indicated that Jacks skin picking behavior decreased  from picking during 56.3 of intervals in baseline sessions to 0 during therapist-monitored 5-minute sessions. Withdrawal of the treatment  occasioned a return to near-baseline levels of the behavior at 39.7 until  treatment was reinstated and the levels of skin picking behavior again became near-zero at .2. The occurrences of the behavior remained steady  at .2 despite factors such as the extension of the interval time to 10 and  15-minutes, the placing of Jack into novel settings, and the removal of the  therapist from the environment. 
Chapter Four Overall, this study indicated that DRO may be used as a self-monitoring  intervention for individuals with autism Tiger, Fisher,  Bouxsein, 2009.  As the results indicate, both the therapist and self-monitored DRO treatment  were shown to be effective. Moreover, the reductions in skin picking behavior obtained from the initial DRO conditions were maintained when the client managed the major aspects of his treatment Tiger, Fisher,  Bouxsein,  2009. In addition to the positive results, this type of self-monitoring can be  a great way to reduce the effort required by many teachers, parents or other  caretakers to implement DRO. Furthermore, it does not require much effort  or training on the part of the caregivers and therefore may be more likely to  support maintenance of this treatment in the natural environment such as the  class wide DRO program suggested by Dr. Gongola.  Moreover, self-monitored DRO may be used with individuals with multiple disabilities. A study by Shabani, Wilder, and Flood 2001 used self-monitored DRO with Larry, a 12-year old boy who was diagnosed with autism,  ADHD, mild mental retardation, and seizure disorder. The study used Larrys  most preferred toys and food items as rewards during a treatment that used  discrimination training, DRO, and self-monitoring of behavior. Specifically,  Larry was trained to perform self-monitoring procedures and work up to a  5-minute DRO interval before the intervention phase was implemented. He  was also trained to discriminate between stereotypical and appropriate behaviors through modeling of both types of behavior by the therapist. The criterion  for access to his reward was increased each time Larry met the specified time  interval for each DRO session until he successfully completed the 5-minute  interval goal. Larry was taught to use a digital timer and to place an x on  an index card in sessions that he did not rock and exchange the xs for his  preferred items. The experimenter had the ultimate say over whether or not  Larry had engaged in the stereotypical behavior through his observations  behind a one-way mirror. The experimenter would give or withhold Larrys  reinforcement if he believed that Larry rocked during the session.  The results showed that during baseline, Larry rocked during a mean of  64 of intervals when sitting and reading and 83 when standing and talking to the therapist Shabani, Wilder,  Flood, 2001. The rocking behavior  decreased to a mean of 4 of intervals while sitting and 2 while standing  Shabani, Wilder,  Flood, 2001. The significance of this study is that the  intervention had lasting effects. After Larrys teacher was taught how to  implement the DRO intervention she reported one month later that the intervention had successfully maintained low levels of rocking Shabani, Wilder,   Flood, 2001.  Additionally, research by Bergstrom, Tarbox and Gutshall 2010 compared the effectiveness of differential reinforcement of alternative behaviors 

Behavioral Interventions for Autism  73 DRA and DRO in reducing the pet mistreatment behavior of a young child  with autism. A significant difference was shown between the two treatments.  In the investigation, DRO produced immediate and significant decreases in  pet mistreatment behavior. In contrast, DRA did not decrease the pet mistreatment behavior, but instead only increased more appropriate pet treatment  behavior.  DRO may also be monitored by peers as indicated in the research conducted by Reese, Sherman and Sheldon 1998. In their study, a DRO procedure, token fines, and prompted relaxation were used to reduce the agitateddisruptive behaviors of an individual with autism and mental retardation in  a community group home. Baseline rates of agitated-disruptive behavior  cursing, hitting, kicking, throwing objects etc. were gathered during three  different group home activities. The duration of the DRO intervals were set  up so that shorter DRO intervals were required during activities in which the  baseline rates of the agitated-disruptive behavior was higher. Once shorter  DRO intervals were successful in reducing agitated-disruptive behavior, they  were increased to longer DRO intervals that were effective in maintaining  those reductions for up to 6 months.  A peer in the group home was taught to interact with the participant and  to deliver praise and tokens when the participant had not exhibited a target  behavior during a DRO interval and to reset the timer when a target behavior had occurred Reese, Sherman,  Sheldon, 1998. The peer, who was  diagnosed with Down syndrome and moderate mental retardation, was given  instructions and feedback over approximately 30 hours until he was able to  deliver praise and the token reinforcement for three consecutive leisure time  sessions Reese, Sherman,  Sheldon, 1998. After training, the peer was  monitored daily to ensure that he correctly implemented the DRO procedure  Reese, Sherman,  Sheldon, 1998.  Once 10 tokens had been accumulated by the participant they traded in  for consumable rewards or special attention Reese, Sherman,  Sheldon,  1998. The participant was also fined one token for each episode that he  displayed the agitated-disruptive behavior, and the DRO interval was reset  Reese, Sherman,  Sheldon, 1998. If the participant continued to display  the behavior, the interval was extended to 5 minutes, and the participant was  ignored until the 5-minute interval was met and the original DRO schedule  was reinstituted Reese, Sherman,  Sheldon, 1998. The participant was also  taught relaxation techniques, through modeling, to take deep breaths when  cued to relax Reese, Sherman,  Sheldon, 1998. This study provides strong evidence for the usefulness of peers when  implementing DRO. By using a peer to deliver reinforcement and monitor the  participants behavior during specific intervals, the staff was able to focus on 
Chapter Four other clients. Peers may also serve as common stimuli to promote generalization Reese, Sherman,  Sheldon, 1998. The use of special attention, instead  of tangible rewards as a reinforcer that could be traded in by the participant is  another way to promote generalization of the results. Additionally, challenging behaviors of people with ASD or mental retardation can be reduced with  community programs without the use of aversive techniques. The study also  indicates the importance of choosing appropriate DRO intervals in behavior  reduction programs, since target behaviors were not reduced if the initial  interval was too long Reese, Sherman,  Sheldon, 1998.  The aforementioned study is limited in that the effects of the relaxation  procedures that occurred alongside the DRO and token fines are unclear  Reese, Sherman,  Sheldon, 1998. The participant did not appear to calm  down through the relaxation techniques. Also, this study shows DRO is effective in one group home setting, but may be difficult to implement in other  institutions Reese, Sherman,  Sheldon, 1998. The time it took to train the  peer, approximately 30 hours, was substantial and required resources that  might not be readily available in other group settings Reese, Sherman,   Sheldon, 1998.  CRITIQUE The research that was conducted regarding the implementation of the  STAR program and the DRO technique showed these programs significant efficacy when working with children with ASD. When used appropriately, the combination of Discreet Trial Training, Pivotal Response Training and Functional Routines, has a very positive effect on the outcome for  a child with ASD in terms of learning the aforementioned skills and being  able to appropriately apply these skills throughout their day. However,  there are also some limitations to consider before deciding on whether  or not to implement these intervention programs within the school-based  curriculum.  STAR Even though the Discreet Trial Training strategy seems to be a very effective  method for teaching academic and receptive language skills, it also has been  found to have some limitations. The major limitations of this strategy are that  children can become dependent on the teacher and the cuesprompts and this  strategy may result in lack of generalization of the learned skills Arick et al,  2005. 

Behavioral Interventions for Autism  75 The major advantages of Pivotal Response Training is that the child initiates the trials, there is use of natural reinforcers, it increases motivation in  the child, and it also deters inappropriate behavior Northup, et al., 2009.  However, there are also some limitations to using this method such as that it  is labor intensive, and the teacher who is using this method needs to be adequately trained Strategies based on Autism Research, n.d. Even though  this instructional strategy can be very beneficial when working with children  with autism, it may be challenging to incorporate this technique in a classroom due to the fact that some teachers may not have the skills or expertise  to utilize this method of instruction. However, when used appropriately, this  method has been shown to have even more effective results than Discreet  Trial Training. While Discreet Trial Training is the primary method for teaching pre-academic skills, receptive language skills, and expressive language  discriminations, it is the Pivotal Response Training that allows the child to  learn these skills in a more natural and appropriate way Kuhn, et al., 2008.  The teaching of Functional Routines involves the chaining of macro level  behaviors. This process is extraordinarily difficult for many reasons. First,  teachers must spend a great deal of time and energy teaching the individual  behaviors using Discreet Trial Training and Pivotal Response Training. A  Functional Routine cannot be taught until these lower level skills are mastered. Additionally, chaining these behaviors together takes even more time  and effort. Teachers must spend much of their time focusing specifically  on one child in order to ensure that that childs behavior is consistently reinforced throughout learning with Functional Routines. Finally, teaching a  child to generalize Functional Routines to multiple settings is even more difficult and time consuming. A teacher is required to follow a student around  for an entire day to continually reinforce a single macro level behavior. DRO The overall DRO approach and related research studies, as they focus on  children with ASD, have multiple limitations. Several studies evaluating the  use of DRO on children with ASD only use concrete reinforcers when implementing the DRO procedure. This method completely avoids the use of social  reinforcement, a common reinforcer that children encounter in their natural  environment. This poses a problem for generalizing of the results of these  studies to multiple environments. Additionally, many research articles use  a case study design. While the researchers use quantitative data within this  method, care must be taken when generalizing this data to other populations  beyond the individual in the study. Another general issue with the DRO procedure is that this method does replace the target behavior with another more 
Chapter Four appropriate behavior. Children diagnosed with autism are also frequently  receiving multiple treatments outside of the study environment. This makes  determining a pure cause of behavior change difficult to identify.  While DRO is frequently critiqued for requiring a great deal of time, effort,  and attention on the part of instructor, the research reviewed shows that these  time requirements can be mediated. For instance, if whole interval DRO is  too rigorous, then variations, such as momentary DRO may be implemented.  Furthermore, depending on the cognitive ability of the child and the availability of peers, the use of self-monitoring DRO and peer reinforcement of  DRO can lower the time and effort required by instructors. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS When working with children with ASD, teachers, educators, and parents must  be proactive when implementing intervention programs that are suitable to the  needs of the childstudent. Studies have shown that the use of the STAR program can be effective when working with this population. This program has  demonstrated that the instructional strategies utilized with the STAR program  have shown significant increases in language skills, social skills, as well as  overall improved behavior and decreased negative behaviors. However, the  primary research regarding the STAR program has studied populations within  the state of Oregon. With the increase in diagnosis of children with children  with ASD, further longitudinal research should be conducted to assess the  progress and outcomes of children with ASD in a larger catchment area. Additionally, the fee for service structure of the STAR program regarding the  training of professionals and cost of material should decrease in the future in  order for the program to be implemented in more public school settings.  While DRO provides a counterpoint to the STAR program in terms of  financing and ease of implementation, DRO has not been thoroughly established as a class wide intervention strategy. Future research should move  beyond case study designs and begin to investigate the approach as a school  based intervention program. This may be done in two ways. The first is to  investigate the effectiveness of DRO use with ASD children within an inclusion classroom setting. Additional studies should focus on the use of DRO  as an intervention with ASD children in self-contained classroom settings. REFERENCES Anderson, C.,  Spaulding, S. 2007. Using positive behavior support to design effective classroom. Beyond Behavior, 16, 2731.

Behavioral Interventions for Autism  77 Arick, J. R., Young, H. E., Falco, R. A., Loos, L. M., Krug, D. A., Gense, M. H.,   Johnson, S. B. 2003. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities, 18,  7486. Arick, J., Krug, D., Fullerton, A., Loos, L.,  Falco, R. 2005. School-Based Programs. In F. Volkmar, R. Paul, A. Klin,  D. Cohen Eds., The Handbook of  Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorders pp. 10031028. Hoboken, NJ:  John Wiley  Sons. Bergstrom, R., Tarbox, J.,  Gutshall, K. 2010. Behavioral intervention for domestic pet mistreatment in a young child with autism. Research in Autism Spectrum  Disorders, 5, 218221.  Bregman, J., Zager, D.,  Gerdtz, J. 2005. Behavioral Interventions. In F. Volkmar,  R. Paul, A. Klin,  D. Cohen Eds., The Handbook of Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorders pp. 879924. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley  Sons. Fombone, E. 2005. Epidemiological Studies of Pervasive Developmental Disorders.  In F. Volkmar, R. Paul, A. Klin,  D. Cohen Eds., The Handbook of Autism  and Pervasive Developmental Disorders pp. 4269. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley   Sons. Gongola, L.,  Daddario, R. 2010. A practitioners guide to implementing a differential reinforcement of other behaviors procedure. Teaching exceptional children,  42 6, 1420.  Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004 Public Law  108446. 108th Congress. McGee, G. G., Morrier, M.,  Daly, T. 2000. The Walden preschool. In J. S.  Handleman  S. L. Harris Eds., Preschool education programs for children with  autism, 2, 157190. Austin TX: PRO-ED. Northup, J., Reitman, D.,  de Back, J. 2009. The STAR program: A description  and analysis of a multifaceted early intervention for young children with a diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Child  Family Behavior Therapy,  31, 7593. doi:10.108007317100902910315. Reese, M., Sherman, J.,  Sheldon, J. 1998. Reducing disruptive behavior of a  group-home resident with autism and mental retardation. Journal of Autism and  Developmental Disorders, 28 2, 159165.  Shabani, D., Wilder, D.,  Flood, W. 2001. Reducing stereotypic behavior through  discrimination training, differential reinforcement of other behavior, and selfmonitoring. Behavioral Interventions, 16, 279286.  Shea, V. 2004. A perspective on the research literature related to early intensive  behavioral intervention for young children with autism. Autism, 8, 349367. Stahmer, A., Collings, N.,  Palinkas, L. 2006. Early intervention practices for  children with autism: Descriptions from community providers. Focus autism other  developmental disabilities, 20, 6679.  Strategies for Teaching Based on Autism Research. n.d. Retrieved from http: www. starautismprogram.com. Taylor, B., Hoch, H.,  Weissman, M. 2005. The analysis and treatment of vocal  stereotypy in a child with autism. Behavioral Interventions, 20, 239253. 
Chapter Four Tiger, J., Fisher, W.,  Bouxsein, K. 2009. Therapistand self-monitored dro contingencies as a treatment for the self-injurious skin picking of a young man with  asperger syndrome. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 42, 315319.  Waters, M., Lerman, D.,  Hovanetz, A. 2009. Separate and combined effects of  visual schedules and extinction plus differential reinforcement of problem behavior  occasioned by transitions. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 42, 309313.  Young, H. 2007. An examination of the variables that affect the outcomes of children with autism spectrum disorders. Dissertation Abstracts International Section  A, 68, Retrieved from PsycINFO database.
PBIS and RTI are two interventions used throughout the school environment  in order to address the specialized needs of every student. Through these  interventions, faculty and parents in school systems are able to monitor the  behavior and academic needs of each child Sugai  Horner, 2009. RTI is  used as a preventative assessment intervention to identify learning disabilities  in a child before the child begins to fail academically Greenfield, Rinaldi,  Proctor,  Cardarelli, 2010. PBIS is used in order to target behaviors and  increase the overall positive environment within a school. Both of these interventions are based on a tier-system which categorizes students based on their  needs. These interventions are derived from evidenced-based approaches  which have proven to be effective in reducing problem behaviors, and in  minimizing the number of children addressed by the special education department within schools. This is important in relationship to behavior management because both of these interventions can be used to define problematic  behaviors and help to replace them with more appropriate and productive behaviors among individual students or for the school-wide population Walker,  Shea  Bauer, 2007. BASIC PRINCIPLES, THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK AND  ASSUMPTIONS OF RTI AND PBIS Response to Intervention RTI Recent changes in legislation and educational policies have led to a reform in  the procedures that lead to classification of special services Greenfield, et.  al, 2010. The new emergence of No Child Left Behind NCLB and changes  Chapter Five Response to Intervention and Positive  Behavior Intervention and Supports Taylor Carroll, Randi Lawlor, and Justin Phee
Chapter Five to Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act IDEA in 2004  have led to a focus on the quality of the instructors rather than on student behavior. This new shift in legislation has targeted teacher effectiveness as prevention for children with learning disabilities, behavior problems or concerns  with academic achievement. RTI Response to Intervention was developed  in order to identify the specific learning disabilities that students presented.  This provided an alternative measure to the past method of identification of a  learning disability by evaluating the child based on an IQ test. RTI relates to  NCLB and IDEA in that these legislative changes were put in place in order  to address needs within the entire school environment. This type of reform is  facilitated in a top down manner. A strong point of this type of reform is that  it allows teachers to use their knowledge and skills within the context of the  federal laws Greenfield, et. al, 2010.  The basic principles of RTI are defined by a three-tier approach which  provides services and interventions for the entire school. This is used to limit  the amount of academic failure in special education and general education  Greenfield, et. al, 2010. There are six core defining features of the interventions involved in RTI Sugai  Horner, 2009. These interventions are  supported by empirical evidence. The interventions are based on a spectrum  to increase intensity, frequency, duration, individualization, and specialized  supports. RTI helps teachers and professionals to have standardized procedures related to the student assessment and instructional decision making involved. Decision rules must be derived from data in order to assess how well  students are performing and if adjustments in instruction are necessary. Another core defining feature of RTI is a strong basis on validating the integrity  of implementation through assessment. Lastly, in order to identify students  earlier than usual, screening is used to assess the performance of students who  are unresponsive to instruction Sugai  Horner, 2009. Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports PBIS The purpose of Positive Behavior Intervention and Support PBIS is to  organize behavioral interventions, practices and systems within a schoolwide setting Sugai  Horner, 2009. There are four elements of integration  involved in positive behavioral intervention support. First, data are collected  and analyzed in order to define the function of the problem and to develop  a measure which will evaluate the progress of the intervention. The data are  used in order to create outcomes and objectives of the intervention set by the  people in the location of the implementation. Then, practices that have proven  to be effective in the past are used in the implementation process. Systems  of organizational support are put into place in order to provide a measure of 

Response to Intervention  81 consistency and validity of the procedures that implementers execute Sugai   Horner, 2009.  School-wide Positive Behavioral Support organizes interventions that are  most effective and involve the smallest number of behavioral interventions.  There are five areas within schools into which this system is divided. Schoolwide is defined as the entire student body as well as family and staff members in all school settings. The second area is the classroom where behavior  management is integrated into academic instruction. The third, most common  area is non-classroom which is defined as a context where instruction is not  applied. Family is the fourth area, where community and parental involvement are necessary in order to increase student achievement. The fifth area is  the individual student, where specialized behavior or academic supports are  put into place for students whose behaviors are unresponsive to interventions  or instruction Sugai  Horner, 2009.  The data based support system is organized on a spectrum which considers all of the needs of the students in regard to behavioral support Sugai   Horner, 2009. Then, the intervention is placed into a sequence of groups with  specialized intensity in order to address the individual students who display  behaviors that may be unresponsive to other interventions. The spectrum or  behavior continuum is organized into a three-tier approach similar to the basis  of RTI. The first tier is described as the primary tier which is for all students,  staff and family members. The second tier is for individuals whose behaviors  were not successfully addressed in the first tier and require more intervention,  more feedback on their behavior, or more active supervision and monitoring.  The third tier is referred to as the Tertiary tier which is for students whose behaviors have not been addressed by interventions in the first and second tiers  and require more intensive, individualized and specialized behavior supports  to tackle their behaviors. Each tier requires three characteristics in relation  to data. First, performance data on responsiveness to the immediate environment and the intervention must be collected on students. Then, decision rules  are derived from the data and used to evaluate the progress of the student  within the intervention. Last, changes and modifications should be made to  the intervention based on student performance Sugai  Horner, 2009. Although performance is evaluated and data are collected, the target of  PBIS is the behavior Bradshaw, Koth, Bevans, Ialongo,  Leaf, 2008. PBIS  was developed in order to reduce behavior problems of students and increase  a positive change in the school environment. School-wide PBIS encourages  a change in student and staff behaviors within a school by improving the  systems involved in discipline, reinforcement, data management and the procedures that are related to these areas. Theories on which School-Wide PBIS  are based include: behavioral, social learning and organizational behavioral 
Chapter Five principles Bradshaw, et. al, 2008. Behavioral principles are used in order to  reduce the amount of behavioral issues that arise within a school and social  learning is facilitated through this system by changing the behaviors of the  staff and having the students model this behavior Bradshaw, et. al, 2008.  IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES Implementation of Response to Intervention Response to Intervention RTI is the practice of providing high quality  instruction and intervention that are matched to students needs. It uses a  childs learning rate over time and level of performance to make educational  decisions about further interventions. Under an RTI framework, students who  are not performing adequately based on state or national standards receive interventions at the time of need. The program eliminates waiting and prevents  a child from getting further behind. Data is used in order to determine appropriate instruction and monitor student progress. Interventions are defined  as strategic, purposeful adult actions that prevent learning difficulties and  accelerate or enrich student learning Sugai  Horner, 2009.  In Connecticut school systems, Response to Intervention is implemented as  Scientific Research-Based Interventions SRBI. SRBI uses interventions that  have a proven track record of increasing the probability of positive outcomes  for students Crawford  Ketterlin-Geller, 2008. An important consideration  for the implementation of RTI is clarity in describing the intervention. In  clearly describing the features of an intervention, one can teach the components to others support them in applying these to their work and monitor the  fidelity of the application Burns  Gibbons, 2008. Implementation of RTI is based on a three-tiered model, a model for differentiating instruction, particularly for the lowest performing students. According to the Connecticut State Department of Education, all three tiers are  part of a comprehensive educational system involving scientific, research  based core general education practices and interventions, with supports from  a wide range of support services personnel Connecticut State Department  of Education, 2008. In Tier I of the RTI model, all students are monitored in  the general education curriculum. There is a comprehensive system of socialemotional learning and behavioral support for all students Connecticut State  Department of Education, 2008. Core curriculum in Tier I should encompass  a comprehensive system of learning and behavioral support, ranging from  teaching of social skills to clear behavioral expectations for all students Connecticut State Department of Education, 2008. Differentiation of instruction 

Response to Intervention  83 for culturally or linguistically diverse students must be part of Tier I practices.  Universal benchmark assessments must be used to establish where students  should be performing at different points in the school year in order to be on  track to be on grade level by the end of the year Connecticut State Department of Education, 2008. It is recommended that curriculum-based measures be used to establish benchmarks and monitor student progress in Tier  I Brown-Chidsey  Steege, 2005. Reliable and valid assessments should  be used to monitor student progress throughout the year. Student data should  also be collected and analyzed from relevant diagnostic assessments and disciplinary referrals. Data teams and early intervention teams should analyze  such data for each student in Tier 1.  Progression to Tier II is implemented for students who do not make  adequate progress in Tier I. Tier II interventions provide more intensive  instruction or socialbehavioral supports than students receive in Tier I  Connecticut State Department of Education, 2008. Instruction in Tier II  is primarily accomplished in smaller groups and is focused on specific academic or social skills. Tier II interventions are short term, usually lasting for 8  to 20 weeks. Interventionists may include the classroom teacher, a specialist,  or an instructional aide or paraprofessional Brown-Chidsey  Steege, 2005.  Student progress is carefully monitored during the intervention and interventions are changed and modified as needed to assess student progress. Probes  or mini-assessments are used to monitor student progress.  Students who do not make sufficient progress with Tier II interventions  are considered for Tier III. Intervention in Tier III is considerably more individualized than in Tier II. Students in Tier III are in a setting with smaller  teacher-student ratio 3:1, a longer duration of instruction, detailed attention  to the social environment and more frequent progress monitoring DOE.  Functional Behavioral Assessments FBAs are implemented for students  with intensive socio-emotional or behavioral needs. In Tier III, interventions  are conducted by a specialist, teacher or specially trained paraprofessional  with a scripted program. They use both diagnostic assessments and individual  intervention plans to frequently monitor student progress and change schedules or instruction as needed Burns  Gibbons, 2008. As in Tier II, Tier III  interventions are short term, remain part of the general education system, and  are supplemental to core instruction in order to meet grade level expectations.  If students do not show sufficient progress by the end of the Tier III intervention period, the intervention team must carefully examine why the student is  failing to make progress. Based on these considerations, the team determines  whether a comprehensive evaluation for special education is necessary Connecticut State Department of Education, 2008. 
Chapter Five Implementation of Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports A PBIS team of six to eight staff members and an administrator is formed to  provide leadership training surrounding implementation of PBIS in the school  Bradshaw, et. al. 2008. A behavioral support coach provides on-site assistance in the implementation of PBIS. To begin implementation, the school  team creates three to five positively state school-wide behavioral expectations  regarding student behaviors Bradshaw, et. al. 2008. These expectations are  posted in the classroom and around the school and are known by all students  and staff. Staff develops plans to define and teach these expectations to students. A school-wide system is developed to reward students who exhibit  positive behaviors. Tangible, positive reinforcers are used consistently to  shape and maintain behavioral expectations. The school team agrees on a  system for responding to behavioral violations including consistent consequences for discipline problems. Schools may, for example, use a formal  crisis plan for managing dangerous situations and train staff on procedures to  use during a crisis Bradshaw, et. al. 2008 mine, not Taylors. The team also  develops a system to collect, analyze, and use data, such as the number of  office referrals or suspensions, to evaluate the implementation and effectiveness of the program. Under PBIS, schools should conduct regular evaluations  to monitor progress of the program. Checks on fidelity, as well as feedback  from school staff, would help the progression to effective implementation  Bradshaw, et. al. 2008. Sugai and Horner suggest four basic operating principles when implementing PBIS: 1. Use data to narrow identification of desired goals and outcomes. 2.  Establish goals, objectives, and outcomes that are based on local data,  described in measurable terms, and are realistically achievable with available resources. 3.  Consider and adapt interventions and practices that have empirical and  applied evidence of achieving expected goals, objectives, and outcomes. 4.  Organize resources and systems so that implementers have the opportunities, capacities, and resources to implement the practice with accuracy and  fluency over time Sugai and Horner, 2009. Like RTI, PBIS emphasizes prevention and occurs at three levels. At the  primary level, all students are exposed to a core social behavior curriculum  in order to prevent the development of problem behavior. At this level, the  school team also identifies students whose behaviors are not responsive to  the core curriculum. Management strategies at this level include teaching  students school-wide expectations, positive reinforcement, parent engagement, and proactive discipline. At the secondary tier, supplemental behavResponse to Intervention  85 ioral support is added to reduce the current number and intensity of problem  behaviors. At this level, teachers frequently check in and out with students,  use peer based supports and may implement a social skills club in order to  support students social skill development. Tertiary tier prevention involves  individualized and intensive behavior support to reduce complications, intensity, and severity of existing behavior problems. Tertiary prevention utilizes  function-based supports as well as person-centered planning Sugai, 2008.  STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF RTI AND PBIS Strengths of PBIS Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports PBIS methods have various  strengths as well weaknesses impacting their effectiveness in different school  settings. PBIS implementation in school systems also known as School-Wide  Positive Behavioral Intervention Supports SWPBIS has shown significant  decreases in disciplinary actions including suspensions and office referrals  and has shown various positive outcomes for children Bradshaw, Mitchell,   Leaf, 2010. During 2008 the state of New Hampshire looked at the impact  of applying SWPBIS to several of their schools throughout the state including  124 private and public schools from kindergarten through grade 12 Muscott,  Mann,  LeBrun, 2008. Results indicated that with PBIS implementation  there were 6,010 fewer office disciplinary referrals and 1,032 fewer suspensions throughout all of the schools Muscott, Mann,  LeBrun, 2008. Along  with the significant decreases in disciplinary actions, teachers were able to  recover 864 days of teaching, 1,701 days of learning, and 571 days of leadership, possibly contributing to the gain in mathematics for most students  Muscott, Mann,  LeBrun, 2008. Therefore not only has PBIS shown to  be an effective intervention for lowering disciplinary actions, but it can also  benefit students academically.  In New Hampshire the SWPBIS model was most effective in middle  schools and high schools; specifically, in middle schools there was a reduction  of all documented major problem behaviors by at least 50 in 6 weeks demonstrating the efficacy of SWPBIS Muscott, Mann,  LeBrun, 2008. Results  were most likely due to teachers dedicating part of their class time to talk to  their students about the importance of respectable behaviors, and what these  types of behaviors look like Muscott, Mann,  LeBrun, 2008. This recent  case study of schools that implemented SWPBIS shows how effective this  model can be throughout the school system and in different school settings.  An important attribute of PBIS is that it predicts problems with children, and can lead to prevention of these problematic behaviors, ultimately 
Chapter Five improving their education experiences, leading to positive outcomes Scott,  2001. School-Wide Positive Behavior Intervention Supports interventions  have also been shown to be effective among different populations of children.  Past research has indicated that  of children with problem behaviors in a  particular school, including white students and minority students, displayed  a 75 decrease in the total number of problem behaviors when SWPIS was  implemented Scott, 2001. This particular school saw a 61 decrease in safe  room referrals in majority and minority students, as well as a 65 decrease  in suspensions for both of these populations Scott, 2001. Reaching out to  diverse populations is another significant strength for PBIS because it does  not leave anyone behind and all students have an equal opportunity to experience its effectiveness. The greatest strengths of PBIS implementation in  schools are that it provides an alternative method for disciplinary action, and  also increases the academic performance of students Bradshaw, Mitchell,   Leaf, 2010.  Weaknesses of PBIS PBIS has several positive characteristics and has been shown to be effective.  It also has been shown to be ineffective in some cases. It does have weaknesses along with strengths. One primary weakness of PBIS is that it has  been implemented mostly in elementary and middle schools in the United  States Flannery, Sugai,  Anderson, 2009. In 2009 research indicated that  only 11 of high schools in the U.S. used Positive Behavior Intervention  Supports, and it is believed to be less effective for older students Flannery,  Sugai,  Anderson, 2009. Implementation of PBIS in high school settings  has demonstrated, not only little effectiveness for the students, but also considerable low staff participation. For example PBIS implemented in one high  school had only 76 staff participation when 80 is the minimal requirement for PBIS to be effective Flannery, Sugai,  Anderson, 2009.  Another limitation to the PBIS model when implemented in schools is  that it requires a great deal of dedicated time from staff in order for it to be  most beneficial Flannery, Sugai,  Anderson, 2009. Some administrators  and staff in high schools may not want to take the time to implement PBIS  if they realize it may not be as effective for older students. The New Hampshire study also indicated that SWPBIS was less contributive to improving  reading and language arts skills compared to math skills Muscott, Mann,   LeBrun, 2008. With more empirical research, PBIS may be able to improve  its techniques so it can be applied more effectively to an older population of  students including those who are in high school. 

Response to Intervention  87 Strengths of Response to Intervention Response to Intervention RTI has also shown to have a significant positive impact on academic progress and improvement in students overall  performance. One of the strengths of RTI is that it provides educators with  more evidence on whether to place a child in a special education class or not.  School districts that follow RTI focus on student progress monitoring, which  allows teachers to see how they can adjust their curriculum or lesson plans to  fit their students needs Greenfield et al. 2010. At one urban school, teachers reported a greater increase in academic achievement among their students  simply because of progress monitoring and adjusting appropriately; in fact  50 of special and general education teachers in this same school had students with greater achievements when RTI was implemented Greenfield et  al. 2010. Not only does RTI work in a general education classroom but also  in special education classrooms.  Another strength of RTI is that it limits the failure of students therefore  resulting in fewer special education placements Yell  Walker, 2010. For  example with RTI implementation there is no need for IQ testing, and IQ  testing cannot be implemented until age 9, therefore RTI gives the school  the ability to determine if children have learning disabilities before 2nd or 3rd  grade Yell  Walker, 2010. For children who are not assessed until they  are 9 years old, it may be too late, and they may be already failing and falling behind Yell  Walker, 2010. The Response to Intervention model is  more effective because it is not a wait to fail model, such as IQ assessment  implementation Yell  Walker, 2010. RTI is also beneficial for minority  students especially those who are English language learners. At the urban  elementary school mentioned before, there was a 5 decrease in the referral  of English language learners to special education classes Greenfield et al.  2010. When implemented in schools Response to Intervention is extremely  beneficial especially for children who are in their early elementary years. This  particular model can prevent failure from happening resulting in greater academic achievement and the less likelihood of children being placed in special  education settings when they do not need to be there. RTI also serves as a better indicator for special education placement as well, compared to traditional  techniques of assessment such as IQ and achievement scores.  Weaknesses of Response to Intervention Response to intervention also has some weaknesses as well, including a lack  of and limited empirical evidence and a weak experimental base Reynolds   Shaywitz, 2009. There has also been little research on the long term effects of RTI such as data on students who were introduced to RTI and have 
Chapter Five graduated high school and are presently working or in college Reynolds   Shaywitz, 2009. Although a strength for children under the age of 9, the fact  that RTI does not take IQ into consideration is a limitation for students in  middle school and high school Reynolds  Shaywitz, 2009. RTI in some  cases leaves out cognitive and psychological assessment as being linked to  learning disabilities, therefore RTI does not require further assessments to be  made Reynolds  Shaywitz, 2009. There are some states in the U.S. that  only use RTI and some of these states do not require the child to have any  further assessment or testing done Reynolds  Shaywitz, 2009. Another  potential weakness of RTI is that it is expensive to implement in schools  because it uses 15 of IDEA funds to develop programs. Some schools may  not be willing to spend this much money on something that has not been  well researched Yell  Walker, 2010. Schools may also want to direct the  money towards other programs which may be more effective for their specific  population and setting.  Suggestions and Conclusion In order to improve both the PBIS and RTI programs it is essential that more  research be done using these programs across diverse school settings and  populations. There have been some suggestions made from previous studies  on how to improve PBIS implementation specifically in high schools or when  working with an older population of students. Researchers came up with six  ways to improve the effectiveness of PBIS when implemented in high schools  including: active school administrator support, greater staff training, total  revision of lesson plans, having experts come in and lecture on PBIS and its  effectiveness, sharing information with students about PBIS through schoolwide assemblies and videos, and getting students involved with informing  peers Flannery, Sugai,  Anderson, 2009. Not only can these suggestions  be used to improve implementation of PBIS and RTI models in high schools,  they can also be applied to elementary and middle schools Flannery, Sugai,   Anderson, 2009.  By getting students involved with implementation they will be able to gain  greater understanding of the effectiveness of PBIS and RTI, realizing that  these models will benefit them as well as fellow students, and the greater  good of their school in improving behaviors and achievement. The education  of teachers, staff, and school administrators about implementing both PBIS  and RTI is essential because without adequate knowledge, the likelihood  of implementing an effective program will be lessened. Therefore, schools  should provide meeting time to simply talk about each model. During this  time, experts in the field can be invited in to lecture about how to properly 

Response to Intervention  89 implement PBIS and RTI, and about the all around effectiveness of these  programs when an adequate number of people are involved and the programs  are implemented properly Flannery, Sugai,  Anderson, 2009. Research  has also indicated several factors that make PBIS most effective that require  commitments by school staff. These include: a commitment to PBIS as one  of the top three school initiatives, consistent methods of emphasizing positive and preventative strategies to students behaviors, commitment to teach  social behaviors, organization of family, faculty and staff, a commitment to  comprehensive collection, review, and analysis of data to make decisions, a  commitment to partnering with families and the community, a commitment  of individualized approaches for students in greater need, and lastly, a commitment to make time available for all school staff, teachers and administration to meet Muscott, Mann,  LeBrun, 2008.  The most important and necessary element of both models is the commitment of everyone who is part of the school, including the parents. With the  full commitment of the entire school body, including parents, both PBIS and  RTI are more effective and are much more likely to improve the behaviors  and achievements of students, as well as improve the effectiveness of teachers  in the classroom Flannery, Sugai,  Anderson, 2009. The RTI model also  serves as an excellent determinant of whether a child should be placed in a  special education classroom compared to more traditional methods of assessment for placement such as IQ testing Yell  Walker, 2010. All schools  including elementary, middle schools and high schools can benefit from  implementing both the PBIS and RTI models because they have been shown  to be extremely effective in improving all aspects of the school. REFERENCES Bradshaw, C.P., Koth, C.W., Bevans, K.B., Ialongo, N.,  Leaf, P.J. 2008. The  impact of School-wide behavioral interventions and supports PBIS on the organization health of elementary schools. School Psychology Quarterly, 234, 462473.  doi: 10.1037a0012883. Bradshaw, C., Mitchell, M.,  Leaf, P. 2010. Examining the effects of school wide  positive behavioral interventions and supports on student outcomes: Results from a  randomized controlled effectiveness trial in elementary schools. Journal of Positive  Behavior Interventions, 123, 133148.  Brown-Chidsey, R.,  Steege, M. 2005. Response to intervention: Principles and  strategies for effective practice. New York, NY US: Guilford Press.  Burns, M.,  Gibbons, K. 2008. Implementing response-to-intervention in elementary and secondary schools: Procedures to assure scientific-based practices. New  York, NY US: RoutledgeTaylor  Francis Group. 
Chapter Five Connecticut State Department of Education, Bureau of School and District Improvement Executive Summary. 2008. Using Scientific Research-Based Interventions:  Improving Education for all Students. Retrieved October 20, 2010, from SDE Web  site: http:www.sde.ct.govsdelibsdepdfPressroomRTIExecutiveSummary. pdf. Crawford, L.,  Ketterlin-Geller, L. 2008. Improving math programming for students at risk: Introduction to the special topic issue. Remedial and Special Education, 291, 58. doi:10.11770741932507309685. Flannery, K., Sugai, G.,  Anderson, C. 2009. School-wide positive behavior support in high school: Early lessons learned. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 113, 177185. doi:10.11771098300708316257. Greenfield, R., Rinaldi, C., Proctor, C.,  Cardarelli, A. 2010. Teachers perceptions of a response to intervention RTI reform effort in an urban elementary  school: A consensual qualitative analysis. Journal of Disability Policy Studies,  211, 4763.  Markey, U., Markey, D., Quant, B., Santelli, B.,  Turnbull, A. 2002. Operation  positive change: PBS in an urban context. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 44, 218230. doi:10.117710983007020040040501. Muscott, H., Mann, E.,  LeBrun, M. 2008. Positive behavioral interventions and  supports in New Hampshire. Effects of large-scale implementation of school wide  positive behavior support on student discipline and academic achievement. Journal of  Positive Behavior Interventions, 103, 190-205. doi:10.11771098300708316258. Reynolds, C.,  Shaywitz, S. 2009. Response to Intervention: Ready or not? Or,  from wait-to fail to watch-them-fail. School Psychology Quarterly, 242, 130 145. doi:10.1037a0016158. Scott, T. 2001. A school wide example of positive behavioral support. Journal of  Positive Behavior Interventions, 32, 88-94. doi:10.1177109830070100300205. Sugai, G. 2008. School-Wide Positive Behavior Support and Response to Intervention. OSEP Center on Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports.  Sugai, G.  Horner, R.H. 2009. Responsiveness-to-intervention and school-wide  positive behavior supports: integration of multi-tiered system approaches. Exceptionality, 17, 223-237. doi: 10.108009362830903235375. Walker, J.E., Shea, T.M.,  Bauer, A.M. 2007. Behavior management: A practical  approach for educators 9th ed. Upper Saddle River: Pearson Prentice Hall. Yell, M.,  Walker, D. 2010. The legal basis of response to intervention: Analysis  and implications. Exceptionality, 183, 124137. doi:10.108009362835.2010.49 1741.
Cognitive Behavior Management utilizes both cognitive and behavioral  learning strategies to produce desired behaviors. It stresses the key roles that  cognitions play in an individuals behaviors, and how, if cognitions can be  altered, then behaviors will consequently be altered. In other words, individuals cannot act differently than they think; therefore, change will occur only  if individuals can change their cognitions. Communication is a major component of this approach, and is critical in helping individuals recognize their  undesired behaviors, the reason for their occurrence, alternatives that can  replace the undesired behaviors, and how to carry out the desired behaviors.  According to the Texas Statewide Leadership for Autism, CBM assumes that a an individuals behavior is mediated by cognitive events; b a change in  mediating events results in a change in behavior; and c an individual is an  active participant in his learning. In short, the cognitive behavioral approach  assumes that individuals have both the capacity and preference for monitoring  and managing their own behavior Heflin  Simpson, 1998. The underlying principle of this approach is that individuals are the agents of  change. While it will be necessary for individuals to communicate and work  with others in recognizing and modifying undesired behaviors, the responsibility and jurisdiction are ultimately placed on the individual. Humans have  an innate drive to have self-control. With the correct tools, genuine support,  and practice, individuals will be able to alter undesired behaviors and control  how they act. CBM aims to integrate peoples thoughts, feelings, and actions;  it strives to teach children to change their behaviors and reward themselves  for their success in doing so. According to Interactive Collaborative Autism  Network, it is crucial to take into account the developmental level of the  Chapter Six Cognitive Behavior Management Ashley Camera, Kathleen Esposito,  and Catherine OBrien
Chapter Six children when implementing CBM techniques because their present level of  understanding will influence the mode of intervention that should be used.  Those who will benefit the most from CBM are individuals who struggle with  recognizing when to exhibit certain behaviors and how to use them properly.  Once CBM is implemented, an individual will begin changing how he or she  thinks and responds to feelings such as anxiety, sadness, and anger Interactive Collaborative Autism Network, 2010. In order for the intervention to  be successful, the individual must have motivation and the desire to want to  change. Through motivation, individuals will be empowered to take action  and monitor, evaluate, and reinforce their own productive behaviors. Multiple techniques have been used to manage the behaviors of children,  causing much confusion over which ones are actually effective. Kazdin  2008 pointed out such inconsistencies and compiled a list of popular myths  that parents have come to believe as a result. Two myths, including the use  of punishment and explaining to a child why his or her behavior is wrong  are two techniques that are constantly overused, despite conflicting research.  Although explanation of behavior may help a child with understanding what  is right and what is wrong, it will not physically change the target behavior.  Constant reminders of appropriate behavior are also known to be ineffective,  as they tend to reverse the likelihood a child will repeat the intended behavior  next time without the reminder.  Kazdin 2008 indicated that praise and positive reinforcement are two  effective ingredients in behavior change that are essential for success. However, he also warned that in order to be effective, previous misconceptions  about praise and positive reinforcement must be corrected. Many parents  tend to follow praise with a negative comment, also known as caboosing,  or provide it simply at the wrong time. Also, many forget the importance  of repetition with positive reinforcement to create consistency in mastering  a permanent behavior change. Kazdin 2008 mentioned the importance of  realizing that a child is not necessarily being manipulative and in fact may  be acting up simply because he or she is reinforced for the wrong behaviors.  Lastly, a parent must understand that the pace and intensity of learning varies  among children, which leads to constant need for modifications in behavior  techniques. This is an important concept as it provides support for the idea  that the environment to which a child is exposed, and the support the child  receives in that environment, have an effect on his or her level of behavior  change.  Bronfenbrenners 1986 Ecological Theory provides support for the belief  that a childs development of behavior is shaped by his or her environment.  This theory states that five different levels of systems shape behavior. The  first, the microsystem, is where individuals have the most direct contact 

Cognitive Behavior Management  93 with their closest social agents. Examples of these agents are parents, peers,  teachers, and church members. Here, individuals help with the construction  of these interactions. The next level, the mesosystem, is composed of the  relationships among the social agents within the micro system that can lead  to both positive and negative behavior problems. For example, if a child does  not have support from their parents, he or she may have trouble developing  relationships with teachers and peers in school. The exosystem, the third  layer, is where individuals are affected by a variable that has an indirect link  to them. Here, a childs behavior may be greatly impacted by agents such as  mass media. The fourth level, the macrosystem, is where culture influences  come into play. Acceptable behavioral expectations of ones culture define  how a child acts in various environments, including schools. The fifth and  final level, known as chronosystem, reflects the time period a child lives in,  or any large transitional periods in his or her life. For example, support for  changing a childs behavior will be greatly affected by a death in the family.  Although Bronfenbrenner 1986 provides support for how childrens environments influence their behavior, his theory leaves out how children directly  learn to act out the behaviors they have observed within their environments.  Social learning, including modeling, posited in Social Learning Theory,  developed by Albert Bandura, provides a third factor that examines the  relationship between an individuals environment and his or her behavior.  Bandura 2001 states that children cognitively characterize others behaviors  around them, and shape their behaviors to shadow these representations. Children model others behaviors within their environment and experience the  consequences related to them. Environmental factors, behavior, and a childs  cognition interact and affect one another interchangeably. For example, if a  child witnesses a physical altercation between hisher two parents they may  cognitively process it and believe that this is a representation of expected behavior between two individuals. It is possible then, that this child will model  this behavior and repeat it with a fellow classmate. On the opposite end of the  spectrum, a parent can use modeling to their benefit in order to teach children  to perform desired behaviors.  Alan Kazdin, as well as many other researchers, has taken into account  the social modeling theory, a childs environment, and the use of cognition  in learning behavior. These researchers have paired these concepts with behavioral techniques to create Cognitive Behavior Management CBM, an  approach to manage and shape behavior. Because this approach looks at both  the child as an individual, as well as the product of his or her environment,  it encompasses all aspects of a childs life and can be applied in various settings. Parents and caregivers can be taught how to manage their childrens  behavior in both private and public settings. In addition, teachers can apply 
Chapter Six this technique, or aspects of it, within their classrooms. Distinct to this approach, when the proper techniques are taught and used, is that children can  begin to manage and take responsibility for their own behaviors. CBM is also  a preferred approach, because it is applicable not only in various settings, but  also for various populations of children. Due to its universality, CBM can be  applied to both special and general education classrooms. This approach is  effective in working with children and adolescents who suffer from Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder ADHD, Oppositional Defiant Disorder  ODD, Conduct Disorder CD and antisocial behaviors. Despite the severity  of a behavior problem or the setting in which it occurs, CBM is a beneficial  approach to use, as it provides specific instructions for sustaining behavior  that are supported by empirical evidence.  Prior to implementing CBM techniques, the first step is that the behavior in  question must first be identified and singled out from other behaviors. It must  have a significant impact on the students functioning, and should be recognized as inhibiting the individuals growth and the growth of others within  the environment Walker et. al., 2007, p. 154. An in-depth description of the  behavior should include: when and where the behavior occurs, the antecedents and consequences of the behaviors, and the severity of the behavior. It is  necessary to investigate what resources are needed and the steps involved in  changing the undesired behaviors. In doing so, people working with the child  will be able to gather sources and provide an environment that will foster  growth and improvements in behavior. Getting to know the child through  numerous interactions will allow the interventionist to understand what types  of reinforcements the child would find enticing and worth working for. The  amount of structure used will depend on the childs levels of motivation and  persistence, which are dependent on the childs developmental level. The second step involved in the intervention involves teaching the children  the desired skills. Sitting down with children and helping them to recognize  why their current behaviors are not acceptable will start them down the right  path towards change. Likewise, brainstorming alternative behaviors with the  children will allow them to creatively explore other options. This will work  towards empowering them as individuals and guide them towards recognizing that they are capable of becoming the agents of change within their own  lives. To accommodate many children who are visual learners, it would be  beneficial to use visuals in order to engage both their visual and auditory  senses, which will heighten their overall awareness. This may include drawing to illustrate perspective or a video of someone modeling positive behavior, Interactive Collaborative Autism Network, 2010.  Teaching children to manage their own behaviors is the next step in the  cognitive behavioral process. Those working with children should model the 

Cognitive Behavior Management  95 desired behaviors first, and then encourage them to join in and practice those  behaviors together. In doing so, the children will come to recognize a routine  that can be used in circumstances where the previously undesired behavior  would occur. During the preliminary steps of the modeling process, prompting may be necessary. Prompting is the process of providing verbal, visual,  aural or manual assistance to a student during the behavior change process  to facilitate the completion of a task Walker et. al., 2007, p. 342. This can  eventually be phased out as children continue through the process and come  to internalize the newly desired behaviors. It will be important to recognize  that children should only be reinforced for accomplishing the desired behavior. Any behaviors that stray from what is expected should not be recognized  or reinforced. Eventually, children will come to internalize the newly acquired behaviors.  They will become more independent in carrying out behaviors and reinforcing themselves for a job well done. Although the shift of responsibility will  be placed on the child, it will still be important to monitor his or her behavior  in order to recognize where any adjustments may need to be made. If modifications are necessary, the process should start from the beginning, where the  child is re-taught the behavior and asked to practice it with the assistance of  the instructor. The Parenting Center and Child Conduct Clinic at Yale University in New  Haven, CT, specializes in evidence-based programs designed to help families  with a wide range of parenting concerns Yale Parenting Center and Child  Conduct Clinic, 2010. One of the characteristics of this Clinic is that it only  offers evidence-based treatments that are applicable to a variety of settings.  Parents go to the center for various reasons, ranging from needing general  assistance about day-to-day parenting issues i.e. a child failing to listen to  instruction, to a desperate parent seeking a treatment for a child with severe  behavioral problems such as violent behaviors and severe aggression.  Some of the services the clinic offers include Parent Management Training PMT, Parent Problem-Solving sessions PPS, Problem-Solving Skills  Training for children PSST, and recently, Phone Consultations. AttentionDeficitHyperactivity Disorder ADHD evaluations are also conducted at the  Center in conjunction with one of more of these training programs, or on its  own. If a parent is interested in any of the above offerings, they may inquire  to speak with a Certified Specialist in cognitive-behavioral management  Yale Parenting Center and Child Conduct Clinic, 2010.  Phone consultation is an option for parents who do not wish to enroll in  a specific program, but would like to discuss a childs problem behaviors  with a certified specialist. The center believes a one-time consultation can  work because the Certified Specialist will inquire about specific aspects of 
Chapter Six the child and the problem behavior in order to determine which skills are the  most appropriate to change the behavior. The specialist will also offer the  parent detailed instructions on how to carry out this form of behavior modification Yale Parenting Center and Child Conduct Clinic, 2010.  If parents prefer to work with a Certified Specialist face-to-face, attending one of these training programs would be beneficial. Parent Management  Training PMT teaches parents how to improve their parent-child relationships, have fun, and ultimately develop adaptive and pro-social behaviors in  their children. Specific parenting skills are taught that address a variety of  problem behaviors that vary in severity, including: temper tantrums, refusing  to engage in self-care bathing, getting dressed, etc., refusing to share with  their peers, and the like Yale Parenting Center and Child Conduct Clinic,  2010.  The other training offered for adults is the Parent Problem-Solving training PPS, which is often offered in conjunction with the Parent Management  Training. In the PPS training, parents are asked to explore and identify current stressors they are experiencing that are potentially negatively affecting  their familial relationships as well as the important relationships outside the  home. The purpose is to create solutions to better cope with these problems  and to decrease the likelihood of them occurring in the future Yale Parenting  Center and Child Conduct Clinic, 2010.  In the third training offered by the center, children are the focal point. The  Problem-Solving Skills PSS training was developed to show children how  to understand their thoughts, feelings, and actions, and to see the patterns  among these factors. The ultimate goal of this training is for children to learn  to effectively problem-solve in a positive and adaptive manner Yale Parenting Center and Child Conduct Clinic, 2010.  As with all therapeutic interventions, a key issue to contemplate is the time  commitment needed to change the unwanted behavior. In order to meet the  needs of busy clientele, treatment is offered in multiple formats, including  in-house sessions, interactive online sessions, phone consultation, and intensive oneand two-day programs for adults. The day programs, as well as the  children-based training and the ADHD evaluations must be carried out at the  center. The average amount of time families work with the certified specialists is between 4-6 months, yet some families have reported visible changes  in their childs behavior as early as one month into treatment Yale Parenting  Center and Child Conduct Clinic, 2010. One of the major goals of the center  is to teach parents how to effectively model pro-social behavior and develop  coping skills. A second pertinent goal is to teach children to take a break, find  a solution for the problem at hand, and then act on it, rather than reacting due  to impulsivity Yale Parenting Center and Child Conduct Clinic, 2010. 

Cognitive Behavior Management  97 In his book titled: The Kazdin Method for Parenting the Defiant Child:  With No Pills, No Therapy, No Contest of Wills. Kazdin 2009 lays out  the basic principles behind his method for changing childrens behaviors,  and how these principles can be implemented. These include: the positive  opposite, positive reinforcement, reinforced practice, shaping and extinction,  and using the ABC model to put all of these steps together. The first step is  focusing on the positive opposite of the problem behavior. Kazdin emphasizes that as parents or educators of any kind, it is important to focus on the  desired behavior, which will eventually replace the unwanted behavior. It  is much easier to build up a behavior you want by positively rewarding its  occurrence than by ridding a behavior through punishment or negative reinforcement Kazdin, 2009. For instance, if a parent wants to get their child  to stop refusing to eat vegetables during dinner, the positive opposite would  be to say, Try to take a few bites of vegetables with dinner, versus saying,  Eat your vegetables!, or I dont understand how you hate every type of  vegetable, please just eat them! Kadin, 2009, p. 31. The second step of the Kazdin method is positive reinforcement. The key  piece of positive reinforcement, according to Kazdin and other behaviorists, is consistency and immediacy. It is important to provide reinforcement  immediately after the desired behavior has occurred, and to clearly state  the connection between the target behavior and the reinforcement. Positive  reinforcement is clearly important in modifying behavior, but in order for behavior modification to be effective, the reinforcement must also be followed  by reinforced practice and shaping Kazdin, 2009. In the third step, reinforced practice means that the child has many opportunities to perform the target behavior correctly, and to receive the reward,  or positive reinforcement. Repetition of the positive opposite of the problem  behavior is essential for a strong association to develop in the childs mind  between the behavior and the reinforcement Kazdin, 2009.  The fourth step of the Kazdin method is shaping. It is important to shape  a childs behavior by breaking it down into smaller steps. After the child  completes each small piece of the behavior, positive reinforcement should  be given, so that eventually the child will work up to the bigger task. For  instance, if someone would like a child to clean up his room every day, then  that person may start by setting smaller goals for the child, such as making the  bed. Once the child makes his or her bed, the behavior should be rewarded,  and the child should be encouraged to perform an extra step next time, such  as putting dirty clothes in the hamper. After a while, the child will clean up  his or her entire room. The purpose of shaping is to not overwhelm children  by the given target behavior, but to teach them step-by-step in order to ensure  a better outcome Kazdin, 2009.
Chapter Six The fifth and final step of the Kazdin method deals with the implanted  consequence when a child does not meet a behavioral expectation. A common  myth of parenting is the effectiveness of punishment, which was discussed  earlier in this chapter. Kazdin argues that extinction is actually a better tool  to use when a child does not follow instructions Kazdin, 2009. A parent or  an educator can assist in the extinction of a problem behavior by failing to address it. For instance, if a child does not complete his or her homework, rather  than keeping him or her in for recess, a teacher should ignore the problem  behavior, and reward the child for another request that was executed, such as  handing in a permission slip for an upcoming field trip.  The five steps of the Kazdin method seem simple enough, yet how does it  work? This method of CBM is effective because the steps follow the antecedent-behavior-consequence ABC formula with cognition as an interceding  variable. When each piece is put together, desired behavior can result. When  the correct antecedents precede the behavior, the child is given repeated opportunities to perform the behavior, and then the appropriate consequences  are delivered Kazdin, 2009. EVALUATION AND RESEARCH EVIDENCE Cognitive Behavior Management can be implemented in various forms, each  of which is tailored around the specific population and behaviors it is targeting. Research supports the use and efficacy of CBM in various locations such  as at home, in schools both regular and special education classrooms, and in  community health facilities. The effectiveness of CBM with various populations has been documented in the research, including among individuals who  have been diagnosed with psychological disorders or present with symptoms  of co-morbid disorders.  An investigation, at the University of Georgia, applied Cognitive Behavioral Management CBM to elementary school students behavioral  intervention programs to examine the overall effectiveness of the approach.  Thirty first graders and 25 third graders deemed as exhibiting inappropriate classroom behaviors were chosen to participate in the study Manning,  1988, 193. Random assignment was used to assign those receiving the extra  treatment component and those in the control group. Students in the experimental group were exposed to Cognitive Behavioral Management and ways  to control their own behaviors and emotions within the classroom. Students  in the control group were also exposed to CBM, but were not taught to use  self-instruction, the critical CBM ingredient, that is used to monitor ones  own behavior Manning, 1988, p. 194. The overall assumption by Manning, 

Cognitive Behavior Management  99 was that children seem to be able to learn to selfinstruct in order to inhibit  undesirable behaviors like impulsivity and aggression, at least when the techniques are applied on a one-to-one instructor-to-tutee basis Manning, 1988,  p. 193. Until this point, little research had been done using Cognitive Behavioral Management in the regular education classroom. The goal of this study  was to shed light on the use of CBM and its effectiveness in regular education  classrooms. None of the participants received special education services at  the time of the experiment, and all had average IQ scores Manning, 1988.  Prior to the administration of the treatment, teachers of the participants  were asked to complete the Brown-Hammill Behavior Rating Profile Scale  BRP, which measured their perceptions of the childrens classroom behavior Manning, 1998, p. 194. Descriptive words and phrases were used  to assess the teachers level of sensitivity towards their students behaviors,  and their feelings towards them overall. Baseline observations were also  made to ascertain whether children were on or off task, with these evaluations made for 10-second intervals over a period of 30 minutes Manning,  1988, p. 195. On-task and off-task behaviors were defined, and included  such items as eyes toward seatwork material, chalkboard, or other learning  display centers on-task, and manipulating pencils, rulers, or paper, scribbling or doodling, or being out of seat off-task Manning, 1998, p. 195.  The Norwicki-Strickland Locus of Control Scale was also used, and yielded  acceptable reliability .6 to .7. After the first three weeks, interviews with teachers and students were conducted to assess whether effects occurred based on the treatment intervention.  Teachers noted substantial-to-100 improvement in classroom behavior for  about 75 of the experimental subjects after the third week, and 90 of  the experimental subjects were reporting the use of self-management Manning, 1988, p. 195. Ten target behaviors were identified as being legitimate  sources for a students entrance into the study, including inhibitory deficitsshouting out, being out of seat, daydreaming, playing around desk or room,  disturbing others; initiating deficits-raising hand, staying seated, listening,  concentrating, and keeping hands to self Manning, 1988, p. 196. Teachers  chose students for the study by identifying those who displayed two or more  of the target behaviors above. Participants met with investigators to learn  self-instruction strategies twice per week, 50 minutes per session, for 4 consecutive school weeks Manning, 1988, p. 196.  Post-treatment measures were administered after the study was complete,  and showed that inter-rater reliability for on-task ratings was 96, and the  BPR was given to parents and teachers to fill out regarding their childrens  current behaviors Manning, 1988, p. 196. During the last session of the  study, participants were expected to demonstrate the self-instruction for 
Chapter Six inhibiting, initiating, and reinforcing classroom behaviors i.e. display the  behaviors that were trained during self-instruction training Manning, 1988,  p. 196. Trained researchers were then placed in the childrens classrooms to  assess whether or not the children internalized and used the skills taught to  them in the Cognitive Behavioral Modification intervention. An inter-rater  reliability of 98 was discovered. Modeling, practicing, and cueing were  used to strengthen the desired behaviors. Mannings experiment was designed to evaluate the effectiveness of CBM  on teaching first and third grade students to control their behaviors, and perform more positively in the classroom. Through her research, it is evident that  children can in fact be taught to produce self-instructional mediators that  promote regulation of behavior through the implementation of Cognitive  Behavior Management Manning, 1988, p. 204. Teachers saw tremendous  improvements in students in-class behaviors. CBM has been shown to be effective in working with another population,  children with Attention-DeficitHyperactivity Disorder ADHD. ADHD is  an invasive condition where individuals exhibit inappropriate behaviors of  hyperactivity, inattention, and impulsivity that do not represent typical development of a particular chronological age Anastopoulos  Farley, 2003.  In addition, it is reported that a large percentage of children diagnosed with  ADHD will also show signs of co-morbid conditions with Oppositional Defiant Disorder ODD and Conduct Disorder CD Anastopoulos  Farley,  2003. This disorder causes multiple psychosocial behaviors that interfere  with school, at home, and in parental and sibling relationships. Many of these  behaviors warrant an effective intervention to control for them. According to Anastopoulos and Farley 2003, in order to help relieve  symptoms at home and reduce secondary symptoms related to co-morbidity,  the use of a Parent Training program, in conjunction with a CBM framework,  have been shown to be effective. The program of focus is designed for children four to twelve years of age and in families where symptoms of ADHD  have been contributing to stress and difficulties. This particular program is  completed within 8-12 one-hour sessions, and is effective in both individual  and group settings. Ten phases are discussed by the therapist, completed by  the parent, and followed up on through the use of homework. Anastopoulos and Farley 2003 introduce the first phase of the program,  which provides parents with an orientation of the process and an overview or  background of ADHD. Here it is important for unrealistic parental expectations to be discussed and corrected. Next, the therapist focuses on understanding the relationship between the parent and child, with specific focus on the  antecedents and consequences that contribute to problem behaviors. In step  three, the therapist begins teaching and assigning the parent techniques that 

Cognitive Behavior Management  101 can be used to help control for their childs behaviors. Here, parents are asked  to put aside a special time of the day to be non-corrective and increase their  positive attending skills by reinforcing positive behaviors. In the fourth stage,  researchers have asked parents to learn to reinforce positive behaviors on a  more general schedule, other than just in this special time. Learning to give  commands more effectively is also important during this phase Anastopoulos  Farley, 2003.  Children with ADHD have a strong need for concrete rewards, which is  why Anastopoulos  Farley, 2003 introduce external reinforcement through  a home poker chip or point system in stage five. Through the guide of the  therapist, parents design the point system around the specific target behaviors  of each child. However, it is not until step six that parents can introduce response cost, or a form of punishment for not carrying out the desired behaviors. In addition to the point system, parents are taught how to correctly use  time-out with their children in step seven. This step is most effective when  children learn that they must comply with the desired behavior requested before they leave time out. As mentioned, because this particular population has  difficulties with psychosocial behavior deficits in many environments, steps  eight and nine focus on extending such practices learned in the earlier steps to  help control for this. Step eight particularly focuses on managing behavior in  public places, which includes both parents and children verbally committing  to expectations and plans of action for punishments for undesired behaviors.  In step nine, the plans implemented at home are extended to the school environment, with the help of the teachers through added techniques such as daily  report cards. Step ten consists of post-intervention sessions with the parents  to discuss progress and overall perceptions of the program. Although limited studies have been conducted on parent training with a  population diagnosed with ADHD, the majority of research supports the use  of parent training when it is a primary source of intervention Anastopoulos   Farley, 2003. The most effective forms have a strong focus on training  parents mostly in specialty contingency techniques such as time-out, response  cost, and positive reinforcement Anastopoulos  Farley, 2003. Anastopoulos and Farley also discuss parent training effectiveness in multi-modal  studies, which have been conducted by fellow researchers. It is suggested that  overall family functioning is most improved when parent training is combined with psychopharmacology and self-training therapy, rather than solely  medication. Parent training has also shown to be effective when controlling  for co-morbid behaviors. Another investigation looked at the effectiveness of CBM techniques in  the population of children with Oppositional Defiant Disorder and Conduct  Disorder. ODD and CD refer to patterns of disruptive behavior that can 
Chapter Six greatly affect a childs functioning at home, in school, and in the community Kazdin, 2010. ODD mainly includes stubbornness, disobedience, and  tantrums. CD encompasses these too, but extends to more severe problem  behaviors, such as bullying, fighting, weapon use, and running away from  home. There is a high co-morbidity rate for children with ODD or CD and  other psychiatric disorders, thus it can be difficult to effectively account for  each presenting disorder. The formal psychiatric diagnosis of CD, according  to the DSM-IV-TR, includes 32,000 combinations of presenting symptoms,  and thus the same treatment options will not work for every individual with  ODD or CD Kazdin, 2010. Two evidence-based treatment interventions that incorporate CBM techniques used to work with this population are Cognitive Problem-Solving  Skills Training PSST, and Parent Management Training PMT. PSST  focuses on cognitive processes, and helping clients brainstorm alternative  solutions to interpersonal problems they are experiencing, such as lack of  communication, and identifying the end result of their actions. Examples  include getting in trouble for fighting, or making friends due to improved  communication with peers Kazdin, 2010. PSST works directly with the  child, and eventually incorporates other key members from a childs life,  such as parents. On the other hand, PMT is used only with parents, and has  no child involvement. PMT focuses on the interactions between children and  parents within the contexts of home, school, and the larger community. Interventions focus on sequences of interactions in the home and how they can be  changed. Aspects of Applied Behavior Analysis, such as functional analysis  and differential reinforcement, are also used Kazdin, 2010. Both of these  methods focus on changing how the child responds in interpersonal scenarios,  in various environments. Both also use learning-based procedures to develop  behavior, including but not limited to modeling, prompting, shaping, positive  reinforcement, and mild punishment time-out from reinforcement, response  cost Kazdin, 2010. Dr. Kazdin conducted a study assessing the effectiveness of both of these  interventions. Children aged 5-12 with Conduct Disorder were studied, both  as inpatients at the Child Psychiatric Intensive Care Service at the University  of Pittsburg, and outpatients at the Yale Parenting Center and Child Conduct  Clinic. Approximately 70 of the children studied met the diagnostic criteria  for two or more disorders, and most children fell within the normal range  of intelligence Kazdin, 2010. PMT was used solely for children six-years  and younger, and for those seven-years and older, a combination of PSST  and PMT were used. Both PSST and PMT interventions consisted of twelve  consecutive weekly sessions, and additional assistance was provided to either  parents or children if needed. Children involved in the PSST were taught verCognitive Behavior Management  103 bal prompts to engage their thoughts and actions that in turn will guide their  behavior. Modeling and role-play were used extensively, and the therapist  provided great praise when the steps were carried out correctly, and offered  detailed feedback about how the child could improve even further next time  Kazdin, 2010. A token economy system was used at first, and over the  course of treatment, social reinforcement was relied on more heavily. Parents  involved in the PMT were taught specific skills on how to develop and use  these skills with their children in their homes. Most sessions consisted of  modeling, role-playing and rehearsal Kazdin, 2010. The evaluation of these treatment methods included: descriptive intake,  child, parent, and family functioning, treatment process measures, and other  treatment related measures Kazdin, 2010. According to this study, PMT  and PSST used alone and in combination produce reliable and significant  reductions in oppositional, aggressive, and antisocial behavior and increases  in pro-social behavior among children. The combined treatment tends to be  more effective than either treatment alone. Not only did the childs behavior  improve, but family relations were shown to improve as well, including a  decrease in parental stress. Overall, treatment-outcome studies suggest that  PSST and PMT can effect positive change in severely disturbed children  within both inpatient and outpatient programs. This can be done by using  cognitive-behavioral procedures, which focus on interpersonal cognitive  processes of both the child and the interactions between child and parent  Kazdin, 2010.  Another clinical population in which CBM has been shown to be effective is with children who possess antisocial behaviors. According to Kazdin,  Siegel, and Bass 1992, common symptoms include extreme aggression,  lying, fire setting, and other violent acts that violate social norms. These behaviors are commonly exhibited in children with Conduct Disorder, leading  to progressively intense symptoms as children grow older. These children are  extremely difficult to treat because there are many external factors that also  contribute to their behavior. External factors include socioeconomic factors,  false cognitive perceptions, parent psychopathology, and family dysfunction.  Due to a combination of all of these factors, it is apparent how similar techniques used to treat children with ODD and CD have been selected to treat  this population as well. Kazdin, Siegel, and Bass 1992 supported the idea that PMT and PSST  are effective tools when working with this population through a study that  looked at ninety-seven children aged 7-13. Children were pooled from an outpatient Child Conduct Center. These children were all referred to the Center  because of their aggressive and antisocial behavior. All children could read  at a second grade level or higher, according to the Wide Range Achievement 
Chapter Six Test WRAT, and were rated by their parent or guardian as falling in the 90th  percentile on the Child Behavior Checklist for aggressive or delinquent behaviors. Children were randomly assigned either to a PMT or PSST treatment  only group, or a combination of the two. Procedures of both evidence-based  treatments were administered in a similar form as with the ODD and CD  population, yet they were tailored to fit with antisocial behaviors.  Multiple assessments were used to evaluate numerous components of children and parents behavior changes before, during, and after the intervention.  Parents through filling out the Child Behavior Checklist assessed childrens  dysfunction and pro-social competence. A similar assessment was used by  teachers to assess for antisocial behaviors at school. To report aggressive,  antisocial, and delinquent behaviors, parents were administered the Interview  for Antisocial Behavior. The children were also asked to rate their behaviors  using multiple assessments, including the Childrens Action Tendency Scale.  The Parenting Stress Index PSI and the Family Environment Scale FEM  were used to collect information on parent and family functioning. Post-intervention testing was also completed by children, parents, and therapists to test  for overall quality and perceptions of success Kazdin, Siegel,  Bass, 1992.  Kazdin, Siegel, and Bass 1992 reported similar results on the effectiveness of PSST and PMT treatments in this population. Significant improvements in child dysfunction, pro-social competence, aggression, delinquency,  and antisocial behaviors were found in the group who received a combination  of PMT and PSST. These improvements in behavior were observed at home,  in school, and in the community even up to the one-year follow up assessment. Specifically, this combined treatment showed improvements in family  functioning and distress. Although, both treatments used alone have been  shown to produce changes in behaviors, PSST seems to be slightly more effective than PMT, when implemented as the solitary intervention.  CRITIQUE Despite the strong empirical evidence in favor of the efficacy of CBM, some  limitations are evident. When CBM is applied in school settings, it is important to be cognizant of the limited amount of time available to teachers  to set aside for students who need behavioral modification. With an average  classroom size of twenty five to thirty students, dependent on the school district, teachers schedules are already limited, which leaves little time to apply  CBM in an efficient manner. Specifically, because token economies and point  chart systems are important tools included in CBM, teachers are expected to  maintain them, while simultaneously running classroom lessons. Valuable 

Cognitive Behavior Management  105 lesson time is then taken from all students in order to tend to the needs of the  identified children. In addition, with school districts limited budgets, training teachers in CBM techniques may be expensive. Other expenses such as  paying for substitutes if the training occurs during school hours need to be  considered.  Reinforcement schedules are at the forefront of current behavior modification systems, including CBM. Although its importance is evident, there is a  concern when reinforcement becomes the main incentive, rather than understanding of why the desired behavior is wanted. When it comes to phasing  out an intervention, there is a concern that the desired behavior will become  extinguished due to the lack of external reinforcement given. Although CBM  may change behaviors, it does not necessarily provide long-term effects.  Children may need additional services such as counseling, communication  skills and social modeling training. Essentially, the final goal of replacing  the tangible reinforcement with an internal reinforcement should be the focal  point.  Cognitive Behavior Management interventions can be shaped based on the  childs current developmental level. Although this is strength of this model  because it allows for working with a range of ages, it is hard to believe that  CBM can be effective with students who do not have the cognitive capacity  to comprehend the consequences of their actions. As mentioned earlier, the  main goal of CBM is for children to self regulate their behavior, which requires in depth understanding and insight. It would be difficult to agree that  CBM is effective in working with young children who are not at a developmental level where they are able to connect their cognitions to their behaviors. It would seem more appropriate to implement a behavioral intervention  with younger children, until they are old enough to begin linking behaviors  and reinforcements to cognitions. When looking at the clinical population, research supports the idea that  CBM parent training techniques are effective ways to modify behavior when  applied to children diagnosed with ADHD. This particular technique not only  changes behavior in children, but also improves overall family functioning,  parenting stress, and parenting self-esteem Anastopoulos  Farley, 2003.  However, it is important to note the limitations of parent training. Anastopoulos and Farley 2003 have discussed a number of them. First, some past  studies analyzing multimodal techniques including medication and other  types of therapy have provided contrasting ideas from the study mentioned  above. Researchers state that when parent training was applied in conjunction  with other types of therapy, no significant improvements in behavior were observed. In addition, because parent training techniques teach multiple types of  reinforcement strategies, it is not possible to identify the specific components 
Chapter Six of these programs that provide change in behavior. Last, limited research has  been done to identify the effects parent training has on childrens emotional  functioning. Future research of parent training should primarily focus on  which children and with which outcomes it works best. Although studies have shown that PMT and PSST programs are effective  in reducing problem behaviors, i.e. antisocial behaviors, and strengthening  pro-social behaviors in children with ODD and CD, there are criticisms to  these interventions. First, it is difficult to generalize results to broader applications given that there are only a limited number of training opportunities  for mental health professionals to learn these techniques Kazdin, 2010.  Training materials and workshops can only bring individuals so far, and they  are not sufficient for providing PMT or PSST to others. Secondly, long-term  follow up data is needed in order to truly assess the effectiveness of these  programs Kazdin 1992, 2010. Many studies and interventions fail to demonstrate the effectiveness of PMT and PSST interventions with children, that  carry into adolescence and adulthood. Thirdly, there should be more focus on  moderators of therapeutic change, in order to identify the factors that affect  outcome and evaluation Kazdin 1992, 2010. Fourth, individual factors must be taken into consideration more. For instance, PMT puts a great demand on families, and not all families will take  this commitment seriously. Also, due to cultural differences in child-rearing  practices, and parent-child interactions, PMT and PSST interventions may  not be effective or realistic for families from all ethnic and cultural backgrounds. Modifications may need to be made, depending on the situation and  familial expectations as well as cultural and religious beliefs Kazdin, 2010.  Lastly, because CD, ODD, and antisocial behaviors encompass a plethora of  different behaviors, it is important that future research continues to investigate the effects of PMT and PSST on each behavior. For example Kazdin,  Siegel, and Bass 1992 noted that peer bonding and academic dysfunction,  which may play a significant role in maintaining antisocial behaviors, were  left out of treatment, leaving an uncertainty of whether or not PMT or PSST  would work with these characteristics.  CONCLUSION Overall, research has shown that Cognitive Behavior Management is an effective technique in improving problem behaviors in children and adolescents.  This method of behavior modification is applicable for children in school in  both special and general education classrooms, home, mental health facilities, and community environments. Educators, parents, and clinicians can all 

Cognitive Behavior Management  107 be trained to use CBM techniques effectively. Furthermore, these individuals  can tailor techniques dependent on the population they are working with, such  as children diagnosed with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, Conduct  Disorder, Oppositional Defiant Disorder, and those with antisocial behaviors.  Although there are some criticisms of CBM, the potential benefits drastically outweigh the disadvantages. Kazdins method empowers parents and  teachers, who in turn empower their children or students. Children can begin  to effectively self regulate their thoughts in order to prevent the re-occurrence  of unwanted behaviors. Through this empowerment, children move from an  external source of control to an internal locus of control over their thoughts  and behaviors.  REFERENCES Anastopoulos, A. D.,  Farley, S. E. 2003. A cognitive-behavioral training program for parents of children with attention-deficithyperactivity disorder. In A. E.  Kazdin  J. R. Weisz Eds., Evidence-Based Psychotherapies for Children and  Adolescents pp. 187203. New York, NY: Guilford Press.  Bandura, A. 2001. Social cognitive theory. Annual Review of Psychology Vol.  52. Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.  Bronfenbrenner, U. 1986. Ecology of the family as a context for human development: Research perspectives. Developmental Psychology, 22, 723742.  Heflin, L. J.,  Simpson, R. L. 1998. Interventions for children and youth with  autism: Prudent choices in a world of exaggerated claims and empty promises. Part  I: Intervention and treatment option review. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities, 13, 194211. Interactive Collaborative Autism Network ICAN. 2010. What is Cognitive Behavior Management? Retrieved from: www.autismnetwork.orgmodulesbehavior cbmlecture01.html. J.R. Weisz  A. E. Kazdin. 2010. Problem-solving skills training and parent  management training for oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder. In A.  E. Kazdin  J. R. Weisz Eds., Evidence-based psychotherapies for children and  adolescents pp. 211226. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Kazdin, A. E., Siegel, T. C.,  Bass, D. 1992. Cognitive problem-solving skills  training and parent management training in the treatment of antisocial behavior in  children. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60 5, 733747. Kazdin, A. 2008. The Kazdin method for parenting the defiant child: With no pills,  no therapy, no contest of wills. Boston, MA: Mariner Books Houghton Mifflin  Harcourt.  Manning, B. H. 1988. Application of cognitive behavior modification: First and  third graders selfmanagement of classroom behaviors. American Educational  Research Journal, 25 2, 193212.
Chapter Six Texas Statewide Leadership for Autism 2009. Texas Guide for Effective Teaching. Walker et. al. 2007. Behavior Management: A Practical Approach for Educators.  Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, Inc. Yale Parenting Center and Child Conduct Clinic. 2002. Retrieved from: http:www. yale.eduyaleparentingcenter.
Many schools within the United States do not provide students with the social and emotional skills, and with the character education they need to help  them to develop the positive relationships with peers and faculty that they  need DeAngelis, 2010. Data show that only twenty-nine percent of students  from grades six through twelve reported that their school provided a nurturing environment for them to develop successful relationships with peers and  teachers DeAngelis, 2010. Thirty percent of schools reported that students  engage in high risk behaviors, including sex and substance abuse DeAngelis,  2010. In an effort to address these problems, social and emotional learning  SEL programs are being more widely implemented in schools. SEL is a  process that helps children develop the fundamental interpersonal and intrapersonal skills that they need to help them lead more effective lives. Social  and emotional learning ultimately helps people become more aware of and  develop the skills needed to better themselves and to cultivate successful and  rewarding relationships Collaborative for academic, social, and emotional  learning, 2000-2010.  The skills learned in SEL programs are not just for the short term but can  be used by students throughout their lives. SEL helps children to develop the  capacity to be more aware of their emotions while developing empathy and  concern for others. These life-long skills, can allow children to resolve conflicts, make safe choices, and regulate their emotions. Children have begun to  benefit from social and emotional programs which are being implemented in  many schools around the country. Many of the tools and activities needed for  SEL school reform can be found at the collaborative for academic, social, and  emotional learning website CASEL, 2000-2010. There are many programs  in schools across the United States, and in some other countries, that are premised on the basic principles of SEL and character education. In this chapter,  Chapter Seven Social and Emotional Learning and  Character Education Approaches Ludmila Rodrigues, Inva Merolli, Jesse Crandall,  and Norris M. Haynes
Chapter Seven however, the authors focus specifically on the work of Bracket 2010 and  Elias 2003, leaders in, and substantial contributors to the field of Social and  Emotional Learning.  BASIC PRINCIPLES, GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES Proponents of SEL generally posit that there are five SEL competencies.  These are:   Self awareness,  Self management,   Social awareness,   Relationship skills,   Responsible decision making.  Self-Awareness  This involves being able to identify and describe ones feelings, needs, desires and motivations. For example, a student who is being called names and  is being picked on by his peers is able to recognize his feelings of sadness and  describe what it feels like to be picked on and called names. He will also be  able to think about and express a different narrative about himself that reflects  who he truly is as a person.  Self-Management This involves the ability to monitor and regulate ones feelings and ones  behavior. A student who practices effective self-management is able to monitor and regulate her emotions and impulses and demonstrate self-regulatory  behaviors. These may include self-regulatory practices but are not limited  to: good anger management, effective time-management skills, the ability to  establish short and longer-term goals, delay gratification and the self-control  and self-discipline needed to succeed academically.  Social Awareness This involves sensitivity to ones social environment and knowledge of how  to recognize, empathize with and respond appropriately to the feelings and  behaviors of others. 

Social and Emotional Learning and Character Education  111 Relationship Skills  These skills involve the ability to interact effectively and establish healthy  reciprocal relationships with others. Relationship skills help elementary  students learn how to cooperate with others, which helps them establish and  develop friendships. In high school, relationship skills are critical to gaining  acceptance, influencing and leading others and building the kinds of networks  that can be very useful beyond high school.  Responsible Decision Making This involves students making thoughtful, constructive and healthy decisions based on careful consideration and analysis of information.  It is believed that if these five basic principles of social and emotional  learning are integrated effectively into a students life, it could greatly benefit  the students development and increase the probability that the student will  succeed academically. Brackett, 2010; Elias, 2003; Devaney, et al., 2006.  The skills of recognizing and managing emotions, developing care and  concern for others, establishing positive relationships, making responsible  decisions, and handling challenging situations ethically are being successfully taught in social and emotional programs which help to prepare children  to successfully address challenges that they face on a daily basis CASEL,  2000-2010. SEL programs are extremely versatile and can be implemented  in many different environments including home and school CASEL, 20002010 and with children of varying ages as well as with adults. SEL programs  can be used with children who attend public or private schools as well as  with children who are home-schooled. SEL programs can be incorporated effectively into existing school curricula and initiatives. Devaney.et al., 2006;  CASEL, 2000-2010.  IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURE Facilitating social and emotional competence can be done in different ways.  Durlak and Dupree 2008 noted that social and emotional skills can be  taught, modeled andor practiced. The ultimate goal of each SEL approach is  the integration of the skills into childrens behavioral repertoire so that children may utilize them in dealing with daily life challenges. 
Chapter Seven Guidelines Elias 2003 identified several elements that are important in guiding SEL  implementation. They may be summarized as follows: Caring  The first, and perhaps most fundamental, is that learning requires caring.  Elias noted that in order for effective learning to take place in a classroom, the  classroom must have an environment in which a child feels safe, cared about,  and valued. Teachers may create such an environment by greeting students  by their names, showing interest in their personal lives, and recognizing their  positive behaviors Elias, 2003.  Teaching Life Skills Another key element in the promotion of caring is the teaching of life shills.  Teachers should take time to teach, not only content areas, but life skills as  wellskills which can be applied inside as well as outside of the classroom.  These include managing ones emotions, caring for others and making responsible decisions Elias, 2003.  Goal Setting and Engagement Elias notes that children are taught a wide range of materials on a daily basis. In order to remember and use this large amount of information in their  daily lives, children should be provided with a sense of connection between  different lessons and connectedness of these lessons to their lives. He advocates that providing goals which tie different materials together, as well as  to a childs life, will allow the child to be more engaged in the classroom.  Engaging students attention, interests and motivation is critical to their learning and success. The idea of engagement is connected to another of Elias  principles; a teacher should use varied methods of instruction Elias, 2003. Varied Instructional Modalities Recognizing that different students learn in different ways, it is important that  a teacher use different modalities i.e. art, drama, music, media, computers,  role-playing, etc. to reach all children Elias, 2003.  Linking SEL to Other School Services  The next factor, which is of high importance, is the need for linking SEL  to other school services. School personnel should be attentive to life chalSocial and Emotional Learning and Character Education  113 lenges that students face and provide needed support such as counseling and  guidance. SEL programs are more effective if there is a school-wide climate  of respect and caring, supporting the learning of social and emotional skills  Elias, 2003. Involving Parents  Getting parents involved in the implementation of SEL programs is another  form of support. Doing so allows children to apply what they learn in school  to their home lives, thus aiding in making social and emotional skills an integral part of their behavioral repertoire Elias, 2003. Community Service Elias asserts that community service can be used as an important tool in  building empathy. He maintained that community service helps to broaden  childrens perspective, and builds understanding and caring on a grandiose  levelnot only for children themselves, their teachers, classmates and families, but also for the world around them Elias, 2003.  Time and Effort The building of social and emotional skills among students occurs gradually  and takes time and diligent and sustained effort Elias, 2003. Professional Development The staff who implements SEL programs must be prepared and supported  well with ongoing professional development Elias, 2003. Ongoing Evaluation Conducting evaluation is crucial in determining SEL outcomes as well as  acquiring the formative opinions of staff and students Elias, 2003.  It is evident that the process of teaching social and emotional skills is one  that requires much time and effort; but the positive results, as research illustrates, are worth the effort Durlak  Dupree, 2008; Elias, 2008. Procedures The specific implementation procedures among some SEL programs involve  three phases: the readiness phase, the planning phase, and the implementation  phase CASEL, 2000-2010. 
Chapter Seven Readiness Phase: the readiness phase begins with introduction of the SEL  competency areas to school leaders i.e. administrators. Once the concepts  are discussed and understood by the administrators, the administrators must  accept the value of SEL and commit to the implementation of the framework.  Upon receiving support from the administrators, the focus is then shifted to  presenting SEL concepts to other stakeholders teachers, families, school  personnel. If the decision is made to adopt the SEL program, formation of a  Steering Committee begins. The administrator recruits members for this committee from different stakeholders within the school community teachers,  parents, counselors, psychologists, etc. and makes sure they are well knowledgeable of SEL concepts and curricula. The Steering Committee serves to  organize as well as over-see consistency of implementation of the program  Brackett et al., 2009.  Planning Phase: the planning phase starts with the development of a shared  vision among the experts, administrators, and members of the steering committee of what they would like this program to achieve for students and for  the school as a whole. They then share this vision with the rest of the stakeholders to increase positive energy and to achieve buy-in to the implementation of the program. The Steering Committee, along with the administrator,  then conducts a needs and resources assessment including an examination  of school climate and a determination of students and, staffs readiness for  implementation, as well as taking stock of possible barriers. This assessment  provides an understanding of the schools strengths and weaknesses which  can serve to support, or buffer, the implementation of the program. Upon  analysis of the assessment data, an action plangoals, benchmarks, timeline,  and plans for addressing social and emotional skill developmentis then  developed for implementation of the program CASEL, 2000-2010. Implementation: the implementation phase initially focuses on professional development activities. Experts from an SEL program provide sufficient training so that implementation staff is well-versed in SEL concepts  and strategies CASEL, 2000-2010. Teachers then begin to implement SEL  instruction in their classrooms, reflecting on what they experience. After  reflecting on initial implementation and making necessary changes, SEL  instruction is expanded to classrooms school-wide. Furthermore, SEL practices are integrated into other school activities so that the school provides a  consistent environment of support for students social and emotional growth.  The implementation activities are constantly being evaluated by the Steering  Committee as well as the Administrators to ensure continuous improvement  CASEL, 2000-2010.  Research has shown that two factors of the implementation process increase the effectiveness of SEL programs Durlak, 2008. One of them is that 

Social and Emotional Learning and Character Education  115 the program must be free of major implementation problems. That is, implementation procedures must be followed systematically and seen through with  fidelity. The second factor is that the program should follow four evidencebased strategies. These strategies include offering a sequential curriculum  and integrating SEL skills into the regular curriculum, using active teaching  methods to promote learning, focusing sufficient attention on skill development, and establishing explicit learning goals Durlak, 2008. If these factors  are present, positive results are very likely. SEL PROGRAM EXAMPLES Two programs which exemplify effective, evidence-based SEL programs are:  Recognizing, Understanding Labeling, Expressing and Regulating RULER  Brackett, 2009 and Social Emotional and Character Development SECD  Elias, 2008.  Recognizing, Understanding Labeling, Expressing  and Regulating RULER, Approach  Brackett 2009 uses RULER as an acronym for: Recognizing ones emotions, Understanding the causes and consequences of the emotion, Labeling  the emotion properly using a diverse vocabulary, Expressing emotion through  different modes i.e. writing, drawing, speaking and Regulating ones emotions preventing, reducing, enhancing according to different circumstances  Brackett et al., 2009. The RULER approach serves to empower school  leaders to become proficient in elements of social and emotional learning so  that they are able to implement workshops, teaching methods, activities, and  professional development themselvesthus providing long-term benefits for  the school.  Social and Emotional and Character Development SECD  Elias 2008 SECD program connects Social and Emotional Learning with  Character Development. It is not enough to merely teach students facts; a  successful education requires that character be developed as well Edutopia,  2008. SECD is described as a blend of SEL and character education. After  years of implementing the approaches separately, SECD was put together as  a result of teacher input recommending the integration of SEL and character  education Elias, 2008. The assumption held by the approach is that successful academic performance depends on the following factors: students 
Chapter Seven acquiring social and emotional skills, students approaching education positivelywith a sense of purpose, teachers drawing upon and nurturing student strengths, offering students opportunities to develop, allowing students  to express unique abilities and contribute positively to the classroomandor  schoolcommunity, and offering a safe and supporting school climate which  fosters empathic understanding, respect, and challenges Elias, 2008. Elias  asserts that some methods of achieving success are through coaching children  in conflict resolution, modeling negotiation, discussing different opinions  without personally attacking one another, and accepting others whose attitudes and values differ from ones own. Elias maintains that students who  acquire such skills are more likely to succeed in school, and furthermore, in  life 2008. RESEARCH Concepts of Social and Emotional Learning SEL have been studied since  the 1970s DeAngelis, 2010. Goleman 1995 brought more significant  awareness of and attention to the topic of Emotional Intelligence DeAngelis, 2010. Emotional Intelligence EI consists of traits of compassion, impulse control, motivation and the ability to love, among others Goleman,  2010. Goleman asserted that EI could be taught and that schools should  include EI in their curricula DeAngelis, 2010. Research has shown that  the emotional centers of the brain are linked to the neurocortical areas,  where cognitive learning takes place Goleman, 2010. When a childs  emotional distress interferes with a childs attempt to learn, the centers  where learning occurs are temporarily vulnerable; as a result, the childs  attention is mainly focused on the distressful event or situation, rather than  what is being taught Goleman, 2010. Some research also indicates that  EI can be an equal to or a better indicator of life success than IQ Ross,  Powell, Elias 2002. The school system reaches approximately 48 million students in both  public and private schools every school day. The most influential years of  students lives are spent in school. Students and adults spent approximately  6 hours together per day, 5 days a week, for 180 days a year, which equals  approximately 5400 hours spent together per year. This makes the school system an ideal institution for fostering and teaching social behaviors Ross, et.  al., 2002. Unfortunately, a large number of U.S. schools lack in promoting  good social and emotional health DeAngelis, 2010. Approximately 30 of  high school students report engaging in risky behaviors such as violence and  substance use DeAngelis, 2010. 

Social and Emotional Learning and Character Education  117 The implementation of SEL in schools can be a preventive tool against  emotional and behavioral problems among students Caldarella et al., 2009.  It helps lower risks that students face such as substance use and violence, and  empowers them with skills in dealing with life struggles Goleman, 2010.  Research studies of programs that have implemented SEL show that the  programs are effective in facilitating academic learning Goleman, 2000.  While SEL programs vary somewhat in design and target different ages,  they all work to develop core competencies: self-awareness, social awareness, self-management, relationship skills and responsible decision-making  DeAngelis, 2010, pp. 46. Studies have shown positive effects with the implementation of SEL programs with children of different backgrounds, from preschool through high  school in urban, suburban and rural locations. A research synthesis of 300  studies of SEL programs conducted by Durlak and Weissberg 2010 showed  that SEL considerably improved childrens performance on standardized  tests. In contrast to students who did not receive the SEL implementation,  students in the SEL programs had better school attendance, less disorderly  behavior; enjoyed school more, did better academically and had fewer suspensions from school. The authors concluded that, SEL improves childrens  relationships with others, it motivates them to learn, and it is effective in  reducing disruptive, violent and drug using behaviors CASEL, 2000-2010. A meta analysis of 213 SEL programs has shown that students who participate in the SEL program score 11 percentage points higher on achievements  tests compared to other students DeAngelis, 2010. Another study analyzed  a subset of 34 studies looking at the effects of SEL on students grade and  performance on achievement tests Taylor  Dymnicki, 2007. The results  showed that SEL improved students school functioning with effect sizes  ES ranging between 0.20 to 0.39 on positive social behavior, attitude, discipline, attendance, grades and achievement tests Taylor  Dymnicki, 2007.  A recent meta analysis of 200 studies evaluated the efficacy of SEL programs  and showed that the students who participate in SEL programs do better in  school and on standardized tests, compared to non participating students  RULER, 2010.  Three large reviews which included 317 studies with a total of 324,303  children were conducted. The reviews were organized in three parts: the  universal review, indicated review and after school review. The reviewed  studies demonstrated the effectiveness of SEL programs on elementary and  middle school students. The Universal review consisted of 180 school based  studies with 277, 977 students. The Indicated review consisted of 80 studies  with 11, 337 students. The After-School review consisted of 57 studies with  34, 989 students. The overall finding indicated that the students in the SEL 
Chapter Seven programs showed improvement in their personal, social and academic lives.  It also showed a gain in achievement test scores of 11 to 17 percentile points  among students in SEL programs Payton et al., 2008. The SEL implementation showed efficacy in the school and after school  programs. The follow up data demonstrated that the intervention was still  effective over time; however its long-term effect was not as strong. The  Universal and Indicated reviews showed the SEL program to be effective  when well implemented by the school staff. The Universal and After School  reviews demonstrated that programs that followed the SAFE program were  more effective compared to other programs. Safe refers to: Sequenced: Does the program apply a planned set of activities to develop  skills sequentially in a step-by-step fashion? Active: Does the program use active forms of learning such as role-plays and  behavior rehearsal with feedback? Focused: Does the program devote sufficient time exclusively to developing  social and emotional skills?  Explicit: Does the program target specific social and emotional skills? Payton, et al. 2008. In a study conducted by Caldarella et al. 2009 the authors evaluated the  effectiveness of Strong Start: A social and Emotional Learning Curriculum  Caldarella et al., 2009 on 26 second grade students. The results indicated  that the program decreased externalizing and internalizing behaviors, and  increased peer-related and pro-social behaviors. A study by Caldarella et  al., 2009 used a quasi-experimental study that evaluated the impact of the  Strong Start program on social and emotional competence. The results of  the study demonstrated that the treatment groups showed improvement on  the School Skills Rating System SSRS which assesses pro-social skills and  troublesome behaviors among students in grades K to 12, and on the School  Social Behavior Skills SSBS which measures social skills and attributes. A  treatment group of five students was identified as at risk. Compared to the  other students, the students in this treatment group experienced a noticeable  decrease on the SSRS Internalizing subscales. Students who participated in  the Strong Start program also experienced improvement in peer-related and  pro-social behaviors, and a decline in internalizing behavior. Strong Start was  successful with at risk students in increasing their pro-social behaviors. RULER Research The RULER approach uses research based tools that include a classroom  charter, a mood meter, an emotional literacy blueprint and later on in the 

Social and Emotional Learning and Character Education  119 program feeling words DeAngelis, 2010. Research indicates that integrating RULER skills lead to:  Enhanced motivation and Study Skills.  Higher academic scores in core content areas.  Decreased hyperactivity in the classroom.  Decreased anxiety and depression.  Increased empathy, social competence, and leadership skills.   Reductions in student referral for inappropriate behavior, school suspension, aggression and bullying.   Enhanced classroom climate, including greater respect between teachers  and students, more positive relationships among students, and enhanced  pro-social behaviors Brackett, 2010.  Research studies indicate that compared to students in classrooms that  have not implemented the RULER approach, middle school students in the  RULER program showed an 11 difference in GPA at the end of the year.  There was a 19 improvement in student behavior in 15 middle school classrooms according to teacher ratings, and a 12 improvement in school climate  in 62 elementary schools Brackett, 2010. A study of 60 schools in New  York demonstrated that the emotional climate of classrooms is connected to  academic commitment and progress among students Rebora, 2010. SECD Research Social, emotional and character development SECD, when implemented  effectively, is shown to have long term benefits for participating students. A  study conducted by Elias and his colleagues at the Rutgers Social-Emotional  Learning Lab compared three cohorts that received social decision-making social-problem-solving SDMSPS lessons in elementary school. The results  showed that ninth grade students who were part of the intervention drank less  alcohol and had less destructive problems. They also scored higher on social  competence, participated more in activities and improved their job work  skills Elias, 2008.  Another study was conducted among 598 students in fifteen Seattle public  schools where the neighborhood was marked by high crime rates. The students were divided into 3 groups. The first group consisted of 146 students  in grades 1 to 6 who received the full SECD intervention. The second group  consisted of 251 students in grades 5 through 6 who received only partial intervention. The third group consisted of 201 students who did not receive any  intervention. The results of a follow-up study fifteen years later showed that  the students who received the full intervention had fewer sexually transmitted 
Chapter Seven diseases STD, had higher incomes, showed more responsibility at work and  were more involved in the community Elias, 2008.  CRITIQUE SEL and SECD programs have been shown to be effective and to improve  various aspects of students social and academic development and performance. Some critics argue that there is no definitive construct of Emotional  Intelligence EI or Social and Emotional Learning SEL. There appears to  be a vagueness and theoretical misunderstanding of the concept of SEL due  to its being used as a large umbrella for many different kinds of programs,  many of which have different ways of addressing and assessing SEL. Critics also assert that research on the measures of EI and SEL are inconsistent  with one another and are unclear, because EI is hard to make applicable and  transferable into assessment measures. It is also noted by some that there is  insufficient evidence of the positive effects of SEL programs. A limitation  that is mentioned is a deficiency in validating empirical support, and a lack  of agreement on the neuroscience research that is purported to undergird SEL  research Waterhouse, 2006. There also appears to be a deficit in comprehensive and efficient evaluations of many SEL programs. In research there  appears to be a lack of robust experimental designs and controlled studies.  Much of the critique and debate over SEL approaches center around questions of empirical evidence and scientifically sound demonstrated effectiveness Hoffman, 2009.  Measuring implementation fidelity is seen by some as another limitation  of SEL research. A study of 1200 prevention programs reported that only 5  of those programs examined implementation Tanyu, 2007. Implementation  may be hard to research due its complexity and measurement challenges. Zins  and Elias 2006 established a guide for future research and practice. The evidence suggests that programs that consider current school resources related to  SEL implementation and that make an effort to strengthen them increase the  odds of implementation sustainability Tanyu, 2007, pp.261.  CONCLUSION Elas 2010 noted: weve been treating students as if theyre not people, as  if theyre somehow sponges and not human beings that come in with their  emotions in full play. Schools should educate the whole child, not just  academically, but also socially and emotionally. Studies have shown that 

Social and Emotional Learning and Character Education  121 emotions drive attention, memory, decision-making and social relationships  Brackett et al., 2009. Thus, emotions are inextricably linked to learning.  SEL programs aim to teach students social and emotional skills in an effort to  encourage, promote and nurture the development of knowledgeable, responsible, and caring individuals. Individuals are consequently more academically  successful, better able to maintain positive relationships, and more motivated  to contribute to their communities Payton et al., 2008. Thus SEL programs  are desirable and valuable despite the assertion by critics of SEL programs  who argue that the implementation of such programs is too time-consuming,  costly, and requires too much effort.  With the passage of the No Child Left Behind Act, the goal of education  has been for the most part, narrowed to focus mainly on measuring achievement through testing. This has to some extent resulted in social and emotional  learning being perceived by teachers and administrators as less important  than academic learning. Yet, some evidence has shown that students who  participated in SEL programs gained an average of 11 more on achievement tests than students who did not participate DeAngelis, 2010. Thus,  integrating SEL competencies into the academic curriculum not only helps  to develop childrens social and emotional skills, but has been shown to help  students achieve at significantly higher levels than they did before being  exposed to SEL programs. Critics have also argued that SEL constructs are  qualitative and thus difficult to measure. However, observable differences  in the behavior and academic achievement of children involved in SEL  programs have been noted through numerous studies. Results of research on  SEL programs show that students who are taught under the implementation  of these programs demonstrate superior social and emotional skills, more  engagement in pro-social behavior, enhanced academic performance, and reduced levels of conduct problems DeAngelis, 2010. The implementation of  SEL programs can be a challenging process. It requires time and effort from  all stakeholders involved. However, when implemented correctly, SEL helps  children succeed socially and academically.  REFERENCES Brackett, A., Patti, J., Stern, R., Rivers, S., Elbertson, N., Chisholm, C.,  Salovey, P.  2009. A sustainable, skill-based model to building emotionally literate schools.  In R. Thompson, M. Hughes,  J. B. Terrell Eds., Handbook of developing  emotional and social intelligence: Best practices, case studies, and tools pp.  329358. New York: John Wiley. Caldarella, P., Christensen, L., Kramer, T.,  Kronmiller, K. 2009. Promoting  social and emotional learning in second grade students: A study of the Strong Start 
Chapter Seven Curriculum. Early Childhood Education Journal, 371, 5156. Doi:10.1007 s10643-009-0321-4. Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning. 2000-2010. http: www.CASEL.org. Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning 2000-2010.  What  empirical evidence supports the effectiveness of SEL programming? Retrieved  October 30, 2010 from http:www.casel.orgbasicsfaqs.phpq11. DeAngelis, T. 2010, April. Another tool for special ed: Social and emotional learning programs appear to benefit children with disabilities. Monitor on Psychology,  414, 50. Retrieved from http:www.apa.orgmonitor. DeAngelis, T. 2010, April. Social awareness  emotional skills  successful kids.  Monitor on Psychology, 414, 46. Retrieved from http:www.apa.orgmonitor. Devaney, E., OBrien, M.U., Resnik, H., Keister, S.,  Weissberg, R.P. 2006. Sustainable schoolwide social and emotional learning sel. Chicago, IL: University  of Illinois at Chicago. Durlak, J.,  Dupree, E. 2008. Implementation matters: A review of research on  the influence of implementation on program outcomes and the factors affecting  the implementation. American Journal of Community Psychology, 41, 327350.  Edutopia staff. 2008, March 17. Why champion social and emotional learning?:  Because it helps students build character. Edutopia. Retrieved on October 15, 2010  from http:www.edutopia.orgsocial-emotional-learning-introduction. Elias, M. 2010. A view on emotional intelligence and the family. Edutopia. Retrieved October 13, 2010, from http:www.edutopia.orgmaurice-elias-emotionalintelligence-and-family. Elias, M. 2003. Academic and social-emotional learning. International Academy  of Education, 11, 531. Elias, M. 2008, December 23. Creating Better People: SECD Can Make a Difference. Retrieved October 15, 2010 from http: www.edutopia.orgsocial-emotional-learning-evidence-research. Goleman, D. 2010. Social  Emotional Learning. Retrieved October 30, 2010 from  http:danielgoleman.infotopicssocial-emotional-learning. Hoffman, D. 2009. Reflecting on Social Emotional Learning: A critical perspective  on trends in the United States. Review of Educational Research, 792, 533556.  Retrieved from Academic Search Premier database. Payton, J., Weissberg, R., Durlak, J. A., Dymnicki, A. B., Taylor, R. D., Schellinger, K.  B.,  Pachan, M. 2008. The positive Impact of Social and Emotional Learning for  Kindergarten to 8th Grade Students Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning. Retrieved from http:www.casel.orgdownloadsPackardES.pdf. Payton, J., Wardlaw, D., Graczyk, P., Bloodworth, M., Tompsett, C., Weissberg, R.  2000. Social and emotional learning: A framework for promoting mental health  and reducing risk behaviors in children and youth. Journal of School Health, 70  5, 179185. Rebora, A. 2010, March 6. How Are You Really Feeling? Retrieved October 12,  2010 from http:blogs.edweek.orgteacherswebwathc201003howareyoureallyfeeling.html.

Social and Emotional Learning and Character Education  123 Ross, M., Powell, S.,  Elias, M. 2002. New roles for school psychologists: Addressing the social and emotional learning needs of students. School Psychology  Review, 311, 43. Retrieved from Academic Search Premier database. RULER 2010. Evidence. Retrieved October 15, 2010 from http:therulerapproach. orgindex.phpaboutevidence. Tanyu, M. 2007. Implementation of prevention programs: Lessons for future  research and practice: A commentary on social and emotional learning: Promoting the development of all students, a chapter by Joseph e. Zins and Maurice J.  Elias. Journal of Educational  Psychological Consultation, 172-3, 257262.  Retrieved from PsycINFO database. Taylor, R.,  Dymnicki, A. 2007. Empirical evidence of social and emotional  learnings influence on school success: A commentary on building academic success on social and emotional learning: What does the research Say?, a book edited  by Joseph E. Zins, Roger P. Weissberg, Margaret. Journal of Educational   Psychological Consultation, 1723, 225231. doi:10.108010474410701346725. Waterhouse, L. 2006. Inadequate evidence for multiple intelligences, mozart  effect, and emotional intelligence theories. Educational Psychologist, 414,  247255. Retrieved from Teacher Reference Center database.
Imagine sitting in a room with your legs crossed, focusing on nothing but  the inhalation and exhalation of your breath. Your life may consist of work,  caring for children, and taking care of household tasks. However, during this  time your only objective is to simply be and live in the moment. What was  just described is a main component of the art of yoga. Yoga involves the integration of physical movement, mental awareness, and spiritual connection.  Physically, yoga can help improve flexibility, strengthen muscles, and release  tension Gillen  Gillen, 2007. It can also help lower blood pressure McCaffrey, Ruknui, Hatthakit,  Kasetsomboon, 2005 and decrease heart rate  Madanmohan, Udupa, Bhavanani, Shatapathy,  Sahai, 2004. Additionally,  yoga can help individuals find mental calmness and tranquility Feuerstein,  2003. On a spiritual level, yoga can help one attain inner peace Hill, 2008  and freedom from suffering Gates  Kenison, 2002. In India, where yoga  was first practiced 5,000 years ago, the art focused strongly on spirituality.  Today, yoga is practiced not only for spiritual purposes but also as an exercise  regime and stress reducer Feuerstein, 2003. Recently, yoga has moved beyond the studio and into the classroom as a behavior management technique.  Adults have reported a variety of benefits as a result of integrating yoga  into their lives. According to a study conducted by Atkinson and PermuthLevine 2009, many individuals viewed yoga as a means for preventing  disease. Participants in this study believed yoga would help decrease their  chances of developing arthritis, fibromyalgia, and headaches. Aside from  its physical benefits, participants also found that yoga helped improve many  social and psychological aspects of life. Individuals stated that yoga helped  them improve relationships as a result of increased patience and tolerance.  Within the psychological domain, participants reported that yoga helped  them reduce stress and increase self-acceptance. Many of the adults in this  Chapter Eight Yoga with Children: A New Approach  to Behavioral Intervention Alysia Tanasi, Cindy Videira, Jenelle Newcomb,  and Adriana Diaz

Yoga with Children  125 study felt that yoga motivated them to create a healthier lifestyle. Yoga is a  complex process and can be a vital resource for personal development and  improvement.  While there has been an abundance of research on the benefits of yoga for  adults, little research has been conducted on the effectiveness of yoga with  children. Research on the use of yoga with children has mainly been conducted in countries other than the United States, such as Germany Stueck   Gloeckner, 2005 and India Kauts  Sharma, 2009. Despite the limited  research conducted in the United States, many of those who have practiced  yoga with children and adolescents have witnessed positive results. Implementing yoga in schools can help improve childrens cognitive functioning,  reduce problem behaviors, and enhance childrens academic achievement.  BASIC PRINCIPLES, IMPLEMENTATION  GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES According to Gillen and Gillen 2007, reducing stress in children is important to help balance academics while providing them with physical and  emotional health training. The Yoga Calm program is designed for use with  children, and combines yoga poses with mindfulness training, nervous system  regulation, socialemotional skill development, and most importantly, emotional support. This allows children to become more aware of their minds and  bodies and helps them make healthier life choices. Yoga Calm also provides  ways of handling stress.  Gillen and Gillen 2007 outline the five major principles of the Yoga  Calm program that must be taught and adhered to in order for the program to  be optimally effective. The five principles are Stillness, Grounding, Strength,  Listening, and Community. The authors provide instruction on how to integrate these five important principles into Yoga Calm training. By focusing on  these principles rather than strict procedural guidelines, the Yoga Calm program can be adapted to work with children of different strengths and abilities.  STILLNESS According Gillen and Gillen 2007 stillness is needed in order for students  to develop a form of self-control and self-regulation. This can lead to improved self-behavior management. Children can apply the principle of stillness throughout the school day during periods of chaos, such as arrival and  dismissal times. This principle can help build confidence in maintaining and 
Chapter Eight regulating self-control. Stillness is taught throughout the entire Yoga Calm  program, and can serve as an effective aide to behavior modification.  The principle of Stillness is also helpful when working with children who  have attention disorders Gillen  Gillen, 2007. Gillen and Gillen recommend that before instructors can begin working with this group of children,  they must believe that the children have the capability to remain still. Stillness should be practiced in small increments, as an example asking the child  to remain completely still for ten seconds at a time. This technique proves to  children that they have the capacity to control their own behaviors. If children  with attention problems believe they can control themselves, they may be  able to focus and pay more attention in the classroom setting. Practicing Stillness can enhance students ability to remain focused on specific tasks, which  is especially important for children who have Attention Deficit Disorder or  Attention Deficit Hyperactive Disorder. Gillen and Gillen 2007 provide several examples of activities that are  used to teach the principle of Stillness. The Changing Channels activity is  an example of this Gillen  Gillen, 2007, p.108. Changing Channels can  last from one to five minutes depending on the age and attention span of the  group of students with whom one is working. It is designed to teach the ability  to shift attention and provides a way to practice this skill. During this activity,  students shut their eyes and take notice of what they are thinking. The children are asked to change the channel in their minds by imagining playing in  the snow. Students are given guided imagery about being wrapped in a jacket,  getting into a snowball fight and other imaginations for about 30 seconds. At  the end of 30 seconds, the children are then asked to change the channel for  another 30 seconds and think about a sunny beach, where the same guided  imagery would follow. Four or five different changes of the channel should  take place during this activity. Afterwards, the children should participate in  a discussion about when it might be useful for them to apply this technique.  By completing the Changing Channels activity Gillen  Gillen, 2007,  p.108, children may learn to relax themselves by following relaxing guided  imagery. The Changing Channels technique is a great coping skill for a variety of school related anxieties. This can be particularly useful in combating  feelings of test anxiety. The Changing Channels activity could also be implemented in dealing with the chronic problem of bullying in schools. In the  United States, 30 of children in grades six through ten report being involved  in bullying Nanse, Overpeck,  Pilla, 2001. Upon mastery of this activity, a  child who is being bullied will possess the tools required to be still and walk  away from the conflict. By achieving tranquility of the mind first, the child  is then allowed to focus attention on their physical and emotional well-being.

Yoga with Children  127 GROUNDING The principle of Grounding would be the next step in enhancing both physical and emotional well-being. This concept could also be used in behavior  management. Teaching a student that the ground is always there Gillen   Gillen, 2007, p. 37 can help them feel as though they have control of  the environment. This process is about developing a connection between  the student and their surroundings. By helping children become aware of  their physical self as well as physical surroundings, a sense of safety will  be established Gillen  Gillen, 2007. When a student feels physically and  emotionally safe, the student is more likely to flourish both inside and outside  of the classroom. STRENGTH The principle of Strength, which is also crucial to behavior management, is  composed of three parts: Physical Strength, Mental Strength, and Emotional  Strength. These skills should be taught and maintained together. Physical  Strength is developed through the use of various yoga poses. Not only does  the body become physically stronger, but the sense of self also becomes  stronger which helps increase feelings of safety Gillen  Gillen, 2007.  During the Yoga Calm process, students should be physically challenged but  also encouraged to listen to their bodies limits. When performing a challenging physical pose, students are encouraged to talk to themselves in a positive  manner. Thinking positively can enable children to accomplish tasks in the  classroom that once defeated them. This can help lower frustration, which is  often displayed as aggression or classroom outbursts. Students can demonstrate emotional strength by becoming aware of and expressing their feelings  while practicing yoga. It is important to provide children with the opportunity to express feelings  throughout each lesson. Guided relaxation can also be used to focus thoughts  and develop positive images about the task at hand Gillen  Gillen, 2007.  A strong sense of self, as well as positive images and ideas helps develop the  concept of Mental Strength. Possessing Mental Strength can reduce negative images and also reduce chances of negative external behavior having  an influence on individual children. When a student has developed Physical  and Mental Strength, they become confident in their ability to express themselves immediately, instead of suppressing their emotions, which results in  increased Emotional Strength Gillen  Gillen, 2007. 
Chapter Eight LISTENING The principle of Listening is used to help develop a sense of self as well as  improve cognitive functioning. According to Gillen and Gillen 2007, this  is achieved by listening to the messages that come from the mind, body, and  heart. This is particularly important to instill in those children who are constantly plagued by danger and fear, such as children who are victims of abuse.  As Gillen and Gillen noted, Listening can help a person make better choices.  There is a distinct difference between hearing and listening. If a student is  in-tune to himself, he may be more likely to listen and process information  being presented by the teacher, instead of just hearing what is being said.  When practicing Listening in the classroom, it is important for the instructor  to encourage open discussions about every students thoughts and feelings.  The authors state that Listening needs to be performed in the presence of  instructors who are capable of listening to their own thoughts and feelings.  If a student feels as though he or she wants to express himself or herself and  time does not allow, or the instructor is feeling impatient, the student should  be allowed to set-up a time where heshe can do so, preferably with someone  who is well versed in the principle of Listening Gillen  Gillen, 2007.  When students and teachers listen to each other, there will be fewer miscommunications in the classroom. If teachers are in-tune with how their students  are feeling, they may be better prepared to deal with any emotions that may  be affecting class work. By addressing these emotions, feelings, andor concerns, students may feel less resentful and overwhelmed, which can lead to  increased productivity in the classroom.  COMMUNITY In order for the Yoga Calm program to be effective and improve academic  achievement, students must understand the principle of Community. In order  to do this, there are various games and activities that have been developed  that show the way that communities both support and challenge us as individuals. For example, Gillen and Gillen 2007 introduce the Archetype Game  p.105 which is a socialemotional activity designed to help students practice  role discrimination. The activity lasts for about 15 to 20 minutes. During this  time, children are asked to think of an archetype Clown, Explorer, King,  Queen, Angel, etc. and on the count of four they are asked to stand up and  become a statue mimicking the archetype they are trying to represent. While  music is played, students walk about the classroom in character until they  are told to freeze. The process is then repeated. Students are asked to keep 

Yoga with Children  129 their space and refrain from touching and talking during this time. If a rule is  violated, the student must sit out for one archetype. In order to make students  more aware of what is taking place during the activity, students are asked to  pay attention to which archetypes are easy and uncomfortable for them to act  out. At the end of the game, a discussion should be held where students are  allowed to talk about their favorite archetypes. It is also important to discuss  when certain archetypes should and should not be used.  The Archetype Game reinforces the principle of Community because  students must be respectful of each others space throughout the activity. During the discussion session students are able to talk about their thoughts and  feelings, which must be respected by other classmates. This helps develop  students confidence in their ability to express feelings. Children are most  likely to excel in an environment free of animosity and miscommunication.  Allowing children the opportunity to express their feelings encourages a  positive learning environment, fit for academic achievement. Acting out and  taking notice of different archetypes during the Archetype Game Gillen   Gillen, 2007, p.105 can help students become more aware of the fact that  everybody is different. Being able to tell what sad, happy, or angry looks like  can be useful in new situations i.e.; meeting someone for the first time and  deciding whether or not they can be trusted.  In order for a community to be effective, its members must learn how to  be compassionate. The Yoga Calm program teaches compassion by allowing students to express their emotions, giving students a chance to become  familiar with how other people feel and difficulties that others may be facing.  The ultimate goal is to get the students to want to help each other, which is  especially helpful in underprivileged populations. Yoga Calms socialemotional activities provoke conversations involving different points of view and  the community games offer an opportunity to practice positive responses to  bullying and other negative behaviors that are common in the school setting  Gillen  Gillen, 2007. In order to begin practicing these five important  principles, a proper teaching environment must first be created. The main component of a proper teaching environment in relation to the  Yoga Calm program is an environment that is therapeutic. Gillen and Gillen  2007 suggest creating a therapeutic environment by creating a routine that  is always followed. Ground rules should be clearly posted, and can include  suggestions about what students should do if they are having a difficult time  i.e., use positive self-talk with examples as well as what to do if struggling  with certain poses i.e., students should take it upon themselves to sit down.  Distractions should be removed from the environment phones, toys, assignments, bright lighting, etc. and a sign should be placed on the door to let  people know that a session is in progress to avoid unanticipated interruptions. 
Chapter Eight Slow, calming music should be used since it can motivate students as well  as provide them with auditory cues for moving in a coordinated manner. The  instructors should take time before the Yoga Calm session, preferably at least  five minutes, to focus on centering themselves. Gillen and Gillen 2007 also provide tips on how to manage the classroom. First of all, rules should be firm. A Yoga Calm routine should usually  start with a Stillness exercise and instructors should not move on until they  feel as though everyone is still. This may require asking students to hold  their bodies perfectly still for 30 seconds, and after they have remained still  for 15 seconds, the instructor can move on. Rewards are acceptable at the  beginning if necessary, but they should be phased out so that students can  focus on the internal reinforcement of participating in the program. Having  a paraprofessional on hand to handle problem behaviors that may arise can  be helpful, especially if dealing with a particularly problematic group of  students. If a child is being difficult, it can be effective to challenge him or  her by letting him or her know that he or she will be leading the class next.  When a child is allowed to lead the class, the instructor should still be the  only person providing verbal instructions. The student simply models the  desired poses and behaviors. An instructor should not perform poses they  are not comfortable with as it may make the students feel uncomfortable as  well. Lastly, it is important that instructors let the students know that they  care about each student individually by complimenting each students individual gifts and talents. If instructors make mistakes, they should not try  and cover it up as students will most likely recognize the mistake and begin  to think the instructor is being dishonest. BENEFITS OF YOGA Yoga has been used as a successful intervention within the classroom. Robin  Feinberg, a yoga instructor in Connecticut, claims that yoga enhances the  well-being of children and is useful when dealing with problem behaviors  R. Feinberg, personal communication, October, 24, 2010. Feinberg has  witnessed an improvement in emotional control and a reduction in temper  tantrums, mood swings, and outbursts of crying among the children she has  worked with. Dr. Kristine Kaloides, a school psychologist at the Beecher  Road School in Connecticut, has practiced yoga with children in the school  system for over 18 years K. Kaloides, personal communication, October 20,  2010. She has received support from students, parents, and staff who have  seen an improvement in the academics, behavioral regulation, and cognitive  functioning of their students.

Yoga with Children  131 Yoga enhances the cognitive functioning of children and adolescents.  Yoga has been found to increase memory and processing speed Kauts   Sharma, 2009. In one study, a group of ten to thirteen year old girls required  less time to execute a mental test after practicing yoga daily Manjunath   Telles, 2001. This increase in memory and processing speed can be applied  in the classroom as children often rely on memory for test taking and planning skills for projects and writing papers. Yoga also helps to increase the  attention span of children. A study done by Subramanya and Telles 2009  found that meditation with movement increased performance on attention and  memory tasks. Attention is an important skill for students to have in the classroom to process and comprehend information being presented. The cognitive  improvements that may result after implementing yoga in the classroom can  be a great benefit to students learning and understanding of material.  Yoga is viewed as an effective means of behavior management with children both inside and outside of the classroom. Kauts and Sharma 2009  have found that yoga lowers levels of aggression in children. In relation  to overall aggression, yoga has also been seen to reduce levels of bullying  among children Powell, Gilchrist,  Stapley, 2008, which can be extremely  beneficial in the school setting. Bullying has been a chronic problem within  school environments for many years. Yoga has the potential to help the children who bully, as well as the children who are the victims of bullying. It is  the strong belief of school psychologist, Kristine R. Kaloides, Psy.D, that  yoga has significantly benefited school aged children within the behavioral  domain. She has witnessed students applying yoga techniques to deal with  personal problem behaviors K. Kaloides, personal communication, October  20, 2010. In one example given by Kaloides, two male students who often  presented problem behaviors were sent to sit in the hall during lunch after  causing trouble. Kaloides later found the two students practicing deep breathing in the hall as a way of reducing their stress and aggression levels from the  incident in the cafeteria. Kaloides has continuously seen an improvement in  behavior management as children learn to apply yoga techniques to deal with  frustration and anger.  In addition to enhanced cognitive functioning and behavioral improvement, yoga has been found to enhance the academic achievement of children  in the classroom Kauts  Sharma, 2009. A positive correlation was found  between participating in yoga and GPA in a Los Angeles, CA inner city  school Slovacek, Tucker,  Pantoja, 2003. In a culture where GPA is an  important factor in determining future academic and professional opportunities, such as college acceptance, yoga can be enormously useful. When used  after a physical activity such as gym or recess, yoga can calm children down  and help them to focus and transition into an academic activity. If children 
Chapter Eight are able to focus themselves sooner, they will absorb more information in  the classroom, which will result in higher academic achievement. Academic  achievement can also be obtained through developed leadership skills. Dr.  Kaloides often allows her students to lead yoga, which she believes has led to  improvement in their leadership skills K.Kaloides, personal communication,  October 20, 2010. Powell et al. 2008 found an improvement in following  instructions and group cooperation among students. Leadership and increased  group cooperation skills are valuable both in the classroom and in social  domains, such as for friendship making. GPA and leadership skills are vital  for helping college and job applicants stand out in a crowd. Possessing these  skills can increase students chances for success.  EVALUATION AND RESEARCH EVIDENCE Several studies have been conducted on the effectiveness of yoga with students. A study conducted by Kauts and Sharma 2009, in India, included 800  boys and girls between the ages of fourteen and fifteen from eight separate  schools. The study was designed to evaluate the effect of yoga on performance  in math, science, and social studies individually and collectively, in relation  to stress. All of the students were given a survey used to assess their level of  stress, and were then placed in appropriate groups. Eighty-nine students were  in the high-stress experimental group; 70 students were in the high-stress  control group; 75 students were in the low-stress experimental group; and 67  students were in the low-stress control group, for a total of 301 participating  students. The high-stress and low-stress experimental groups received daily,  one hour yoga interventions, for seven weeks. Kauts and Sharma found that  students who received the yoga intervention received better scores on math,  science, and social studies combined scores than those who did not receive  the yoga intervention 0.01 level of significance. Kauts and Sharma also collected evidence 0.05 significance level that students with low stress perform  better academically, than those with high levels of stress.  Kauts and Sharmas 2009 study has shown that Yoga can be used as  a means to reduce stress, which may help improve academic performance.  Yoga Calm is designed to teach lifelong stress management skills, as well as  socialemotional skills Gillen  Gillen, 2007. Stress management skills, after being developed through a program such as the Yoga Calm program, can  be applied in a variety of settings. One of these settings could be academic  examinations.  A controlled-design study conducted in Germany, by Stueck and Gloeckner 2005 was designed to teach children and adolescents self-regulation 

Yoga with Children  133 strategies that could be used to reduce stress and improve their reactions to  the pressures and demands that occur in everyday life. Throughout the course  of the program, there was a total of fifteen, 60-minute sessions that consisted  of relaxation, yoga exercises, and a social interaction game. There were a  total of 48 participating subjects, with 21 subjects participating in the experimental group, and 27 subjects participating in the control group. Subjects  were between the ages of 11 and 12 and indicated high levels of examination  anxiety. With a significance level of p  .05, aggression, feelings of helplessness in school, and physical complaints all decreased immediately after the  completion of the 15 session program, while there was an indicated increase  in stress-coping abilities. Also at the p  .05 level of significance, levels of  anxiety remained lower when assessed 3 months after the completion of the  intervention, as did impulsivity. This suggests that students retain the information learned in the program, continue to utilize it, and are able to use it in  more than one setting. Through practicing the principle of Community, Gillen and Gillens 2007  Yoga Calm program promotes communication among community members  students. If children are given the tools they need to communicate their  feelings, it is possible that rates of aggression will decrease. Children will  be less likely to snap when they are being bullied, and will be less likely to  bully each other since they will have a better understanding of each others  feelings. Also, if children feel as though they have people to turn to, feelings  of helplessness may decrease. Stueck and Gloeckners 2005 study provided  further support for the use of the Yoga Calm program by showing that a  yoga program resulted in decreased aggression, feelings of helplessness, and  anxiety.  In a randomized controlled trial conducted by Mendelson et al. 2010  the feasibility of using a mindfulness-based intervention for children in an  urban school setting in Baltimore, MD and the effect of the intervention on  the students was evaluated. Participants in this study were from four different schools and included fourth and fifth graders. Random assignment was  used to designate two control schools, and two schools that would receive  a 12 week mindfulness-based intervention. Fifty-five fourth graders and  42 fifth graders participated in the study. Fifty-one students received the  intervention and 46 students remained in the control group. Interventions  took place during normal school hours in 45 minute sessions, four days a  week, for 12 weeks. The intervention was composed of several different  parts, which included yoga-based physical activity, breathing, and guided  mindfulness. Results showed that it is feasible to introduce a mindfulnessbased intervention into an urban school setting. The intervention group  experienced reductions in involuntary stress responses, which may indicate 
Chapter Eight that mindfulness-based interventions enhance the self-regulation capacities  and reduce worrying thoughts in children. Gillen and Gillens 2007 Yoga  Calm provides a structured program, along with training and certification,  that could be easily introduced into school systems where there are high  levels of stress and anxiety. In a study conducted by Slovacek et al. 2003, a Yoga Ed program in an  inner-city school in Los Angeles, CA was evaluated. Four-hundred and five  students in a K-8 charter school participated in the Yoga Ed program, which  took place over the course of an entire school year. The study was designed  to evaluate whether or not Yoga Ed classes were effective in improving elementary and middle school students attitudes about themselves and school,  and improving their emotional and physical health. Kindergarten, first,  and second grades focused on physical awareness and skills. Grades three  through five focused on mentalemotional awareness and skills, and grades  six through eight focused on selfcommunityuniversal awareness.  Slovacek et al. 2003 found that at the elementary school level, students  who had high rates of participating in yoga class, had fewer discipline problems r  .463, p .01. A negative correlation between yoga participation  and a number of discipline problems also appeared at the middle school level  r  .367, p .01. Also, at the middle school level, a positive correlation  existed between yoga participation and GPA r  .399, p .01. A pre and post  yoga questionnaire was distributed and completed by 310 students in grades  three through eight. In a question where students were asked to rate whether  or not they liked themselves and thought they were a great person, positive  responses increased by 20 percent.  Perhaps, participation in the Yoga Ed program resulted in lower rates of  discipline problems at both the elementary and middle school levels because  students learned to think before acting. They may have also learned deep  breathing in order to relieve stress. If this is the case, then it is reasonable to  believe that the Yoga Calm program would also result in decreased amounts  of disciplinary action being taken. Yoga Calm devotes a large portion of its  instruction to the practice of deep breathing Gillen  Gillen, 2007. Also  important to note is that all of the students in the school studied by Slovacek  et al. 2003 were involved in the Yoga Ed intervention. Since all students  participated in the intervention, everyone may have benefited from it and felt  less stressed. Students that are less stressed may not act out as often, resulting in less disciplinary action being taken. Based on the evidence provided  by Slovacek et al., for the Yoga Ed program, the Yoga Calm program should  be implemented throughout the entire school in order to achieve the maximum desired effect. It is reasonable to assume that children who are calm  and relaxed are more confident with who they are, and believe in themselves, 

Yoga with Children  135 resulting in better school performance. The research presented in this paper  offers support for the use of yoga with children. CRITIQUE The purpose of this paper is to argue for yoga to be implemented in the classroom setting to improve cognitive functioning, reduce problem behaviors,  and enhance the academic achievement of students. Research supports the  idea that yoga is beneficial, but this research has mostly been conducted on  adults. Therefore, it is prudent to point out that there is not much research  that has been done with the school aged population and the research that does  exist does not examine the effects of yoga with children in the American  culture. There is significant reason for more studies to be done with children.  The Yoga Calm program appears to be good in design but there is a lack  of empirical evidence to support its effectiveness. With stronger evidence  supporting its effectiveness, increased use of the Yoga Calm program holds  promise for increasing understanding of the effects that yoga could have on  children in the school setting.  This approach stands to offer cognitive, behavioral, and academic advancements. A cognitive strength that students can achieve is the ability to calm  their minds and focus more in class. Children can learn to become better  students by exercising self-control and being able to focus completely during  lessons. Yoga enhances listening skills, which can be directly related to academic achievement. Additionally, yoga helps children learn to work cooperatively with others in the classroom, which enhances the sense of community.  Research has been done that shows how yoga helps reduce feelings of  stress and anxiety in both adults and children. The study done by Kauts and  Sharma 2009 compared level of stress and academic performance, and  found that a yoga intervention helped children receive higher scores in academic areas such as math and science. This study was done in India, and a  huge cultural discrepancy does exist, but for those children yoga improved  academic scores. Right now there is a high demand on teachers and school  systems to make sure that all children are meeting state and federal test performance standards. If there is a chance that yoga can improve a childs test  scores, there could be more state and federal interest in implementing yoga  in school systems. Ultimately, if yoga helps children feel less stressed and  reduces levels of anxiety, it is in the best interest of school administrators to  allow students to have that experience. Dr. Kaloides, the school psychologist in Woodbridge Connecticut referenced earlier in this chapter, has a program in place in her school that she 
Chapter Eight feels is tremendously beneficial. Kaloides mentioned seeing improvement in  children with attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder ADHD. She has  seen increases in concentration among those with ADHD. Hyperactive students have engaged in abbreviated yoga stretches to keep them on task in the  classroom. These are common diagnoses that can be seen in the school aged  demographic, so finding an intervention that can be effective in working with  them is extremely important.  Unfortunately there is no research based on the work that takes place at Dr.  Kaloides school. Changes of the magnitude described by Dr. Kaloides at her  school should be empirically documented. Another factor to take into consideration is that the small amount of research that has been done has also primarily been focused among elementary aged children. There could be significant  differences among young children, older children and adolescents. Teenagers  are developmentally in a different place than younger children, and these fundamental differences could impact how yoga could differentially affect them. If yoga were to be implemented in schools on a larger scale, this would  require more time and training for teachers. Teachers are already under an  incredible amount of pressure to meet mandated requirements that ensure that  their students are performing at state and district expected academic levels. A  yoga program would indeed be one more requirement that a teacher would have  to master, so this is something to consider when trying to implement a yoga  program in a school. It would make most sense to have one person trained and  informed about the program, such as Dr. Kaloides is for her school, who could  work with the children in the classroom. This would allow yoga to be implemented within schools without increasing requirements for all teachers.  With regard to The Yoga Calm program, there are a few specific limitations. The program places heavy emphasis on communication. Children, who  have communication deficits, may have a difficult time expressing emotions  and engaging in specific program activities. This may be especially difficult  for students who have other hearing impairments OHI, who are non-verbal,  or who have developmental disabilities. In addition, the yoga calm program  does not specify whether assistance should be given to students who are  struggling with the poses or do not understand the poses. There is no clear  direction for what to do when a child needs help, or how to handle children  who have physical handicaps. These limitations may make it difficult to  implement this program in diverse school settings. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS Future research on the use of yoga with the school aged population would be  necessary before implementing nationwide yoga programs in schools. There 

Yoga with Children  137 is a serious lack of research on yoga with children. More research would be  required to establish the validity of the effectiveness of yoga as a behavior  management modality with children. More research would also help to provide more in-depth understanding of how yoga affects children in the school  environment. Research would also have to be conducted on the implementation and effects of yoga with children who have developmental disabilities.  Yoga has the potential to be a great intervention for students with disabilities  so further research on this population is highly recommended. The American  culture is unique in comparison to other cultures in that its citizens are very  diverse. More research on the effectiveness of yoga with children in the  United States could discover specific benefits for this diverse population of  children.  The saying our children are our future is not a clich, it is truth, and society has a great responsibility to make sure that children are being given the  best opportunity to lead healthy and productive lives. Children live in a hectic world of busy parents, school pressures, incessant lessons, video games,  malls, and competitive sports. One does not usually think of these influences  as stressful for children, but often they are. Given these stressors and others  such as facing a learning or developmental disability, there is a need to develop effective coping and management strategies to meet these challenges.  Yoga can help students adjust to academic and social pressures and could be  a valuable aspect of a schools curriculum.  REFERENCES Atkinson, N. L.,  Permuth-Levine, R. 2009. Benefits, barriers, and cues to action  of yoga practice: A focus group approach. American Journal of Health Behavior,  331, 314. Feuerstein, G. 2003. The deeper dimension of yoga. Boston, MA: Shambhala Publications.  Gates, R.,  Kenison, K. 2002. Meditations from the mat. New York: Anchor  Books. Gillen, L.  Gillen, J. 2007. Yoga calm for children: Educating heart, mind, and  body. Portland, OR: Three Pebbles Press, LLC.  Hill, D. 2008. The inner yoga of happiness. Victoria, BC, Canada: Trafford Publishing. Kauts, A.,  Sharma, N. 2009. Effect of yoga on academic performance in relation  to stress. International Journal of Yoga, 21, 3943.  Madanmohan, Udupa, K., Bhavanani, A.B., Shatapathy, C.C.,  Sahai, A. 2004.  Modulation of cardiovascular response to exercise by yoga training. Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology, 484, 461465. 
Chapter Eight Manjunath, N.K,  Telles, S. 2001. Improved performance in the Tower of London test following yoga. Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology, 453,  351354. McCaffrey, R., Ruknui, P., Hatthakit, U.,  Kasetsomboon, P. 2005. The effects of yoga on hypertensive persons in Thailand Holist Nurs Pract. JulAug;194:17380. Mendelson, T., Greenberg, M.T., Dariotis, J.K., Gould, L. F., Rhoades, B.L.,  Leaf,  P.J. 2010. Feasibility and preliminary outcomes of a school-based mindfulnessbased intervention. J Abnorm Child Psychol.387:98594. Nagendra, H. R.,  Nagarathna, R. 1977. New perspective in stress management.  Bangalore, India: Vivekananda Kendra Parkashana.  Nansel, T.R., Overpeck, M., Pilla, R.S., Ruan, W.J., Simons-Morton, B.,  Scheidt,  P. 2001. Powell, L., Gilchrist, M.,  Stapely, J. 2008. A journey of self-discovery: An  intervention involving massage, yoga, and relaxation for children with emotional  and behavioral difficulties attending primary school. European Journal of Special  Needs Education, 234, 403412. Slovacek, S. P., Tucker, S. A.,  Pantoja, L. 2003, November 21. A study of the  yoga ed program at the accelerated school, Yoga Ed. Retrieved October 24, 2010,  from http:www.yogaed.compdfsresearcharticle.pdf. Stueck, M.; Gloeckner, N. 2005. Yoga for Children in the Mirror of the Science:  Working Spectrum and Practice Fields of the Training of Relaxation with Elements  of Yoga for Children. Early Child Development and Care,1754, 371-377.  Subramanya, P.,  Telles, S. 2009. Performance on psychomotor tasks following two yoga-based relaxation techniques. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1092,  563576.
Behavior management approaches are most effective in addressing high-risk  behaviors among at-risk children and youth, when implemented in school  contexts that are supportive, nurturing and responsive to the diverse needs  of students. The authors of this chapter advocate very strongly that the social  and emotional climate in schools be treated as importantly and be very much  a part of all interventions designed to address high risk behaviors. The context  provides the infrastructure and the foundation within which, and on which,  the durability and success of an intervention rest.  As collaborators in our blended professions of family-, individual-, schoolcounseling, and school psychology for over a decade, the common lens  through which the authors of this chapter approach addressing the social,  emotional and behavioral challenges among children and youth in schools is  one of chronic loss. Chronic loss refers to loss on a daily basis of what a child  needs to thrive Black, 1981. It encompasses a childs or youths continuing social and emotional struggle for a sense of wholeness and completeness  which often finds expression in high-risk behaviors, such as eating disorders.  Children who may be lacking significant elements that they need to survive  and then to thrive or who may feel psychologically, socially and emotionally challenged, may be emotionally inhibited from connecting to the school  community and unable to take advantage of the learning opportunities that  schools provide. So, again, loss in this chapter is broadly defined as missing or lacking physical, social and emotional connectedness to something  or someone that is needed and wanted to make ones life better. There are  numerous situations that contribute to chronic loss for youth which include  but are not limited to: poverty, parents contentious divorce, imprisonment of  a parent or guardian, struggling with chronic or terminal illness of a family  member, a family members substance abuse, eating disorder, sexual abuse,  Chapter Nine Implementing Behavior Management  Approaches in Supportive School  Contexts: Addressing High-Risk  Behaviors among At-Risk Students  Patricia De Barbieri, Joy E. Fopiano,  and Norris M. Haynes
Chapter Nine job loss, physical abuse, cyber-bullying, peer rejection, teen pregnancy,  violence witnessed or experienced, homelessness, feelings of isolation and  depression, natural disasters fire, hurricanes, draught, tornado, and war.  All of these examples of loss pose serious threats to childrens emotional  safety and their connectedness to their school community. The list of  examples of loss while not exhaustive, create in todays society an increasing number of school-age high risk youth. For while they are experiencing  emotions that tax their energies, they may feel separate and apart from peers  and school learning. Research demonstrates that students connectedness to  their school community is an important part of their success Brooks, 1991;  Joyner, et.al., 2004. Therefore it is critical to focus on reaching at-risk children and supporting them to re-engage in their classroom and school communities. Eating disorders, as a high-risk behavioral condition, is prominently  highlighted throughout this chapter, given its increasing prevalence among  both male and female students in schools, and its severe impact on all aspects  of the life of those affected by it. Traditional and alternative behavior management strategies offer important  methods for providing social and emotional support structures that help children to experience personal and academic success. Behavior management is  not narrowly characterized in this book by a stimulus-response-reinforcement  paradigm but is recognized as embracing the total configuration of cognitive,  emotional and behavioral responses to life experiences. Challenging attitudes  and behaviors, encouraging healthy behavioral choices and building resilience even when dealing with chronic loss are the areas on which this chapter  is most focused. CONNECTING EMOTIONALLY As was noted in earlier chapters in this book emotions influence students  attention in class, their capacity to process and retain information and their  ability to perform well. Therefore, it is important for teachers and other  school-based personnel to recognize the students in classes and in schools,  who are challenged emotionally. These students may be compliant, but still  harbor pain that takes their energy away from class activities. A student suffering chronic loss may feel so emotionally depleted, that the student may not  have the physical or psychological energy needed to focus and concentrate  on academic tasks. Students who are dealing with chronic loss may believe  that their situation is so extreme that they feel disconnected and apart from  their friends, peers, adults in their schools and even from family members. A  child suffering chronic loss may continue to attend school; may appear with 

Implementing Behavior Management Approaches  141 low motivational energy, and may be reported to struggle to connect to others  and to the learning. The skills they employ to get through their days such as:  dont talk about how you feel, dont allow yourself to feel, and dont trust  anyone Black, 1981 may help them to survive but seriously impair their  ability to connect with others and build relationships. We know that children,  especially at-risk children and youth, benefit from connectedness to school.  Behavior management strategies that attend to cognitions, and emotions, as  well as to behavior can pull students into learning and can build for them a  repertoire of consistent success. Academic success can support their selfesteem, social-emotional development, and assist in their connection with  the school community. Through behavior management children can learn  strategies that can support them to move through their difficult problems and  build resiliency. The Center for Disease Control CDC, 2009 cites connectedness to school  as being correlated with positive school achievement. Further, the CDC  proposes from their National Youth Risk Behavior Survey CDC, 2009 that  students who do not engage in health-risk behaviors receive higher grades  than their classmates who do engage in health-risk behaviors. Behaviors including: substance abuse, being sexually active, watching television for three  or more hours per school day, and not being physically active for five days  per week are all behaviors correlated with lower school achievement. These  behaviors then, are flags to which we must attend. Using academic grades as  a measure, the CDC suggests that students with higher grades are less likely  to have engaged in high-risk behaviors. Where behaviors are flagged and an  intervention is designed, students have the opportunity to learn new successful strategies. Therefore, research clearly suggests that it is critical to monitor  grades and consistent school success as a measure of risk requiring intervention and support. This is a foundational screen for knowing whom to consider  for early behavior management intervention. It is well advised to attend to  these behaviors very early to create a net of safety before at-risk behaviors  escalate towards school failure. According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National  Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion CDC, 2009,  young people who feel connected to their school are less likely to engage  in many risk behaviors, including; early sexual initiation, alcohol, tobacco,  other drug use, violence and gang involvement. A strong network of support and effective behavior management interventions build resilience and  resourcefulness in times of crisis, feelings of despair, or when friendships are  not going well in an area of ones life. A repertoire of behavior management  skills and a strong connectedness network assist with a childs self esteem,  socio-emotional skill building and academic performance Brooks, 1991. 
Chapter Nine The authors of this chapter posit that school success promotes resiliency and  effective behavior management strategies can help achieve school success  and build resilience. DEVELOPMENTALLY SENSITIVE  APPROACHES: THE CASE OF GWEN Considering the age and stage of development of a child provides insight into  potential skill levels. Cognitive and emotional skills may not be developmentally consistent with any one given student. This can confuse both the child  and the adults with whom the child interacts. This may potentially yield an  incomplete grasp of a childs own behaviors and possible consequences.  When a school psychologist or school counselor understands that many of  the students referred are suffering powerful losses, each at his or her own  developmental level, including perhaps the early loss of a students own  childhood, one can better empower individuals to build protective factors  that can support success. Take for example Gwen who lost her brother to a  terminal illness when she was 13-years-old. The trauma of this loss during  the transitional middle school years, coupled with the estrangement of her  parents during their grief, was enough separation and loss and increased stress  to trigger the onset of Anorexia Nervosa in Gwen Levine  Harrison, 2004.  The eating disorder provided an unconsciously suitable distraction from the  underlying issues of loss and a mechanism for taking control of something  tangible when life was spinning out of control. Gwens significant weight  loss had consequences that impacted both her physical safety and her learning. Eating disorders may manifest as an inability to attend or concentrate, as  lethargy, depression, and non-engagement in class discussions and with peers  in work groups, or through the inability to complete assignments because of  fatigue or compulsivity De Barbieri  Kendall, 2007. Until her weight was  stabilized Gwen was not able to concentrate on math or other subjects. Math,  sequentially organized, became an increasing school problem as Gwen began  to lose the solid foundation of mathematics necessary to grasp and build on  the new concepts introduced. For at-risk students, having the ability and being able to act on their ability are very different skills.  In Gwens case, before school success could begin, her physiological illness needed to be professionally addressed and stabilized. While behavior  management strategies could not cure or even arrest Gwens eating disorder,  behavior management strategies, practiced effectively in school, could have  supported her focused attention during math. This focused attention could  have promoted her math success. We hypothesize that experiencing success 

Implementing Behavior Management Approaches  143 could begin to positively impact self-esteem in a student such as Gwen as she  takes control of her learning.  SCAFFOLDING AND SUPPORT: THE CASE OF CHELSEA School scaffolding is essential as family cannot always be available to support children through emotional stressors that tax their developmental age,  problem solving skills and internal resources. The trauma and family dynamics of a childs problem may be concurrently impacting adults in a childs  household rendering him or her less available. Severe problems may then  prevent the adults in a household from addressing a childs need when it  arises because the adults attention is consciously or unconsciously focused  elsewhere. Consider this example: 8 year-old Chelsea appeared inconsolable during school following the recent death of her maternal grandmother.  Chelseas grandmother had been her primary care-giver and had resided  with her family throughout this childs life. Chelseas mother, concurrently  grieving the loss of her own parent, was unable to reach out to console her  daughter as she was shrouded for a time in her own grief. Thus, as with this  example, a child may become disengaged in school and in learning following  a traumatic event. Adult family members may be emotionally unavailable  to this high need, increasingly at-risk student. A compliant and achieving  child suffering trauma may begin to struggle with school failure and lack the  emotional energy or skill to reach out and request support. The astute and  trained professional such as a school psychologist, behavior specialist, counselor, family therapy practitioner or social worker would take steps to ensure  that Chelseas emotional needs are met through a scaffolding and supportive  behavior management planning process. As a foundation of success builds,  students can feel more willing to take risks and grow in their school learning environment. Therefore it is imperative that through strategies such as  behavior management we build consistent foundations of success for at-risk  learners. It is through this steady process that students may feel safe to take  the risks that will allow them to move forward. This is where a strong connectedness network can scaffold childrens  psychologically and boost their academic performance. Where children have  their emotional energy taken up with issues related to chronic loss, they are  less likely to be able to attend, focus and sustain the necessary concentration  required for learning. As educators, a real danger is in not recognizing the  emotional threats that may impede childrens learning. With problem recognition, through behavioral analysis and cognitive behavior management  assessment and treatment techniques, solutions can be created that support 
Chapter Nine school connectedness and promote other positive strategies that may increase  school learning. The authors suggest that a positive and welcoming school  environment that can facilitate connectedness and belonging Brooks, 1991  coupled with behavior management strategies that stimulate higher levels of  school achievement can be effective tools for increasing learning and prosocial behaviors in schools. For many children, school is the most stable and consistent environment  in a world they perceive to be riddled with turmoil. In school, a schedule is  predictable, as are the behaviors of the adults in their learning environment.  That consistency and structure are a comfort for many. In fact, it has been  found that routine and safety are two factors that contribute to recovery from  an eating disorder Bunnell, 2011; De Barbieri, 2005. A school day starts on  time, moves through a consistent sequence, and there are clear expectations  for behavior. While this can feel secure for some, others may benefit from  significantly increased layers of structure beyond what is typically in place.  These more advanced layers of structure provide at-risk students with greater  and more immediate feedback increasing their opportunities to achieve success. As we have established, it is that foundation of success that is critical  for student growth. Shaping the school environment to support recovery is highly beneficial  for students suffering from eating disorders or other serious illnesses. Shaping the school environment to support learning is equally beneficial for both  students recovery as well as for their success. A number of issues to consider  when shaping the school environment to support learning are: involving key  people, determining available resources, selecting behavioral objectives collaboratively and analyzing the function of current contingencies Mayer et.  al., 2012. School psychologists and school counselors are among school  professionals working to support student social and emotional health in ways  that positively impact student learning. These are the professionals who,  along with teachers, and possibly the school nurse, school social worker and  school marriage and family therapist will make up the multidisciplinary team  working with any at-risk student.  THE SUPPORT TEAM The number of pupil personnel professionals in a school system differs, as  do their roles. Many of the services offered by these professionals may appear to overlap, yet, in all situations, these support staff address issues that  impact student learning. Making a case for the impact an eating disorder or  other illness or trauma has on student learning is key to shaping the academic 

Implementing Behavior Management Approaches  145 environment De Barbieri  Kendall, 2007. Schools are responsible for and  must respond to issues that impact student learning. Eating disorders and  other disorders stemming from chronic loss do not fit the typical definition  of a special education disability, so schools may not be automatically motivated to develop a treatment plan. These disorders may not seem to disable  a student academically, but school psychologists and school counselors need  to collaborate with other school staff to establish how the disorder negatively  impacts learning for the student De Barbieri  Kendall, 2007. Uncovering  the layers of impact on school learning is necessary in order to identify supports to counteract the negative impact. This is where behavior management  strategies can be most helpful. Teachers can benefit from guidance regarding which in-school interventions are likely to support the students efforts  toward recovery. Further, communication from the team to the teachers  about the behaviors and potential learning impact of the disorder can guide  instructional strategy. School psychologists, school counselors, school social  workers and others can be instrumental in the development of a specialized  educational plan that reflects the current status of a students cognitive and  emotional functioning.  CLIENT PARTICIPATION IN DESIGNING  THE BEHAVIOR MANAGEMENT PLAN There are a number of areas where school psychologists, school counselors,  social workers and other support personnel can impact school services for  students through behavior management. These areas include social emotional  skill development, stress management and coping skills building and behavior management and self-control. With regard specifically to eating disorders,  coping strategies to promote social and emotional learning, enhance resiliency, improve self-esteem and help girls resist the cultural forces that encourage maladaptive body preoccupation, unhealthful eating and dieting can  be very effective. It is advisable to involve students in the establishment of  the behavior management intervention whenever possible. Evidence suggests  that students often prefer techniques that they help design or implement Kazdin, 1994. Additionally, students seem to perform better when they dictate  the criteria for reinforcement or administer the rewards than when others  administer the contingencies Kazdin, 1994, p. 285; Dickerson  Creedon,  1981. Other advantages of involving clients in their behavior management  planning is that the gains achieved seem to extend to other areas of a students  life and are maintained better over time Kazdin, 1994. Involving the individual collaboratively in the design of the intervention promotes ownership. 
Chapter Nine We emphasize this point, as in our experience this necessary collaborative  component is often omitted. Indeed, we observe, that students in schools are  frequently left out of the process and handed behavior management plans that  they are directed to follow. We find that lack of involvement extends across  grades from elementary through high school. With no input into a rewards  system, there is little motivation to comply. Design collaboration is extremely pertinent for a student affected by  an eating disorder where the desire is for the student to move the locus of  control from managing their eating disorder to managing their recovery De  Barbieri, 2005. Self-control techniques such as self re-enforcement and selfpunishment can be useful in addition to students being involved in selecting  the problem focused on and having some role in implementing the techniques  or strategies themselves. We suggest that such a collaborative model may  be equally as valued by other at-risk students who struggle with a variety of  diverse challenges such as: those who engage in cutting behaviors, substance  abuse, truancy, and anger management. Obviously, the amount of control that  can be delegated to the student is related to such variables as student age,  the type of problem focused on and the setting Kazdin, 1994 in which the  strategy is conducted.  CONCLUSION There are a number of areas where school psychologists, school counselors  and other school-based support personnel can impact school services for students through behavior management. Behavior management has evolved as a  concept and in its implementation to include a more holistic and comprehensive view of behavior. The traditional approaches to behavior management,  while still germane and in fact continuing to form the backbone of behavior  management have been broadened and expanded to allow for more alternative approaches to treating more complex issues facing children and youth  in schools today. These areas include social emotional skill development,  stress management and coping skills building and behavior management and  self-control.  With regard specifically to eating disorders coping strategies to promote  social and emotional learning, enhance resiliency, improve self-esteem and  help girls resist the cultural forces that encourage maladaptive body preoccupation, unhealthful eating and dieting can be very effective. It is advisable to  involve students in the establishment of the behavior management interventions whenever possible for this and other high risk disorders. Since the primary focus for teachers is on the academic curriculum, it is the role of school 

Implementing Behavior Management Approaches  147 psychologists, school counselors, social workers and other support staff to  focus on the social emotional curriculum that supports learning. Chronic loss  and or trauma can compromise a childs development. Schools can help combat compromised development due to chronic loss by working collaboratively  within their teams, with families and with community professionals. Behavior  management provides an effective framework for addressing the observable  behavioral effects of chronic loss in schools so students are safe to take risks  and move forward in their learning.  REFERENCES Black, Claudia. 1981. It Will Never Happen To Me. Denver, Colorado: M.A.C.  Publishing.  Brooks, Robert. 1991. The Self-Esteem Teacher. Circle Pines, MN: Treehaus Communications, Inc.  Bunnell, D. 2011 Anorexia Symptoms, Characteristics  More caringonline.com eatdistopicsanorexia.htm. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Division of Adolescent and School Health. 2009.  www.edc.govHealthyYouth.  Clements, John,  Martin, Neil. 2002 Assessing behaviors regarded as problematic. London, England and Philadelphia, PA: Jessica Kingsley Publishers Ltd.  De Barbieri, P.W.  Kendall, B. Summer, 2007. Bridging the communication gap  between therapists and school personnel working with students recovering from an  eating disorder. Perspectives: Professional Journal of the Renfrew Foundation.  14. De Barbieri, P.W. October, 2007. Learning to recover from bulimia: Voices of  transformation. in transformative learningIssues of difference and diversity,  NM: University of New Mexico Press.  De Barbieri, P.W. October, 2005. The Role of Learning in Recovery from Bulimia.  Ann Arbor, Michigan: UMI Dissertation Services.  Diament, Charles  Luiselli, James K., Eds. 2002. Behavior psychology in the  schools: Innovations in evaluation, support, and consultation. New York: The  Hayworth Press, Inc.  Dickerson, E. A.,  Creedon, C. F. 1981. Self-selection of standards by children:  The relative effectiveness of pupil-selected and teacher-selected standards of performance.  Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 14, 425433. Echterling, Lennis G., McKee, Edson J.  Presbury, Jack H. 2005. Crisis intervention: Promoting resilience and resolution in troubled times. Upper Saddle River,  NJ: Pearson Education, Inc.  Fisher, M., Golden, N.H., Katzman, D.K., Kreipe, R.E., Rees, J., Schebendach, J.,  Sigman, G., Ammerman, S.  Hoberman, H.M. 1995. Eating attitudes in adolescents: A background paper. Journal of Adolescent Health, 16, 420437.
Chapter Nine Hallahan, Daniel P., Kauffman, James M., Mostert, Mark P.  Trent, Stanley C.  19932002. Managing Classroom Behavior: A Reflective Case-Based Approach  3rd Ed. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.  Hoek, H.W.  van Hoeken, D. 2003.Review of the prevalence and incidence of  eating disorders. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 383396. Joyner, Edward T., Comer, James P. ,  Ben-Avie, Michael. Eds. 2004.The Field  Guide to Comer Schools in Action. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. Kazdin, Alan E. 1994. Behavior Modification in Applied Settings 5th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, Inc.  Levine, M. P., Harrison, K. 2004. The role of mass media in the perpetuation and  prevention of negative body image and disordered eating. In J. K. Thompson Ed.,  Handbook of eating disorders and obesity pp. 695-717. New York: Wiley. Mayer, Roy G., Sulzer-Azaroff, Beth,  Wallace, Michele. 2012. Behavior Analysis  for Lasting Change 2nd ed. Cornwall-on-Hudson, NY: Sloan Publishing, LLC. Osofsky, Joy D., Ed. 2004. Young Children and Trauma: Intervention and Treatment. New York: The Guilford Press. Piran, N. 1997. Prevention of eating disorders: Directions for future research. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 33, 419423. Polivy, J. 1996. Psychological consequences of food restriction. Journal of the  American Dietetic Association, 96, 58992. Rome, E.S., Ammerman, S., Rosen, D.S., Keller, R.J., Lock, J., Mammel, K.A.,  OToole, J., Rees, J., Sanders, M.J., Sawyer, S.M., Schneider, M., Siegel, E.   Silber, T.J. 2003. Children and adolescents with eating disorders: The state of the  art. Pediatrics, 111, 98108. Rosen, D.S.  Neumark-Sztainer, D. 1998. Review of options for primary prevention of eating disturbances among adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health, 23,  354363. Shapiro, Edward S. 2004. Academic Skills Problems: Direct Assessment and Intervention 3rd Ed. New York: The Guilford Press. Whitbeck, Les B. 2009. Mental Health and Emerging Adulthood among Homeless  Young People. New York: Psychology Press.
Early developmental experiences and the contexts in which children develop  and learn affect their overall development including their behavior and  academic achievement. Early life experiences during formative years help  to shape childrens views of themselves, their perceptions of others, their  feelings about their capacities to influence events that affect them and their  responses to these events. Behavior management, therefore, is perhaps best  understood and addressed from a developmentally and ecologically informed  perspective, including an understanding of and sensitivity to childrens  socio-cultural and developmental experiences. The enduring effectiveness  of all of the approaches to behavior management discussed in the previous  chapters in this book can perhaps be enhanced if implemented in a school  or classroom context that addresses students needs holistically, in a highly  developmentally sensitive and personalized way. Behavior management then  is not viewed as fixing the student but as strengthening the system to better  support each students development. Effective behavior management that achieves long-term sustained effects  can be achieved through a truly personalized approach. Personalization is  defined here as supporting each students holistic development through  individualized, developmentally appropriate and culturally responsive attention to each students social, emotional and academic learning needs.  This requires a school climate and learning environment in schools that are  supportive of childrens total development and that are responsive to their  developmental and learning needs. Personalization can be used to help inform  positive relationships among and between students and staff, allow schools  to function well, promote positive behaviors among students and increase  student achievement.  Chapter Ten Systemic Personalized and  Developmentally Appropriate  Behavior Management  Norris M. Haynes
Chapter Ten The Yale University School Development Programs SDP many years  of work with schools, coupled with findings from research and evaluation  studies, indicate that the establishment of mechanisms in schools which  foster sensitivity and caring, and provide preventive strategies for addressing  academic and psychosocial concerns, help to build resilience among children  and youth and give them the social and cognitive skills to address the many  challenges which they confront on a daily basis. In short, a truly personalized learning environment helps children develop well and the SDP helps  schools achieve a more personalized learning community that results in the  prevention of and reductions in behavior problems Haynes, 1994; Comer   Emmons, 2006; Emmons  Comer, 2009.  Unfortunately, the goal of creating personalized school communities is  often illusive. What is often missing from schools is an emphasis on the role  of healthy positive relationships among and between students and adults  in establishing and maintaining achievement-facilitative behaviors among  students. Meeting the goal of higher student achievement is less likely to  consistently occur without first establishing the kinds of relationships and inschool structures that will support and promote positive child and adolescent  development. Greater school efforts at personalization can help to bring out  the best in a large numbers of students, across a variety of developmental  pathways. Teachers who create a personalized supportive climate in their  classrooms are better able to manage student behavior and increase student  engagement in that classroom Comer, Haynes, Joyner  Ben-Avie, 1999.  The positive climate that results from personalization can serve as a foundation for student engagement, high achievement motivation and positive  learning outcomes.  HOW SCHOOLS CAN ACHIEVE PERSONALIZATION Schools achieve personalization through the development of structured opportunities for meaningful, helpful, developmentally enriching interactions  among and between students and adults. Positive interactions among and between students and adults contribute to student development across multiple  developmental pathways: Physical; Speech Language; Moral; SocialInteractive; PsychologicalEmotional; and CognitiveAcademic Comer, Haynes,  Joyner  Ben-Avie, 1999. The SDP approach to personalization has seven  basic premises that are articulated by Haynes et al 1993: 1.  A childs overall development is influenced by his or her interactions with  significant adults.

Personalized and Appropriate Behavior Management  151 2.  The transition from family to school is influenced by the ability and willingness of educators and parents to manage the challenges that emerge  when there is divergence between the culture of the school and the culture  of the home. 3.  The ability of parents and educators to facilitate academic learning rests on  a relationship between adults and children, that is characterized by trust,  support, positive regard, high expectations, affiliation and bonding. 4.  Adults and children are able to best meet their responsibilities in a supportive climate that emphasizes a no fault approach to identifying and  solving problems, decision making processes that generate consensus, and  structures that promote collaborative working relationships. 5.  The best decisions about programs and strategies, including curricula are  made based on the careful analysis of qualitative data about the characteristics and needs of students. 6.  The welfare of the child becomes the concern of all significant adults in  the childs life and programs and activities are planned, implemented, and  evaluated on the basis of their benefit to children. 7.  Adult decision makers choose programs that fit students rather than conclude that there is something inherently wrong with students when children do not benefit from programs. These premises suggest that effective and personalized behavior management and education require that educators and other adults who influence  childrens behavior and development should understand child development  issues and be able to have this understanding reflected in the schools curriculum, pedagogy, social activities and in their approaches to behavior  management. A PERSONALIZED SCHOOL COMMUNITY: WILSON HIGH Entering the lobby of Wilson High is a pleasant experiencethere is a large,  colorful mural of Martin Luther King and Malcolm X shaking hands to welcome you. Mr. Rollins, the principal, greets school visitors at the door. From  his small, picture filled office he offered the following comments about his  work: Ive been working in this district for twenty-three years and Ive always tried  hard to get to know my students. Some of these kids need personal attention as  much as they do book knowledge . . . Creating unity at our school is an ongoing effort because most of our people dont initially know each other well. As  a matter of fact, I dont think most of them at first even liked each other . . .
Chapter Ten With those kinds of separations among stakeholders, in order to achieve any  real understanding . . . programmed opportunities for interaction are necessary. I  constantly try to remind my teachers to be more human with our childrenaccept them for where they are. Ive seen a number of our kids respond well to  teachers who treat them like real people and not just another face in the class.  Our best teachers have good relationships with their kids and give them respect  in the classroom. Thats what our SPMT helped to create . . . we needed to include collaboration as part of our overall school vision.  Mr. Rollins discussed his efforts to personalize his schools environment  so that it would reflect and project the backgrounds and interests of his  students, parents, and the local community. The use of murals around the  school and artwork in the classrooms helps to brighten up the school and also  to project the culture and interests of the local school stakeholders. These  steps helped to place both the students and their parents in a school climate  that is comfortable and supportive of their growth. The School Development  Program is an extension of this positive climate perspective. The SDPs approach to personalized schooling is one that attends to the total development  of children. It is the SDPs proposition that children learn best when their  basic needs are met, and when the significant adults in their lives work collaboratively to encourage, support and nurture them. This proposition has  significant implications for the manner in which schools are organized, and  how children are taught. The context and content of schooling should reflect  sensitivity and responsiveness to the developmental needs of children, and to  the varied social and cultural experiences that children bring to the schooling  enterprise. THE SDP PROCESS The School Development Program uses a systems approach that addresses all  aspects of school life including the academic and social climate and school  organization. It is a process that focuses on the total development of students  in a climate of sensitivity, caring and challenge. It seeks to develop creative  ways of dealing with problems, and to implement these ways using the collective good judgment based on social and behavioral science knowledge of  school staff, parents, and the community.  There are three program components or mechanisms and three major  program operations. The key program component is the building level representative governance and management body commonly referred to as the  School Planning and Management Team SPMT. The Student Staff Support  Team SSST provides child development and relationship knowledge and 

Personalized and Appropriate Behavior Management  153 skill to addressing the needs of students and staff. Parents support the program through participation on the governance and management body, active  participation in daily school activities and general school support. The three operations are: 1 A Comprehensive School Plan which outlines  goals, objectives and strategies and is developed by the SPMT. The plan  addresses two areassocial climate, and academicthe activities in these  areas are based on perceived needs, research and analysis of school functioning, and student achievement. 2 The Staff Development Program is based  on training needs that arise from the school plan. Central office supervisory  personnel provides support for staff development activities initiated at the  building level, and 3 Monitoring and Assessment that generates useful data  on program processes and outcomes and recycle information to inform program modification where necessary and establish new goals and objectives.  These key operations are carried out or supervised by the School Planning  and Management Team. These components and operations will be described  in greater detail. In order to sustain a learning and caring school community in which all  adults feel respected and all children feel valued and motivated to learn  and achieve, the mechanisms and operations of the SDP are driven by three  guiding principles that nurture a positive climate: 1 a no-fault approach to  problem solving in which fingers of blame are not pointed at others, but  everyone accepts equal responsibility for change; 2 decision by consensus  where voting on issues is discouraged because voting results in losers who  may feel that they have no stake in the decision that is made while consensus  allows for brainstorming, in-depth discussion, cross-fertilization of ideas, and  a plan for trying different solutions in some sequence; and collaboration and  no paralysis of the principal or any other individual. This requires respect for  other points of view and a willingness to work cooperatively as part of a team  Haynes, 1993. School Planning and Management Team SPMT  This componentmechanism is the central organizing body in the school. It is  led by the building principal and includes teacher and parent representatives.  Its major function is to develop and monitor a Comprehensive School Plan  which includes academic, social, and staff development goals. These goals  address the perceived socio-educational needs of all students and adults in  the school. Specific programs are developed andor selected to accomplish  these goals. All school activities are coordinated by the SPMT. The presence  of parents and teachers on this decision-making body provides for balanced  representation and input. The decision-making process that characterizes an 
Chapter Ten effective SPMT is one of collaboration and consensus, as opposed to autocracy or plurality. The Comprehensive School Plan gives direction and focus to the school  improvement process. It provides a structured set of activities in the areas  of academics, social climate, staff development, and public relations that  enables the governance body to establish priorities, and to approach school  improvement in a well coordinated and systematic fashion. It utilizes data  student achievement and behavior, attendance, and the felt needs of educators and parents collected at the school site in order to generate goals and  objectives Joyner, Haynes, Comer, 1994. Staff Development activities are based on training needs that stem from the  school plan. Decisions about staff development are made by the governance  and management body with support from central office personnel. This program:   organizes periodic workshops for teachers and parents based on identified  needs and program objectives at the building level;   creates workshops to provide teachers with those skills proven to be most  effective in working with underdeveloped student populations;   allows the staff to integrate academic, arts, social, and extra-curricular activities into a unified curriculum; and   encourages teachers to develop special curriculum units in the skill areas  most needed in an underdeveloped student population, government, business, health and nutrition, and leisurespiritual time activities are examples  of such units Joyner, Haynes, Comer, 1994. The Student Staff Support Team SST  This componentmechanism of the SDP was formerly referred to as the Mental Health Team MHT. This team is led by the principal or assistant principal, and includes staff with child development and mental health knowledge  and experience. These staff members often include: 1 school psychologist,  2 guidance counselor, 3 school nurse, 4 special education teacher, 5  attendance officer, 6 pupil personnel workers, and any other appropriate  staff persons. The function of the SSST is to address school-wide climate  and psychosocial issues that are likely to have an impact on the students  adjustment and life path choices. The SSST also deals with individual student  issues that are referred to it by teachers and staff. The SSST is intended to act  in a preventive, preemptive way rather than in a reactive, treatment fashion.  It works in this fashion in providing on-going consultation to teachers and the 

Personalized and Appropriate Behavior Management  155 SPMT in matters that pertain to child development and behavior. It meets on  a weekly basis to:   apply, through its representative on the SPMT, child development and relationship knowledge and skills to the social climate, academic, and staff development programs developed by the governance and management body;  facilitate the many interactions between parents and school staff;   consult with classroom teachers to assist them in responding to students in  a manner promoting growth and development;   assist classroom teachers in developing strategies that prevent minor problems from becoming major ones;   set up individualized programs for children with special needs which may  involve the utilization of services outside of the school when necessary and  possible;   assist all staff members in bridging the gap between special education and  regular classroom activities;   provide consultation and training workshops to staff and parents on child  development, human relations, and other mental health issues, and;   make recommendations for building level policy changes designed to prevent problems Joyner, Haynes, Comer, 1994. Parents Program  This componentmechanism of the SDP is intended to involve parents at all  levels of school life. The majority of parents serve at the first level, which  involves general support activities, including attendance at PTA, PTO or  PTSA meetings, social events and other school activities. At the second  level, some parents serve in the building, as volunteer aides or assistants,  in the library, cafeteria or in classrooms. Level three involves parents who  are selected by the larger parent group to represent them on the SPMT. As  members of the SPMT, parents serve as vehicles for transmitting the views  and opinions of the general parent body on issues related to academic, social  and staff development needs of the school. In these ways, the Parent Program  helps to bridge the gap between home and school. It reduces the dissonance  that disadvantaged students can experience as they attempt to make adjustments from one environment to the other. By empowering parents, schools  provide continuity in the socio-educational lives of children. This can also  serve to strengthen families and help them build resilience in support of their  childrens academic and social development. The School Development Program views parental involvement as the cornerstone for success in developing 
Chapter Ten a school environment that stimulates the total development of its students.  Parents are expected to:   select their representative to serve on the governance and management  team;   review the school plan developed by the governance and management  group SPMT;   work with staff in developing and carrying out activities of the parentteacher general membership group PTA, PTO in line with the overall  school plan; and   support the efforts of the school to assist students in their overall development Joyner, Haynes, Comer, 1994. The three SDP componentsmechanisms come together to create a good  school climate. The school becomes a well functioning social system where  the developmental needs of students can be addressed. All children need to  develop a sense of adequacy and efficacy to be successful. Their search for  an identity intensifies as they mature and their aggressive energies need to  be channeled into constructive and wholesome activities. They benefit from  cooperative and collaborative activities such as participating in community  based projects. Such involvement increases resistance to negative and destructive influences in their proximal social environment. The SDP, because  of its emphasis on social development and positive relationships, is seen as an  effective socio-educational intervention for empowering schools to positively  influence the life paths of students. RELATIONSHIPS MATTER: WILSON HIGH Mrs. Burns, a social studies teacher, enthusiastically welcomes visitors into  her classroom. Her teaching style is activemoving up, down, and across the  roomincluding everyone in the days discussion. Try and stay with me,  group . . . Were with you, Mrs. B! There was little of the sage on stage  lecturing style and no signs of student boredom. After the class ended, Mrs.  Burns spoke about her work: Im extremely proud of my students. Ive been teaching here for 20 years and  . . . the kids are basically the same. We have a good group here and Im still  enjoying myself . . . Were a smaller schoolI think that makes for a closer  group of people. I try to utilize the room, you know, to make it more interesting  for the students. If I stood up front and just lectured I dont think they would  be interested in looking at me . . . so I try to get them thinking by making what 

Personalized and Appropriate Behavior Management  157 we do fit with issues that theyre already interested in. I try to make my class  a place where kids feel its worth coming to learn somethingotherwise they  wont. These kids need that positive attention whether it comes from their Mom  or Dad, our mentoring program, or me.  It is through this kind of whole village approach that the SDP personalizes the schooling process towards meeting the individual and collective  psycho-educational needs of all children. It is our proposition that schools  alone cannot and should not be expected to address all of a childs developmental needs. The meaningful involvement of parents, and support from the  wider community are essential to schools ability to educate children well.  When parents and the wider community become full partners in childrens  education and development, a more holistic educational approach is possible,  because many of the significant adult stakeholders in childrens development  become engaged in providing essential services to children and families. In  our approach schools are organized to allow for the full involvement and participation of all staff, parents and students in the life of the school. Members  of the wider community are also involved in the process of developing and  nurturing children through the schooling process. The positive climate established at school-wide levels can be built upon by teachers in the classroom  for positive learning outcomes.  At the heart of the SDP process for helping schools to become more personalized, and to respond more effectively to behavior challenges among  students are the respectful and mutually supportive relationships among and  between students and adults in schools, including staff, parents and other  adults from the community. Children learn from observing how the significant adults in their lives interact with one another and with children; how decisions are made and executed; and how problems are solved. They also learn  from how adults treat them as children, and how much effort is given to ensure that their psychosocial and academic needs are totally met. The emphasis  on the school being an interactive community helps to legitimize the teacher  and other adults as sources of knowledge in the classroom. Additionally,  the inclusion of students as sources of knowledge in their own right helps to  personalize the flow of information between teacher and student. This kind of  flexibility in both the school and classroom environments can yield positive  achievement-facilitative behaviors and learning gains for students.  The most effective relationships are those which are based on feelings of  mutual empowerment and a keen sense of individual and collective efficacy.  School staff, parents, and members of the wider community are seen as equal  partners in the process of school improvement. The relationships among  students themselves are very important sources of motivation and affirmation. Children who feel socially connected to school, and who derive positive 
Chapter Ten self-affirmation from interactions with peers are more likely to be motivated  and to want to attend school. If the peer culture is one that values pro-social  behavior, academic learning, and achievement, the connected student would  be more likely to want to be an achiever. The school culture, however, must  send positive messages about what it means to be a student, teacher or parent at that school in order to both promote and realize significantly positive  psychosocial and academic growth. Pallas, 1988. THE HOME-SCHOOL PARTNERSHIP An essential element in student development and behavior management  through personalization is recognition and reinforcement of the home-school  partnership. When children observe that home and school are engaged in a  respectful partnership for their benefit, children are likely to develop more  positive attitudes toward school and to do much better school work compared to situations in which school and home are seen as being worlds  apart. Although several impediments to meaningful parent involvement in  the educational process are often cited, our experience is that significant and  meaningful parent involvement is possible, desirable and valuable in improving student growth and performance. Essential to educational empowerment  and school-based decision-making is the recognition that parents have much  to offer if provided the opportunities to do so. In SDP schools, parents are involved in many ways. They are encouraged  to provide broad-based support for their childrens education. This support  can be in the form of encouraging children to complete homework assignments, attending parent-teacher conferences, and being actively involved  in their schools parent-teacher association or organization. Parents are also  directly involved in the daily life of the school by volunteering and serving  as teacher aides, lunchroom monitors, library assistants, and office assistants.  This level of involvement advances the personalization process by bringing  parents in direct contact with staff and students in respectful, constructive and  supportive ways. Children observe and learn from parents and staff working  together as collaborators and partners for their benefit. Studies indicate that  students benefit academically and psychosocially from this kind of parent  participation. The connection between home and school is strengthened when  parents are involved in helping to make decisions about school policies and  procedures, together with school administrators and staff, through their representatives on the School Planning and Management Team SPMT. This  process allows parents to bring knowledge about their childrens developPersonalized and Appropriate Behavior Management  159 mental and educational needs to the planning and designing of school and  classroom activities. THE ROLE OF THE WIDER COMMUNITY The wider community, including businesses, social agencies, the media, local universities and colleges, health centers and hospitals, and community  service organizations, should be part of a service network to schools and  families to strengthen their capacity to meet the total developmental needs  of children. Even with strong school planning and management teams, and  helpful psychosocial support teams, many schools recognize the need for and  importance of establishing linkages with community agencies and groups to  enhance their effectiveness. Education, increasingly, is being regarded as a  community enterprise with vital services coalesced into a support network  that is available to children and families either directly or through the schools.  This is a pivotal service due to parents natural tendency to turn to schools for  help or guidance on matters affecting their children. In addition, the multifaceted nature of education warrants that schools should have access to services  which promote positive pro-social behaviors among students, by enhancing  the educational process and reinforcing the ability of students to behave appropriately and to learn well. For example, service learning projects can be  instituted, mentoring programs can be implemented and businesses can offer  internships and provide material resources to enhance a schools capacity to  meet the multifaceted needs of its students.  Social and community agencies may also assist by providing counseling  and other social support to families or by contributing expertise to a schools  psychosocial support team. Local universities and colleges can contribute in  many ways including providing preand in-service adult development training to teachers, counselors, psychologists, administrators and social workers,  to prepare and assist them in understanding and addressing the socio-cultural  and psychosocial needs of children and their families. SUMMARY Behavior management strategies in schools are best implemented in school  contexts that promote and support holistic child and adolescent development  through the creation of systemic personalized learning communities. Personalization is a means of adapting the school environment to the needs, perspec160  Chapter Ten tives, and concerns of the students being taught. In personalizing teaching and  learning, the Yale University Comer School Development Program builds  and strengthens the capacity within schools to address the total development of all children. In doing so it addresses behavioral as well as academic  concerns. This is accomplished through a process of empowerment that  establishes true collaboration and mutual respect among all the significant  adults in childrens lives, including school staff, parents, other members of  childrens families, and significant others in their communities. Children  themselves are respected and taught to respect others, their peers and the  adults in their lives. They learn and practice pro-social, constructive and  achievement-facilitative behaviors.  Essential services to children and their families are structured, coordinated  and made more accessible, with schools playing a pivotal role. Schools alone  cannot completely educate children, neither can families alone. But working  together we can prepare our children well to face the future effectively and  successfully. The participation of school, parent and community stakeholders in an ongoing collaboration is an important component for student behavior management and school success. Increased appreciation by all school stakeholders  of the perspectives, values, and viewpoints across their school community  can lead to more effective, authentic, and relevant classroom pedagogy and  higher levels of student engagement. Parents can become engaged in the  educational enterprise in meaningful ways which empower them to be a  more powerful and positive force in shaping their childrens development and  behavior. Homes, schools and communities become connected together in a  support network that is designed to personalize the educational process and  help children to develop holistically. It is evident that behavior management can be effective in promoting  achievement-facilitative behaviors among students. The various approaches  discussed in this book have the potential to have significant positive impact  on childrens behavior and learning. The traditional approaches to behavior  management provide basic and important concrete steps that can be used  to influence students behaviors. The alternative approaches suggest that a  more inclusive approach to behavior management that considers cognitive  processes, as well as contextual and cultural factors, may have more sustained and enduring impact. The approach discussed in this chapter focuses  on addressing the holistic development of students, along multiple pathways,  by creating personalized learning communities, using the Yale University  Comer School Development Program. This approach allows for the inclusion and combined use of any or all of the approaches discussed. In this way,  evidenced-based best practices are integrated in a systemic school empowerPersonalized and Appropriate Behavior Management  161 ment process that prevents and addresses behavior challenges in a holistic and  developmentally appropriate way.  REFERENCES Comer, J. P.  Emmons, C.L. 2006. The research program of the Yale Child Study  Center School Development Program. The Journal of Negro Education 753:  353372. Comer, J. P., Haynes, N. M., Joyner, E.  Ben-Ave, M. 1999. Child by child: The  Comer process for change in education. New York: Columbia University Teachers  College Press. Emmons, C. L.  Comer, J. P. 2009 Capturing Complexity: Evaluation of the Yale  Child Study Center School Development Program, in R. Deslandes ed. International Perspectives on Contexts, Communities and Evaluated Innovative Practices:  Family-school-community partnerships. London and New York: Routledge, pp.  204219. Haynes, N.M. 1994 Editor. School Development Program Research Monograph.  New Haven: Yale Child Study Center. ERIC Research Documents No: ED 371  091. Haynes, N., Comer, J.P.  Roberts, V. 1993. A developmental and systems approach to mental health in schools. Educational Horizons, 71, 4, 181186. Joyner, E., Haynes, N., and Comer, J. 1994. School development program nine step  guide. New Haven: Yale Child Study Center. Pallas, A.M. 1988. School climate in American high schools. Teachers College  Record, 89, 4, 541556. Rutter, M. 1985. Family and school influences on cognitive development. Journal  of Psychology and Psychiatry, 26, 5, 683704.
ABA, 6364 ABC, 7, 10, 17, 9798 achievement, 22, 32, 41, 8081, 8788,  11718, 121, 125, 12829, 13132,  135, 141, 144, 14950, 15354,  15758, 160 adaptive, 62, 96 addictions, 1 ADHD, 3133, 72, 9496, 100101,  105, 136 adolescence, 106 aggression, 95, 99, 1034, 119, 127,  131, 133 aggressively, 11, 102, 111, 114, 117,  143, 151, 153 alcoholism, 25 Anastopoulos, 100101, 105, 107 animosity, 129 antecedent, 7, 910, 17, 25, 32, 39, 49,  98 antisocial, 94, 1034, 1067 archetype, 12829 Arick, 6264, 6667, 69, 74 ASD, 6266, 6970, 7476 Asperger, 71 assessment, 1718, 3233, 4041, 49,  63, 68, 7980, 8789, 104, 114, 120,  143 assessments, 83, 88, 104 assignment, 44, 98, 133 attendance, 26, 117, 15455 Attention Deficit, 95 attentive, 112 autism, 2, 6265, 7073, 7576, 107 aversive, 74 avoidance, 3233 Bandura, 1012, 93, 107 BASC, 31, 41 baseline, 2829, 34, 39, 44, 51, 6061,  63, 7173 Bass, 1034, 1067 Bauer, 28, 79 Beecher, 130 behaviorism, 10 behaviorist, 12, 10 behaviorists, 12, 97 benchmark, 83 benchmarks, 83, 114 Bergstrom, 72 BERS, 31 Bevans, 81 beverages, 45, 4853, 6061 Bhavanani, 124 blended, 139 blueprint, 118 BMF, 35 bobo, 11 Index
Index boredom, 156 Bouxsein, 68, 7172 BPR, 99 Brackett, 111, 11415, 119 Bradshaw, 8182, 8486 brainstorming, 94, 153 Bregman, 62, 66 Bronfenbrenner, 9293, 107 BRP, 99 Bunnell, 144 caboosing, 92 caffeine, 45, 4751, 6061 Caldarella, 11718 capacity, 17, 91, 105, 109, 126, 140,  15960 Cardarelli, 79 cardiovascular, 137 CASEL, 109, 111, 11314, 117 CBA, 1718, 33 CBCL, 31, 41 CBM, 19, 9194, 98105, 107 CD, 94, 100104, 106 CDC, 141 certification, 134 certified, 9596 cessation, 5 Chandler, 17 Checklist, 31, 41, 104 Checklists, 16, 31, 4041 Chidsey, 83, 89 childhood, 62, 142 chronological, 30, 100 chronosystem, 93 Cipani, 28 classification, 79 classified, 14 classroom, 4, 9, 12, 1718, 2527, 30,  32, 38, 40, 6667, 6970, 7576,  81, 8384, 87, 89, 98100, 104,  107, 112, 116, 11819, 124, 12628,  13032, 13536, 140, 14950, 152,  15557, 15960 clientele, 96 clinical, 103, 105 clinicians, 106 cognitions, 12, 1012, 17, 19, 37, 50,  66, 68, 76, 88, 91, 9495, 1023,  105, 107, 116, 125, 128 cohorts, 119 Collings, 69 Comer, 150, 15456, 16061 compulsivity, 142 concepts, 10, 1819, 64, 69, 93, 114,  142 concrete, 75, 101, 160 confederate, 11 consensus, 151, 15354 consequences, 3, 7, 17, 20, 2526, 32,  42, 84, 9394, 98, 100, 105, 115, 142 contingencies, 14445 contingency, 25, 68, 101 counselors, 2, 114, 14447, 159 crisis, 84, 141 criterion, 22, 7172 CS, 6 culture, 93, 131, 135, 137, 15152, 158 curriculum, 1718, 3233, 63, 6566,  69, 74, 8284, 87, 115, 121, 137,  14647, 151, 154 Daddario, 62, 65, 6768, 70 Daly, 69 Darch, 28, 38 data, 1517, 2831, 34, 3637, 3945,  5155, 6061, 63, 68, 71, 75, 8081,  8384, 87, 89, 106, 114, 118, 151,  15354 daydreaming, 99 DeAngelis, 109, 11617, 119, 121 deficit, 71, 107, 120, 136 delinquency, 104 delinquent, 104 descriptive, 28, 44, 51, 103 desensitization, 6 determinism, 10 Devaney, 111 development, 2, 15, 39, 8485, 92, 100,  107, 111, 11315, 11921, 123, 125,  14142, 14547, 14961

Index  165 developmental, 2, 62, 69, 91, 94, 105,  13637, 14243, 14950, 152,  15657, 159 Dhalquist, 17 diagnosis, 76, 102 Dickerson, 145 differential, 21, 72, 102 disabilities, 33, 65, 72, 7980, 8788,  13637 discrimination, 72, 128 disobedience, 102 disorder, 62, 72, 100, 102, 107, 136,  139, 142, 14447 disruptive, 1, 12, 40, 73, 101, 117 dissonance, 155 distraction, 142 distress, 104, 116 DRA, 22, 73 DRH, 21 DRI, 22 DRL, 21 DRO, 6568, 7076 DSM, 102 Durlak, 111, 11315, 117 Dymnicki, 117 dysfunction, 1034, 106 education, 2, 65, 69, 7980, 8283,  8689, 94, 9899, 106, 109, 11516,  121, 145, 151, 15455, 15759 Edutopia, 115 Elias, 11013, 11516, 11920 emotions, 98, 10912, 115, 12021,  12729, 136, 14041 empathy, 64, 109, 113, 119 empowerment, 107, 15758, 160 engagement, 84, 112, 121, 142, 150,  160 ESP, 30, 4041 ethnicity, 35, 44 evaluation, 14, 28, 4142, 44, 51, 83,  103, 106, 113, 150 evident, 100, 1045, 113, 160 examination, 2, 40, 114, 133 exclusion, 2627 exclusively, 118 externalizing, 118 extinction, 26, 71, 9798 extinguish, 56 FABMF, 44 fading, 5 Falco, 6263 Farley, 100101, 105, 107 FBA, 17, 32 FBAs, 83 FEM, 104 Feuerstein, 124 FI, 20 Flannery, 86, 8889 formative, 28, 39, 113, 149 FR, 20 frequency, 14, 16, 26, 42, 45, 51, 60,  80 FT, 70 Fullerton, 62 Geller, 82 generalization, 45, 63, 74 Gerdtz, 62, 66 Gibbons, 8283 Gillen, 12430, 13234 Gloeckner, 125, 13233 Goleman, 11617 Gongola, 62, 65, 6768, 70, 72 Greenfield, 7980, 87 grief, 14243 guidelines, 26, 125 Gutshall, 72 habits, 25, 48 Hammill, 99 Hatthakit, 124 Heflin, 91, 107 Heron, 17, 39 Heward, 17, 39 Hoch, 68, 7071 Hoffman, 120 holistic, 2, 146, 149, 157, 15961 homelessness, 140
Index homework, 8, 98, 100, 158 Horner, 7982, 84 Hovanetz, 71 hyperactive, 126, 136 hypothesis, 3233, 63 hypothesize, 63, 142 Ialongo, 81 ICAN, 107 identification, 39, 63, 80, 84 imagery, 5, 1012, 126 imitation, 12 impulsivity, 1, 96, 99100, 133 inappropriate, 12, 2628, 6465, 71, 75,  98, 100, 119 incentive, 11, 105 inclusion, 65, 70, 76, 157, 160 individualized, 65, 81, 83, 85, 89, 149,  155 inferential, 28 inhibitory, 99 instruction, 63, 69, 75, 8083, 95,  98100, 112, 114, 125, 134 instrumental, 1, 3, 610, 19, 50,  145 integrated, 67, 81, 111, 114, 160 intelligence, 32, 41, 102, 121 internalizing, 118 interpersonal, 102103, 109 interval, 8, 33, 65, 68, 7074, 76 intervals, 68, 7074, 99 intervention, 2, 1416, 1920, 25,  2829, 31, 34, 37, 39, 42, 44, 47,  4951, 55, 6063, 6566, 68, 7072,  74, 76, 7983, 85, 87, 89, 92, 94,  98101, 1045, 11819, 130,  13239, 141, 145, 156 interventionist, 17, 25, 5051, 94 intrapersonal, 109 IQ, 80, 8789, 99, 116 isolation, 140 Joyner, 140, 150, 15456 judgment, 152 jurisdiction, 91 Kadin, 97 Kaloides, 13032, 13536 Kame, 28 Kasetsomboon, 124 Kauts, 125, 13132, 135 Kazdin, 3, 24, 41, 9293, 9798, 1024,  1067, 14546 Kenison, 124 Ketterlin, 82 kindergarten, 85 kindergartners, 11 Koth, 81 Krug, 62 Kuhn, 67, 75 learners, 87, 94, 143 LeBrun, 8586, 89 legislation, 7980 legislative, 80 Lerman, 71 lessons, 104, 112, 119, 135, 137 Levine, 142 Madanmohan, 124 mainstreaming, 69 maintenance, 72 maladaptive, 62, 64, 14546 Malcolm X, 151 management, 13, 610, 1213, 1920,  25, 28, 3435, 3940, 44, 61, 79,  81, 95, 99, 107,110, 117, 12425,  127, 13132, 13747, 149, 15156,  15860 manipulating, 9, 25, 99 manipulative, 92 Manjunath, 131 Mann, 8586, 89 Manning, 98100, 107 Mariner, 107 Mayer, 144 McCaffrey, 124 McConnell, 31, 41 McGee, 69 mechanism, 18, 142, 15355 meditation, 131

Index  167 membership, 156 Mendelson, 133 metronome, 4 MHT, 154 misbehavior, 18, 25 miscommunication, 129 mistreatment, 73 modal, 101 modification, 13, 9697, 1047, 126,  153 modules, 107 morbid, 98, 100101 morbidity, 100, 102 Morrier, 69 motivation, 32, 75, 92, 94, 112, 116,  119, 146, 150, 157 mozart, 123 Muscott, 8586, 89 Nanse, 126 naturalistic, 41 NCLB, 7980 neurocortical, 116 neuroscience, 120 Northup, 67, 75 Norwicki, 99 observable, 910, 19, 68, 121 operant, 1, 3, 610, 19, 37, 50 oppositional, 103, 107 outcome, 7, 9, 19, 25, 39, 64, 74, 97,  103, 106 overcorrection, 2728 overeating, 5 Palinkas, 69 Pallas, 158 Pantoja, 131 pathways, 2, 150, 160 Pavlov, 35 Payton, 118, 121 PBIS, 7981, 8486, 8889 PBS, 65 personalization, 150, 158 personalized, 2, 14952, 157, 15960 Pilla, 126 pivotal, 15960 PPL, 18, 33 PPS, 9596 PPT, 30 premised, 3, 109 preschool, 70, 117 prevention, 80, 8485, 120, 123, 150 principle, 9, 65, 91, 12529, 133 probability, 7, 14, 20, 82, 111 probes, 18 prosocial, 144 protective, 142 proximal, 156 PRT, 64 Prudent, 107 PSI, 104 PSS, 96 PSST, 95, 1024, 106 psychologist, 13031, 135, 14243, 154 psychometric, 32 psychopathology, 103 psychopharmacology, 101 psychosocial, 100101, 150, 154,  15759 PTA, 15556 PTO, 15556 PTSA, 155 punisher, 79, 1920 randomized, 89, 133 Ratio, 89, 2021 readiness, 11, 17, 11314 reassessment, 63 recovery, 26, 14446 Reese, 68, 7374 rejection, 140 relapse, 25 relationship, 3, 7, 10, 12, 79, 93, 100,  111, 117, 15152, 155 relaxation, 56, 7374, 127, 133 reliability, 99100 repertoire, 111, 113, 141 repetition, 92 representation, 93, 153
Index resilience, 140142, 150, 155 response, 12, 46, 8, 20, 27, 6365, 71,  89, 1012, 137, 140 restitution, 27 retardation, 7274 retention, 11 reversal, 29 Rinaldi, 79 Rollins, 15152 RTI, 7982, 8485, 8789 Ruknui, 124 RULER, 115, 11719, 123 Rutgers, 119 SAED, 31, 41 Sahai, 124 salivate, 3 satisfaction, 34 Schunk, 3, 13 SDM, 119 SDP, 150, 15258 SECD, 115, 11920 SEL, 10918, 12022 Shabani, 70, 72 Sharma, 125, 13132, 135 Shatapathy, 124 Shaywitz, 8788 Shea, 28, 65, 79 Sheldon, 68, 7374 siblings, 39 Siegel, 1034, 1067 Skinner, 67, 19 Slovacek, 131, 134 socialemotional, 82 socially, 12, 12021, 139, 157 socioeconomic, 103 sockeroo, 11 Spaulding, 65 spirituality, 124 SPMT, 15256, 158 spontaneous, 26, 63, 67 SPS, 119 SRBI, 82 SSBD, 30, 4041 SSBS, 118 SSRS, 41, 118 SSST, 152, 154 SST, 154 Stahmer, 69 stakeholders, 114, 121, 152, 157, 160 standardized, 80, 117 Stapley, 131 STD, 120 Steege, 83 stereotypical, 70, 72 stereotypy, 7071 Stillness, 12526, 130 stimulation, 70 stimuli, 3, 5, 7, 74 stimulus, 1, 36, 910, 1920, 23, 25,  63, 140 strength, 70, 8688, 105, 127, 135 stressors, 96, 137, 143 Strickland, 99 Stueck, 125, 13233 Subramanya, 131 substitutes, 105 Sugai, 7982, 8486, 8889 suspensions, 8486, 117 SWPBIS, 8586 SWPIS, 86 tangible, 74, 105, 142 tantrums, 96, 102, 130 Tanyu, 120, 123 Tarbox, 72 TCDGA, 4344 teachers, 2, 15, 18, 26, 39, 6163,  6566, 72, 7576, 80, 85, 8789, 93,  99, 101, 1045, 107, 109, 11314,  116, 119, 121, 128, 13536, 140,  14446, 15255, 157, 159 technique, 25, 66, 7475, 94, 105106,  124, 126 techniques, 2, 19, 64, 7374, 8687,  9294, 99103, 1057, 131, 143,  14546 teen, 140 Teenagers, 136 Telles, 131

Index  169 Theories, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 81 theory, 3, 10, 9293, 107 therapeutic, 96, 106, 129 therapist, 7172, 100101, 103, 144 therapy, 16, 101, 105, 107, 143 tiered, 82 tiers, 8182 timeout, 2627 timer, 68, 7073 token, 7, 9, 2022, 2425, 5051,  7374, 1034 tolerance, 124 topography, 42 TR, 102 transitional, 93, 142 trauma, 142144 treatment, 16, 7073, 9596, 9899,  1024, 1067, 118, 143, 145, 154 TRF, 32, 41 Troutman, 17 truancy, 146 Udupa, 124 UR, 6 VI, 20 vicarious, 12 violence, 1, 11617, 14041 visualization, 5 vocalization, 66 vocalizations, 71 VR, 21 Waterhouse, 120 Weissberg, 117 Weissman, 68, 7071 Weisz, 107 Woodbridge, 135 WRAT, 104 Yale, 9596, 102, 150, 16061 yoga, 2, 12425, 127, 13038 youth, 2, 107, 13941, 146, 150 Zager, 62, 66 Zins, 120, 123 Zirpoli, 1415, 22, 2526, 28, 3032,  40