Beyond the   Classroom Walls

Beyond the   Classroom Walls Teaching in Challenging   Social Contexts Jerome Cranston LEXINGTON BOOKS Lanham  Boulder  New York  London

Published by Lexington Books An imprint of The Rowman  Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc. 4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706 www.rowman.com 6 Tinworth Street, London SE11 5AL, United Kingdom Copyright  2019 The Rowman  Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any  electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,  without written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote  passages in a review. British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Cranston, Jerome, author. Title: Beyond the classroom walls : teaching in challenging social contexts    Jerome Cranston. Description: Lanham, Maryland : Lexington Books, 2019.  Includes   bibliographical references and index.  Identifiers: LCCN 2018046697 print  LCCN 2018048607 ebook  ISBN  9781498565066 Electronic  ISBN 9781498565059 cloth Subjects: LCSH: Education and globalization.  Intercultural communication   in education.  TeachingSocial aspects. Classification: LCC LC191 ebook  LCC LC191 .C75 2019 print    DDC 370.115dc23 LC record available at https:lccn.loc.gov2018046697  The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American  National Standard for Information SciencesPermanence of Paper for Printed Library  Materials, ANSINISO Z39.48-1992. Printed in the United States of America

In honor of my grandparents: Margaret Roslyn Rosie Brown Anthony Fowler Sybil May Harper William Bertram Sinclair Cranston

vii Contents Preface	 ix Acknowledgments	 xv   1	 A Framework for Understanding Teaching in a Complex,  Heterogeneous World	 1   2	 Seeing beyond the Stories	 9   3	 A Modicum of Opportunity in the Haze of the Brickfields	 17   4	 Beacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 35   5	 Refugee Camp Schools beneath a Setting Sun	 63   6	 Looking Back	 89 Epilogue	 97 References	 99 Index	 109 About the Author	 113

ix Preface The changing geopolitical and economic landscape, coupled with sweeping  global shifts in migration patterns, has created an unprecedented need for  educators to be prepared to teach students who are arriving in their schools  from almost every corner of the world. The political economy of the twentyfirst century and its concomitant polarizationthe division between those  who are included in it and those who continue to be excluded from itplay  a significant role in erecting and fortifying walls between people. Walls feed  the particular sorts of suspicions that nearly always lead to conflict. Many  point to the fact that globalization has diffused images, music, movies, and  even ideas rapidly across vast swaths of the world. However, economic and  social capitalin the forms of wealth and, quite frankly, living-wage jobs have not been similarly distributed throughout the world. While it may be  true that assurances of prosperity and of a better future have echoed the world  over, the irony is that the material manifestations of these promises have not  measured up to the glossy advertisements. In some regards, it is generally accepted that, in order to flourish, children  increasingly need to take a broad perspective on present-day world events and  issues. Arguably, we live in a world that is more interconnected than ever before and yet, in some ways, it is a world more fragmented than it has ever been.  While there has been greater integration in some aspects of contemporary life,  there continues to be social fragmentation observed through such phenomena  as the resurgence of nationalism, the increase in ethnic and religious conflicts,  and the upsurge in critical social movements. Globalization has certainly  changed the ways in which we interact with others as well as our understandings of our individual places on the face of the planet. Faced with a multiplicity  of global linkages and seemingly far-distant events, along with decisions that 

x	 Preface impact us both nationally and locally, a reconsideration of the education system  seems timely. In particular, it is critical to explore the ways in which it can play  a crucial role in creating an awareness of the experiences of school for those  who seem to live innumerable miles away. It is an ambitious commitment, but as Zhao 2010 proposed, effective  teaching in and for the twenty-first century social reality requires teachers  to become more aware of the global nature of societal issues, to care about  people in distant places, to understand the nature of global economic integration, to appreciate the interconnectedness and interdependence of peoples, to  respect and protect cultural diversity, to fight for social justice for all, and to  protect planet earthhome for all human beings. In their 2007 book, Teaching the global dimension: Key principles and effective practice, Hicks and Holden propose that opportunities are needed that: 	 Enable educators to understand the links between their own lives and those  of people throughout the world. 	 Increase understanding of the globalized economic, cultural, political, and  environmental contexts that shape society and schools. 	 Develop the skills, attitudes, and values that enable people to work together  to bring about change and take control of their own lives. 	 Work toward achieving a more just and sustainable world in which power  and resources are more equitably shared. Global competence is more than just a skill set that looks good on a resume.  It is not an extracurricular accomplishment. Global competence is crucial for  a teacher to possess if she or he wants to be effective. Without it, teachers  risk obscuring, or even worse, perpetuating the systemic injustices built into  a colonial educational enterprise that disadvantages the most vulnerable and,  at times, oppresses those who have fled indescribable tragedy. In short, students from diverse backgrounds need teachers who can recognize and honor the various facets of their identities and who can guide  them through interactions in an increasingly interconnected and intercultural  world. They need teachers who have developed the necessary knowledge,  skills, and dispositions to demonstrate effective and appropriate communication practices and behaviors in an intercultural situation Deardorff, 2006. However, scholars such as Walters, Garii, and Walters 2009 have noted  that the majority of North American public-school teachers come from  primarily White, middle-class backgrounds, and that pre-service teachers  professional identities are often based on their own secondary school experience and grounded in the cultural norms that emanate from those contexts.  The perpetuation of a homogenous and conventional teacher-identity model 

Preface	 xi has served to reinforce traditionally narrow understandings of school norms  and to sustain a general lack of global perspective in the teaching profession  Bates, 2008; Santoro  Allard, 2005. In order to move forward in an interconnected world, it is imperative  that teachers and school administrators increase their understandings of the  global educational contexts. These educational contexts, at times, extend well  beyond conventional understandings of what constitutes formal schooling in  traditional North American classroom settings. Teachers need opportunities  to learn about other regions of the world and the social contexts of global current events, and they need to be provided with space and time to reflect on the  cultural and professional identities that they have constructed for themselves  as teachers. They need to be invited to question how these identities might  impact their pedagogical approaches and to be enabled to explore what they  believe to be true about their students and their students families experiences. Teachers ought to be exposed to diverse perspectives and worldviews  of what life and teaching looks like beyond the borders of their own countries  and firsthand experiences. In the end, perhaps, such a broad examination  of learning contexts will act as a catalyst that will encourage educators to  consider and, maybe, question some of their firmly held assumptions about  teaching and learning both in global and local contexts. A MODEST BEGINNING One of the goals of this book is to contribute to the body of knowledge  concerning an important aspect of the way in which globalization affects  schooling: the increasing flow of people within and across national borders,  and the stark challenges that educators face in trying to understand the lived  experiences of some of their recently arrived students. It hopefully does so  without affirming that the worlds nations are converging on a common  experience of life in a presumptive global world. The intention of this book  is not to suggest that society is quickly becoming flatter, the underlying assumption of which would be that the differences among people are becoming smaller and smaller as a global community emerges Friedman, 2007.  I do not believe that this is case, and I do not think that globalization will  somehow usher human experience into a state of homogeneity. The sad  truth is that, while many in the self-named Developed World champion the  rhetoric of global connectedness both technologically and economically,  as economists Machiko Nissanke and Erik Thorbecke 2004 have argued,  many in the so-called Developing World continue to suffer from the scourge  of a global disconnect.

xii	 Preface Despite its timely relevance, I must admit that I had never set out to  studyat least, not in the empirical senseteaching practices in some of  the worlds more challenging social contexts. My original intent was to simply document the ways in which a childs right to education, as articulated  in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child is being met  beyond Canadas national borders. In the spring of 2012, a colleague at the University of Manitoba, Fr. David  Creamer, S.J., Ph.D., a Jesuit, pestered me to find time to sit down and have  a cup of tea with an acquaintance of his. Her name was Sr. Cyril Mooney,  i.b.v.m., and she was an Irish Loreto nun who had lived in India for forty  years. At the time, our university was recognizing Sr. Cyril with an honorary doctorate for her relentless spirit and incredible humanitarian work with  some of Indias poorest citizens. She was both an impressive and persuasive  force of nature. After many cups of tea over the course of a few weeksand  the occasional latteI discovered that our conversations were taking me  down a scholarly path that I could never have anticipated. I spent ten days in  Kolkata, India, in January 2013 to create a series of five-point-five minidocumentaries, followed by eight days in Kigali, Rwanda, in April 2014, and  then another eight days in the remaining Bhutanese refugee camps in Nepal  in December 2015. While in Kolkata, my project assistant and I stayed in what might be aptly  described as a spartan and minimally adequate guest house located on the edge  of the Sealdah district, which is, arguably, one of Indias and the worlds most  densely populated and poorest urban slums. Sealdah is a neighborhood teeming with people who demonstrate all the signs that are associated with simply  trying to survive the effects of debilitating poverty. Sealdah served as the departure point for examining the effort and initiative that are required in order  to make schooling available to the children of migrant brickfield workers. Home base in Kigali was Lhotel Chez Lando. Like lhotel Mille Collines of Hotel Rwanda movie fame, it is a hotel that is intertwined with the  tragic history of the 1994 genocide. In my room, which would become my  research projects makeshift interview space, I would discover the commitment of ten remarkable teachersall survivors of the genocidewho were  dedicated to peace education and reconciliation in Rwanda. Beyond the  cramped comfort of my hotel room, I would meet ordinary Rwandans who  conveyed their extraordinary insights into the enduring traumatic effects of  the 1994 genocide. Finally, Fr. Bill Robins, S.J., another Canadian Jesuit, had arranged for  me to stay at the Kamal Niwas Jesuit Training Centre in Kathmandu before I  would head out to visit the Bhutanese refugee camps in Damak, Nepal. The  camps were located near Nepals eastern border with India, where 120,000 

Preface	 xiii Bhutanese refugees had been unceremoniously deposited after being expelled  from the Kingdom of Bhutan in the early 1990s. In December 2015, the Bhutanese Refugee Education programs were struggling to maintain standards for  quality educational programming in the face of certain closure within a year. This book is an attempt to present three specific cases that will hopefully  serve as a platform to help educators to make sense of contemporary life in  the twenty-first centuryan interconnected and interculturally linked life through a deeper understanding of the ways in which our teaching lives and  the teaching lives of others co-exist in the context of a changing global society. In very broad terms, my cumulative fieldwork, which was undertaken  over a period of three years, has served as the basis for this book. While  each project was underpinned by a particular variation of qualitative inquiry,  my choice to employ narrative methodologies across projects is a testament  to the fact that the circumstances of the fieldwork and choices made in  the field are as much a part of the findings as are the findings themselves  Whyte, 1964. I make no claims to fictitious objectivity in presenting the  three narratives that will follow. I am implicated in both the observations and  conversations that took place. These have shaped the ways in which I understood the people whom I interviewed, and this acquired understanding, in  turn, has shaped how I have come to understand myself Devereux, 1967. It  is my hope that reading these descriptive cases will allow you to experience,  to a certain extent, what they seek to illuminate, both on a cognitive and on  an emotional level. Hopefully, the experience will produce a similar effect in  you as it did in me.

xv Acknowledgments The ethnographic fieldwork that has been represented in the narratives of this  book would not have been possible without a tremendous amount of support  and trust. There are simply more people than I can list to whom I am clearly  indebted for extending to me their trust, companionship, and encouragement.  That said, I have endeavored to acknowledge as many of them as I could in  the pages of the book that follow. In the event that someones name is omitted  or spelled incorrectly, I sincerely apologize. Particular acknowledgment is owed to three individuals whom I wish to  name. The truth is that this book would not have been written at all without  the generous invitation from Nicolette Amstutz of Lexington Books. It was  Nicolette who first suggested that maybe there was a seed-of-a-book present  in the abstract of a paper that I had written for presentation at the 2015 American Education Research Associations Annual Conference. Do you think, she asked me, that you might be interested in developing  this into a book project? Maybe, I replied with an honest uncertainty. And that was the encouragement that I needed. Without her recognition  of the creative possibilities contained within a less than two-hundred-word  conference abstract, I am quite certain that the scholarly presentation I gave  would have, at best, become another journal article. Turning three years of messy, ethnographic fieldwork into the narrative  chapters of this book would not have happened without the patience and skillfulness of my colleague and writing assistant Stephanie Crook. Her pay stub  said something like Graduate student research assistant, but she became  more than what the title even remotely suggests. She was willing to read  multiple drafts, offer thoughtful and sometimes unwelcome but, oftentimes, 

xvi	 Acknowledgments needed revisions. This willingness, coupled with her unobtrusive manner of  asking, What are you really trying to say, Jerome? has allowed this book to  develop and hang together. Finally, I am fully aware that I have come across great fortune in quite  literally being able to live out the so-called clich of marrying my best friend.  To my best friend and life-partner, Janet: You always appeared to understand  even when you did not know why I felt compelled to leave the comforts of  home to work in distant locations for weeks and weeks while, in some cases,  immersing myself in difficult social and political contexts. You were always  there when I returned home, finding myself slightly overwhelmed by all of  what I had experienced. To you, I will simply say, Je taime. Toujours.
Chapter One A Framework for Understanding  Teaching in a Complex,  Heterogeneous World As the world becomes progressively more interconnected and interrelated,  and the cultural, ethnic, linguistic, and religious diversity of students increases in many North American schools, the needs and pressures to prepare  teachers to have a level of global competency concomitantly increase. Dealing with cultural and social diversity in classrooms is certainly not a new  issue for teachers to face. In various forms, the challenges associated with  teaching in socioeconomically and culturally diverse communities have been  present for centuries Lindsey, Roberts  Campbell Jones, 2005. However, the burgeoning complexity of the twenty-first century, in which  a wide variety of languages, cultures, and religions have come into closer  contact through increased levels of refugee resettlement and forced migration, has intensified pressure on teachers and school leaders to learn to value  diversity, honor it with integrity, and to preserve the cultural dignity of their  students and their families. It is clear that teachers will continue to be challenged by the expenditure of energy required to nurture unity within a context  of diversity. It seems safe to suggest that in order to effectively nurture unity within  classrooms, schools, and the communities they exist within, it is important  for teachers to begin to develop a globalized intercultural awareness of the  dynamics of the teaching and learning process. Such an awareness will enable  them to better understand what happens in schools and what teachers do in  distant places as well as to recognize the global challenges that have impacted  some of their students previous experiences of school. This book explores some of the ways in which some specific sociopolitical  and ethnocultural contexts shape teaching and the social milieu of teachers  lives. Hopefully, it illustrates some examples that might lend themselves as a 
Chapter One means that allows teachers in the Western world to develop a critical intercultural awareness of teaching in some challenging global contexts. CHALLENGING NARROW   WORLDVIEWS OF TEACHING Our assumptive worldviews influence the ways in which we see ourselves as  well as the social roles that we assume. They also determine the social roles  that we assign to others. We each have our own long list of social roles with  which we identify. For example, I am: a father, a husband, a son and brother,  an immigrant whose parents were immigrants and whose grandparents were  forcibly displaced, a descendant of tribal peoples from South Asia, an advocate for human rights, an anti-racist scholar, and a teacher. These are only  a few roles through which I construct an identity for myself, but each one  certainly contributes to how I see myself and how I interpret the social world I  inhabit. Importantly, I accept that my social roles and experiences shape how  I view myself as a teacher and the perspective I hold of the profession. And,  I am proud to belong to the teaching profession. Our worldviews and the social roles we occupy enable us to make meaning  of our lives and to navigate our relationships. They also aid us in maintaining  a somewhat consistent and predictable world, reading it through the schemas  that we hold to be true. Our assumptive worldviews ground, secure, steady,  and orient us. This is especially important during the times in which we experience destabilization. Yet, at the same time, our assumptive worldviews can  limit how we perceive and make sense of those who seem different from us. The truth is, despite the fact that human beings have much in common at a  fundamental genetic level, in some distinct ways cultural differences can be  more prevalent than cultural universals. And we have the proclivity, oftentimes unconsciously so, toward what, over a century ago, sociologist William  Graham Sumner termed ethnocentrism in his book Folkways 1906. At the  dawn of the twentieth century, Sumner identified that almost every person  tends to believe that her or his culture is superior to someone elses. This is  the basis of ethnocentrism. Recognizing and admitting a proclivity for ethnocentric thinking should  not leave us feeling guilty or ashamed. The vast majority of people are simply  unaware of the cultural norms to which they tightly hold. Yet, it is important  to recognize that we use those cultural norms to determine who belongs to our  communities and who exists outside of them. This is where the problem lies. Ethnocentrism, however, should not be mistaken for xenophobia, which  is a fear or hatred of strangers or foreigners. In mild forms, xenophobia can 

A Framework for Understanding Teaching in a Complex, Heterogeneous World	 3 lead an individual to harbor negative attitudes toward all immigrants or, in  many cases, a subset of immigrants who perhaps speak a different language,  practice their religions differently, or simply look different. In more intense  forms, xenophobia breeds racism, radical nationalism and, all too often, results in violence against immigrants, refugees, and newcomers. Despite the security that assumptive worldviews provide, teachers and  teacher-educators need to conceptualize teachingthe science, art, and craft  of educating other peoples childrenin ways that transcend the practicalities and limitations of their firsthand experiences. Every teachers assumptive  worldview of teaching has been shaped through the living laboratory of attending and working in schools located in particular neighborhood contexts,  which typically reflect particular social milieus. These highly contextual  experiences generate preconceived notions, expectations, beliefs, values, and  firmly held assumptions about students, schools, teachers, and what constitutes teaching. GLOBALIZING THE TEACHER PROFESSION In order to create a professional identity as a teacher in an increasingly globalized world, teachers need to consider the interconnectedness of the meaning of  teaching in local contexts with the meaning of teaching in more global ones.  To do this means providing teachers with opportunities to reconsider and shift  some of their deeply held beliefs and attitudes about teaching and what it  means to be a teacher. This is important because as Sachs 2005 stated, Teacher professional identity . . . stands at the core of the teaching profession.  It provides a framework for teachers to construct their own ideas of how to  be, how to act and how to understand their work and their place in society.  Importantly, teacher identity is not something that is fixed nor is it imposed;  rather it is negotiated through experience and the sense that is made of that  experience. p. 15 Recognizing the interconnectedness that binds teachers together into a  global profession requires an active negotiation of what it means to belong  to a worldwide profession that is committed to instill in young people the  attitudes, knowledge, and skills required to live peacefully and to work collectively in local communities and as members of a singular human species. A globally minded teacher recognizes the commonality of some of the  vexing educational issues and solutions that exist throughout the world. She  understands the value of learning from the experiences of teaching colleagues  who work in other national andor cultural settings and she is committed to 
Chapter One use the experiences of these colleagues to improve her own professional practice. Preparing teachers to contribute to a truly globalized profession requires  that they be nurtured toward developing a critical intercultural awarenessan  awareness that will serve as a tool to navigate a world of facts and so-called  alternative factsthat helps them to analyze the sociopolitical and historical  events that shape the world and their profession Freire, 1983. SELECTING A ROADMAP In their book Qualitative Data Analysis: A Methods Sourcebook 2014, Miles,  Huberman, and Saldaa contend that researchers should devote time and  energy to developing, refining, and clarifying the conceptual framework that  structures their research projects. They define a conceptual framework in the  following manner: A conceptual framework explains, either graphically or in narrative form, the  main things to be studiedthe key factors, variables, or constructsand the  presumed relationships among them. Frameworks can be simple, elaborate,  commonsensical or theory driven, descriptive or causal. p. 20 In plain language, a conceptual framework provides a roadmap of sorts  that explains what the researcher planned to focus on in the study and provides a framing mechanism to explain what went on in the analysis and how  the results were derived Maxwell, 2013. It is important for a conceptual  framework to also identify a researchers positionality on the topic under investigation and to surface her or his assumptions, preconceptions, and biases  toward the subject. In a somewhat general sense, the underlying notion of professional growth  and development of and for teachers is based on two other generally accepted  tenets, which are: 1 the concept of teaching as a profession, and 2 the concept of teachers are professionals. While there are seemingly endless debates  that flare up in the mainstream media about whether or not teaching is or is  not a profession, I will make my bias known and begin with the stance that  teaching is a profession, and that teachers are professionals. Furthermore, I  believe that one of the challenges, but not an insurmountable one, to developing more globally competent teachers is the fact that the concept of a teacher  as a professional is oftentimes rooted in narrow understandings of teaching  as a geographically and culturally bound process where local context is all  that seemingly matters. Drawing on the work of numerous authors for example, see Delvin-Foltz,  2010; Guo, 2014; Merryfield, Lo  Kasai, 2008; Santoro, 2009; and Zhao, 

A Framework for Understanding Teaching in a Complex, Heterogeneous World	 5 2010, among others, I have taken the position that if teachers are to become  more globally competent they need to be given opportunities to develop the  knowledge, skills, and dispositions that lead to such things as: a deepened  sense of the struggles that many in the Developing World face and be given  a vista into how these impact the dynamics of teaching and learning in  some challenging social contexts. They need opportunities that permit them  to develop a critical intercultural consciousness that allows them to make  sense of the world beyond their national borders. They need to be supported  as they gain the confidence and self-efficacy that helps to prepare them to  better address the challenges of bringing a global perspective into their local  classrooms. And, finally they need professional learning opportunities that  can increase their level of intercultural competency so that they can better  understand the range of social and cultural norms that appear in their classrooms as embodied by some of their students. The ethnographic narratives in this book are framed as a means through  which teachers can develop an intellectual and emotional sensitivity that allows for an increased capacity for tolerance and ambiguity, and an openness  to the cultural, political, and spiritual values, beliefs, and practices that are  different from those shared by the dominant groups of society Fennes  Hapgood, 1997. Lacking the sensitivity to understand cultural differences and to  accommodate them represents an impenetrable obstacle to developing human  relations that are born from being able to communicate with others who come  from cultures that are different from our own Bennett  Bennett, 2004. DEVELOPING A CRITICAL   INTERCULTURAL AWARENESS In order to operationalize the notion that contemporary schools represent a  microcosm of the global village that exists today, teachers need to be more  than merely encouraged to toss around ideas about what works best in their  local and national contexts for teaching, and how those ideas might influence and be influenced by broader and more globalized understandings of  what teaching means. If the adults who are charged with teaching have not  developed attitudes that embrace openness, respect, and responsibility, if they  do not possess an understanding of historical and current world issues, and  if they do not have the ability to communicate across linguistic, religious,  and cultural boundaries, it is difficult to imagine that they can support their  students to thrive in an interconnected world. Interestingly, research has pointed to the tenacity with which many teachers in North America cling to prior knowledge and beliefs about other people 
Chapter One based on an assumptive worldview that positions the so-called Developing  World as in need of fixing Tallon  McGregor, 2014. Arguably, while the  teaching profession in Canada and the United States has undergone some demographic changes in the past thirty years, the majority of the workforce still  reflects a population who can be best described as White, middle class, and  heterosexual, and who hold a predominantly Eurocentric worldview Leeman   Ledoux, 2003; Moreau, 2014; Walters, Garii  Walters, 2009. As a result, many teachers have little or limited cross-cultural understanding and knowledge of the social dynamics of teaching beyond their personal  and professional experience, even though they fully anticipate working with  students who have been previously educated elsewhere. In turn, they navely  regard teaching as teaching regardless of the social context in which it occurs. They have, in many instances, formed their beliefs and attitudes toward  and about the profession based on a very limited worldview of teaching. Such  pervasive beliefs limit their ability to develop the intercultural awareness  that allows them to understand teaching as a global profession with all of its  similarities and differences. The concept of intercultural competency is crucial in terms of being able  to effectively teach in increasingly diverse North American school settings.  Intercultural competency refers to a teachers ability to communicate effectively across and among cross-cultural contexts, and to being able to respectfully relate to diverse groups of people, some of whom have had markedly  different life experiences from ones own Bennett  Bennett, 2004. As highlighted in the 2013 UNESCO document, Intercultural Competencies: Conceptual and Operational Framework: The costs of intercultural incompetence are so high, including all the dangers of  conflict and war, that it is vital to invest in activities necessary to clarify, teach,  promote, enact and support intercultural competencies. emphasis added p. 40 Doing nothing, with respect to offering teachers opportunities to develop  a critical intercultural awareness, is clearly a shortsighted decision that could  lead teachers to not be able to understand the lives and past educational experiences of some of their students. Students who desperately need their teachers to understand them in order to be able to reach and effectively teach them. However, teachers can only do this if they are also committed to critically  reflecting upon their own experiences of teaching, the experiences of other  teachers, and allow themselves to challenge how they perceive and construct  their identities as teachers and of the teaching profession. Such a commitment requires that teachers and teacher-educators develop what Paulo Freire  1983 referred to as conscientizao: a critical intercultural consciousness 

A Framework for Understanding Teaching in a Complex, Heterogeneous World	 7 that impacts professional practice through the ways in which teachers relate  to others and to the planet we all share. Although some want to deny it, teachers are not born with intercultural  competency. Rather, they develop competency through a combination of  educational and life experiences. It is important, therefore, for teachers to  encounter accurate narratives that will allow them to more adeptly navigate  the complex social environments of contemporary North American schools schools that are marked by a growing diversity of peoples, lifestyles, cultures,  and religions. Teachers need to be given opportunities to develop their own  awareness and understanding of students who come from backgrounds that  are very different from their own, and who have been taught by teachers in  schools that are quite different from those in which they have experience  Fantini  Tirmizi, 2006. A MODEST STEP FORWARD If we are to achieve a sense of unity within a context of human diversity,  we must reduce the likelihood of perceiving othersthose who seem to be  different from usthrough the lenses of broadly held and yet inaccurate  stereotypes. I hope that the narrative ethnographies contained in this book,  while admittedly modest, make a meaningful contribution to the scholarly  work that connects the social and political issues that arise in classrooms to  the lived realities that affect all of us who belong to this interconnected and  intercultural world Bennett  Bennett, 2004; Marshall  Rossman, 2011. As the globalized world continues to grow seemingly smaller, the critical  importance of improving teachers intercultural sensitivity and competence  grows bigger in equal measure Bennett  Bennett, 2004. If teachers are to  develop a sense of solidarity in the teaching profession, they need to be given  vistas into the challenging sociopolitical and ethnohistorical experiences that  some of their professional colleagues in the global community of teachers  have had to endure.
Chapter Two Seeing beyond the Stories The three cases that form the storied experiences described in this book were  connected using the methodology of naturalistic inquiry, which, in this case,  relied on a pluralism of method and occasion approach Chamberlain et al.,  2011; Lincoln  Guba, 1985. Initially conceived of stand alone cases within  the traditions of naturalistic inquiry Lincoln  Guba, 1985, the three cases  were eventually integrated for the purposes of analysis and interpretation. The  pluralism of method and occasion approach allowed for the data from each case  to be analyzed collectively in order to better understand teachers perspectives  on the common challenge of formally educating children in challenging social  contexts. Even though the data for each study had been collected in slightly  different ways, and most definitely in different places and at different times  Chamberlain et al., 2011, a common theme united them. As an integrative approach to naturalistic inquiry, a pluralism of method  and occasion works well when it offers a means through which to understand  the social world of some diverse groups of people who lives and work suffer under some similar societal and cultural pressures Chamberlain et al.,  2011; Lincoln  Guba, 1985. By embedding themselves in the places where  people live and work, naturalistic researchers can draw on observations,  interviews, and other sources of descriptive data, as well as their own subjective experiences, to create rich, evocative descriptions and interpretations of  social phenomena Lincoln  Guba, 1985. Qualitative research is a situated activity that locates the observer in the  world, stated Denzin and Lincoln 2005, p. 3. Furthermore, they proposed that, It consists of a set of interpretive, material practices that make the world visible. These practices transform the world. They turn the world into a series of 
Chapter Two representations, including fieldnotes, interviews, conversations, photographs,  recordings, and memos to the self. At this level, qualitative research involves  an interpretive, naturalistic approach to the world. This means that qualitative  researchers study things in their natural settings, attempting to make sense of,  or interpret, phenomena in terms of the meanings people bring to them. p. 3 Qualitative research, when conducted well and when presented as intelligibly as it should be, is more of an artistic craft than a slavish adherence to  methodological rules Miles  Huberman, 1994, p. 5. It is not, however, uncommonas in the case of the studies illustrated in  this bookto discover that a qualitative study did not conform precisely to a  standard methodology. In fact, the skillfulness of a qualitative researcher can  be measured by her or his ability to bend the methodology to the peculiarities of the setting Miles  Huberman, 1994, p. 5. In my experience, as  McGrath 1982 stated, qualitative research should be more correctly viewed  as a set of dilemmas to be lived with; and as an effort to keep from becoming impaled on one or another horn of one or more of these dilemmas p. 69. The chapters that follow present a series of three ethnographic research  studies, which have been linked together and integrated into a multisited  ethnographic narrative of formal education as a commitment to human development. Within the boundaries of each case, as well as collectively, the  narratives seek to illustratively respond to the following questions: 1.  Beyond the traditional confines of schools and classrooms in the Developed World, what does teaching look and sound like in some of the  worlds more challenging sociopolitical and ethnocultural contexts? 2.  What are some of the sociopolitical and ethnocultural factors that have  contributed to create the milieu within which the teachers work? 3.  What might be learned by teachers in the Developed World about teaching, the teaching profession, the lives of students, and reflexively learned  about themselves through deeper understandings of what it means to be  committed to student success in such challenging contexts? NARRATIVE ETHNOGRAPHY Narrative ethnography seeks to close the distance between an outsiders interpretation or what is referred to as the etic perspective of social order, and a  more authentic account of the lived experiences of those who are the subjects  of the study, or the emic perspective Creswell, 2013. Tedlock 1991 described narrative ethnography as a research approach that renders explicit the 

Seeing beyond the Stories	 11 relationships that were formed between an ethnographer and the participants  who actively engaged in ethnographic dialogue to create a world of shared  intersubjectivity p. 70. My intent in explaining my research approach is not to make narrative  ethnography seem simplistic. Rather, my intent is to demonstrate the ways in  which narrative ethnography can be used to illustrate that there are millions  of people whose experience is only marginally connected to anyone beyond  their local community, who are excluded from the purported benefits of globalization, and of whose lives we know very little Inda  Rosaldo, 2007.  Such experiences take place, quite ironically, in the midst of a globalized  world that is marked by complex social mobility and economic interconnection Inda  Rosaldo, 2007. Narrative ethnography provides the opportunity for the celebration of  diverse worldviewsworldviews that shape the social politics of local  communities and which, when accepted as frames for peoples understandings of social reality, make the world a little safer for human differences  Ghodsee, 2016. Ethnography literally means to write or to represent a culture. Ethnographers, therefore, look for patterns, describe local social relations, attempt to  understand them and derive meanings from them, and try to make sense of  a place and a case in relation to the entire social setting within an interconnected web of social relationships Creswell, 2013. The value of representing  ethnography narratively is best explained by Van Maanen 2011, who wrote: The ordinary truth of any research tradeethnographic or otherwiseis that  we traffic in communications, and communication implies we intend to alter the  view of our readers. From this perspective, our task is rhetorical. We attempt to  convince others that weve uncovered something of note, made unusual sense  of something, or, in weak form, simply represented something well. That is to  say that our writing is both explicitly and implicitly designed to persuade others  that we know what were talking about and they ought to therefore pay attention  to what we are saying. p. 147 COLLECTING AND ANALYZING STORIES Because these research studies were anchored in the notion of lives as they  are lived on the landscape Phillion, 2002 then, inevitably, external events,  actions, and happenings also became a part of the research, and were woven  into the stories that were retold by both the participants and myself. Following the suggestions of Atkinson and Coffey 2003, I invited participants to 
Chapter Two have conversations with me. The conversations were, at times, structured as  formal interviews, while, at other times, they occurred as more informal backand-forth discussions. In each case, the conversations were tape-recorded,  transcribed, read and re-read, and then analyzed Creswell, 2013. Exploring diverse experiences of teaching and learning through less formal  conversational approaches allowed me to begin to understand the cognitive  structures and the cultural embeddedness of the purposes of educationthe  worldviewsas a means to human development and how these understandings are narratively composed, embodied in people and expressed in practice Clandinin  Connelly, 2000, p. 124. In this way, the data collection progressed through observations and chains  of conversations, in which there was not a specific emphasis on precisely  finding a representative sample to interview. I had no statistical or numerical  sense of how many individuals had to be interviewed because generalization  is not a goal of qualitative research. Rather, the focus of the data collection  was on finding individuals in each local context who could identify events  that seemingly mattered to them, and who would willingly contribute to the  narrative research. Tables 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3 provide some basic information about the individuals who participated in each of the cases and who were generous in sharing  their time and stories. RESEARCH INFORMANTS Table 2.1.  Resource Centre for Social Transformation and Brickfield Schools   Kolkata, India Sr. Cyril Mooney, i.b.v.m. Former principal of the Loreto Sealdah Day School   foundress of the Resource Centre for Social  Transformation Jon Ellis Brickfield Schools Program Coordinator, Resource Centre  for Social Transformation Rina Singh Brickfield Schools Project Coordinator, Resource Centre  for Social Transformation Soumitra Bhattacharya Teacher-Educator, Resource Centre for Social  Transformation Sanjay Teacher, Brickfield Schools Priya Teacher, Brickfield Schools Arbind  Teacher, Brickfield Schools Sahanaj Teacher, Brickfield Schools

Seeing beyond the Stories	 13 ILLUMINATING DISTANT SOCIAL   REALITIES AND WORLDVIEWS Analytically, the data from each case were initially read, and then re-read  as a single narrative; one that described the social context of teaching from  the research informants perspectives. This analytical process required me  to listen attentively to the voices of the research informants as they were  captured in the transcripts and to reflect on my best remembrances of them. It  also required me to go back and forth between the field notes that I had written and the photographs that I had taken at each location. The process pushed  me back into the extant literature in order to find additional background to  the history and research already written about each context. Poignant elements from this process of reading, re-reading, revisiting, and remembering  Table 2.2.  Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective Kigali, Rwanda Olivier Clerk of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective Christian Chairperson of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective Sonia  Teacher and member of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective Gervais Teacher and member of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective Pascal Teacher and member of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective David  Teacher and member of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective Jacob Teacher and member of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective Raisa Teacher and member of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective Thierry Teacher and member of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective Xavier Teacher and member of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective Eric Teacher and member of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective Peter Taxi driver Table 2.3.  CARITASJesuit Refugee Service JRS Sub-Office and Bhutanese Refugee  Education Programs Damak, Nepal Sr. Lourda Mary  Thumma Field Director, CARITASJesuit Refugee Service JRS Sub-Office Loknath Pokrel Assistant Field Director, CARITASJRS Sub-Office Martha Office-based resource teacher, CARITASJRS Sub-Office Rachel Office-based resource teacher, CARITASJRS Sub-Office Dorji Head Teacher, Bhutanese Refugee Education Program school Shakun Head Teacher, Bhutanese Refugee Education Program school Prakash Assistant Head Teacher, Bhutanese Refugee Education Program  school
Chapter Two were surfaced through this iterative processelements that seemed to stand  out and that needed to be written about. These elements have been brought  together within each of the narrative chapters that follow. To present the ethnographic case studies that formed the research projects,  I chose to employ a form of narrative ethnography whereby a researcher  seeks to lend thickness to her or his research in an attempt to validate what  has been regarded by some as informal research practices Charmaz, 1983;  Tedlock, 1991. Narrative ethnographies refer to texts presented in the form  of stories that incorporate the ethnographers experiences into the ethnographic study Tedlock, 1991. Narratives are not, however, as Gubrium and Holstein 2008 explain,  simply reflections of experience, nor are they descriptive free-for-alls . . .  Rather, narratives comprise the interplay between experience, storying practices, descriptive resources, purposes at hand, audiences, and the environments  that condition storytelling pp. 250251. Narrative ethnography, as a form  of inquiry, is based firmly in the premise that, as human beings, we come to  understand and to give meaning to our lives through stories Andrews, Squire   Tambokou, 2008. Grounded in interpretive hermeneutics and phenomenology, it is a form of qualitative research that involves the gathering of narrativeswritten, oral, and visualfocusing on the meanings that people ascribe  to their experiences, and seeking to provide, as Josselson 2006, p. 4 aptly  states, insight that befits the complexity of human lives. Narrative ethnography as inquiry is more than the uncritical gathering of  stories. Narrative inquirers strive to attend to the ways in which a story is  constructed, for whom and for what purpose, and they also aim to note the  contextual discourses upon which a story draws Riessman  Speedy, 2007.  Narrative ethnographies are neither sentimental reflections of an experience  nor uncritical descriptive recollections of people and places. Rather, they  should feature a vibrant, cultural interchange between an ethnographers  subjectivity and the subjectivities of those whose social realties are to be  represented Bochner, 2007. Even so, both subjectivities are partial as our  memories are, by nature, selective. Memories play tricks on us Atkinson   Coffey, 2003. ACKNOWLEDGING THE SHADOWS As with other paradigmatic positions in social science research, narrative ethnography is not without its critics. As a researcher who decided to structure  this research as narrative ethnography, it is incumbent upon me to share a few  of these critiques. One criticism is that if you are a storyteller rather than 

Seeing beyond the Stories	 15 a story analyst then your goal becomes therapeutic rather than analytic Ellis  Bochner, 2000, p. 745. Another is that ethnographic researchers try to  represent narratives as if they were authentic when, in fact, autobiographical accounts are no more authentic than other modes of representation: a  narrative of a personal experience is not a clear route into the truth, either  about the reported events, or of the tellers private experience Atkinson   Delamont, 2006, p. 166. Finally, there is a criticism leveled at narrative  inquirers that, in their concern to represent the meanings that individuals  ascribe to their lived experience, they often fail in the struggle to resist a globalized, homogenized, impoverished system of meaning Fox, 2008, p. 341. Such criticisms are legitimate, and especially so when narrative ethnographers allow themselves be seduced into a belief that they have the insight  and the ability to faithfully represent anothers story. Such criticism serves  as a warning to those who purport to offer the definitive story of a people.  However, if ethnographers listen carefully enough to the stories that they  hear, as Andrews 2007 suggests, they will discover that there is much to  learn from every story that they might gather, and they can begin to understand the worldview that lends meaning to those lives collectively. In narrative ethnography, researchers work with the data they gather, and, in light of  this fact, they must be aware of and remain self-critical of the arguments and  claims that they make Polkinghorne, 2007. In the end, what narrative ethnographers are left with is some understanding, even if only a partial one, of  the patterns that cohere among individuals and the aspects of lived experience  that differentiate Josselson, 2006, p. 5. SHARPENING THE FOCUS In narrative ethnography, as is the case with all forms of qualitative research,  it is important to present methods to justify the scholarly contribution of the  research. Lincoln and Guba 1985, more than three decades ago, at a time  when qualitative research was being challenged by the positivistic science  fundamentalists, proposed that it is important for qualitative researchers  to consider the following question in their work and to respond to it: How  can an inquirer persuade his or her audiences that the research findings of an  inquiry are worth paying attention to? p. 290. In a narrative form, I have attempted to represent the tone and quality of  specific aspects of the conversations. It is simply impossible and impractical to include all of the transcripts verbatim or append all of the field notes  that I took or to include every image that I captured. Thus, the narratives are  necessarily incomplete. The selection does, however, offer a representation 
Chapter Two of the subjects that I and the participants discussed and the general tone of  the conversations. This commitment to an evocative description is borne out  in what might best be described as a fidelity to represent those who willingly  informed this project through their descriptions of some of the challenges  that accompany teaching in some difficult sociopolitical and ethnocultural  global contexts. While each one was admittedly a messy study, in presenting the narratives, I have tried to not lean on that messiness as an excuse  to use language that obfuscates rather than clarifies, and that shrouds the  limitations of the work behind what Ghodsee 2016 refers to as a fog of  impenetrable prose.
Chapter Three A Modicum of Opportunity  in the Haze of the Brickfields Not long after the sun had risen, my project assistant, Elisea twentysomething Bachelor of Education student, and an insistent young woman  who had found a way to invite herself into working with me on the projectwalked quickly alongside me in order to meet Soumitra Bhattacharya,  the teacher-educator who was assigned as one of our on-site handlers,  along with his colleague, Rina Singh, one of the brickfield schools project coordinators. We were to meet them at the Sealdah train station in  Kolkata, India. As we walked down the street, we stepped around a few of  the thousands of homeless individuals in Kolkata who were still sleeping  on the sidewalk, covered in threadbare blankets. We also kept a watchful  eye for the rats that scurried over and around them. There were certainly  a lot of rats. At about a quarter of the way to the train station, I told Elise that we should  probably pull up the scarves around our necks to cover our mouths and  nostrils. I explained that this was to avoid inhaling the toxic ash floating off  the burning trasha collection of rubbish and human wastethat had been  brushed into the gutter and doused with kerosene and then set alight. The  pungent scent that emitted from the burning pile is indescribable. Geoffrey Moorehouse, the author of Calcutta: The City Revealed 1971,  said that Calcutta, now known as Kolkata, provided for him a window into  a society that offered a sight that was enough to destroy any romantic illusions people may cling to about gentleness and brotherly love. It is fair for  me to say that, in many regards, even though it has been forty years since  he wrote those words, Moorehouses sentiments described my experience of  Kolkatas Sealdah district in January 2013. Sealdah tested me.
Chapter Three NAVIGATING ORGANIZED CHAOS It was Soumitras and Rinas assignment to help us navigate the organized  chaos of the Sealdah train station and the Indian rail system. We were planning to make the hour-long journey to the Budge Budge train station in order  to visit two of the areas brickfield schools. Sealdah station is a terminus for  trains arriving from some of Indias most underdeveloped areas. It serves as  a gateway for the throngs of unor undereducated poor who are seeking a  better life. I watched them pour out of the railcars and step onto Sealdahs  platforms, only to discover that their welcome was, however unceremoniously, joining the mass of others who had arrived earlier, now to be found  squatting not far from the platforms, surrounded by the meager belongings  they brought with them. While I cannot know for sure, they seemed to be  thinking about what they should do next. There was a perceptible irony that struck me as I boarded our train, but  one that I chose not to share with my colleagues. We were traveling to West  Bengals Budge Budge station as our staging point for this part of the project.  Given that the focus of our work was specifically to document how a childs  right to education is met in some socially and environmentally challenging  conditions, the obviousness of my project stood out to me. SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION Budge Budge was the site where the ship the S.S. Komagata Maru was ordered to dock following its forced return from Vancouvers harbor in 1914.  The Komagata Maru incident is identified to this day as one of Canadas  most infamous human rights violations. The Komagata Maru was a coal-transport steamship that had been repurposed into a passenger ship and chartered by a group of Indian Sikhs who  were attempting to immigrate to Canada in search of a better life. Upon arrival to the Vancouver harbor, the passengers were denied entry to Canada  and forced to live on the ship for two months. During the span of time it sat  in the harbor, the Komagata Maru became something of a media sensation,  and drew plenty of attention from the public at large. Eventually, after the  standoff in the waters just off the Vancouver coast, Canadian naval vessels  escorted the ship back out to sea. The captain and crew of the Komagata Maru  had no choice but to make the long and arduous journey back to India. When  the ship reached India, a British warship escorted it to Budge Budge where  the British colonial authorities attempted to arrest a number of the men. A 

A Modicum of Opportunity in the Haze of the Brickfields	 19 gunfight erupted and nineteen people died. Those who survived were imprisoned for the duration of the First World War. More than a century later, on May 18, 2016, Canadian prime minister  Justin Trudeau rose in the House of Commons, Canadas Parliament, and  acknowledged that the Komagata Maru and its Sikh passengers were refused  entry into Canada as a result of clearly discriminatory policies enacted by  the Canadian government of the day that were designed, quite simply, to  keep them out. NEGOTIATING A RIDE After a train ride, during which we made room for farmers traveling with  produce and livestock, including a pair of goats that needed to be squeezed  into the aisle space, we walked slowly away from the train station. Rina  purposefully strode ahead along the dirt road, dismissing one auto-rickshaw  driver after another. It seemed that they did not meet her standard. The conversations were always short and pitched, and they ended with Rina giving  a huff of disgust in response to whatever the local drivers were suggesting. She knows the local drivers, and wants to find an honest one, Soumitra  offered before Elise or I could ask what was happening. They are not all honest men, he added, with emphasis. We continued to walk for about five minutes and then, abruptly, Rina  stopped and waved frantically for us to hurry up and climb aboard the rickshaw she was standing beside. I could only guess that she felt satisfied that we  were not being ripped off. The whole situation struck me as funny because I  was fairly confident that the cost of transporting the four of us from the train  station to the brickfields was well within our financial means. It cost us about sixty rupeesapproximately one Canadian dollarto be  driven out to the brickfields, have the driver wait for us for a few hours, and  then take us back to the train station. I felt somewhat embarrassed that Rina  had felt it necessary to haggle so that we could pay a dollar to transport all  four of us. I routinely spend more than that on a cup of coffee. And, for the  price, it is all too often a bad cup of coffee. While I had traveled in an auto-rickshaw, or tuk-tuk, as it is called in  other parts of Southeast Asia, I had never ridden in one that could be made  to accommodate nine people. After we four climbed aboard the sevenhorsepower, sputtering people mover and squished ourselves with a sense of  modesty to fit on the bench without sitting on each others laps, the driver  got the machine moving.
Chapter Three We did not travel very far before he stopped along the way to pick up a  series of fares who found novel ways to either hang on or squirm their way  into the tiny spaces between others. At one point, I turned to Elise, who was  sitting so close to me that I had to lean away from her so that our noses would  not bang into each other, and said, I think we could get out and walk faster  than this thing is moving. She smiled but did not bother to reply. Her attention was taken by the small  woman who was seated in her lap. SERIAL MIGRANTS AND 3D WORK Worldwide attention has been focused on the plight of migrants crossing  the Mediterranean Sea to seek refuge in Europe, and, all too often, meeting  with tragic consequences. According to a 2017 report by the United Nations,  however, migration within national borders is of a far greater magnitude than  migration across international borders. Internal migrationthe temporary or  permanent movement within nationsis occurring on a vast scale and continues to grow United Nations, 2017. The International Organization for Migration 2015 estimates that there  are approximately 740 million internal migrants worldwide, but the actual  numbers are probably higher as the official statistics fail to capture many temporary, circular migrants. Internal migration is induced by a complex matrix  of economic, social, environmental, and demographic factors that push and  pull people to migrate from one place to another in search of an income,  more promising futures for themselves and their families, and safer communities in which to temporarily reside. While migration can open up new  economic possibilities for families, it also comes with high risks, especially  for the migrants who constitute a floating and somewhat invisible populationthe ones who alternate between living and working in their home communities and in their temporary work site destinations. Serial or circular migrationthe back-and-forth movement of migrants  from their homes to their temporary worksitesinvolves the movement of  hundreds of millions of people in India alone. Government social support  does not really reach these individuals. This lack of support only compounds  the fact that almost all of these serial migrants belong to socioeconomically  deprived demographic groups who have attained negligible educational success, if any success at school at all, and, as a result, have no economic or  political clout. Serial migrants are oftentimes employed in 3D jobs, namely, ones that  are dirty, dangerous, and difficult Castles  Davidson, 2000. They are enA Modicum of Opportunity in the Haze of the Brickfields	 21 gaged mainly in work that local residents refuse. Some of the risks associated   with 3D work include low pay, either low-quality or uncertain housing, a  lack of sanitation and safe water, irregular or no access to utility services,  and generally poor access to basic health services Castles  Davidson, 2000;  Deshingkar, 2006. In addition, serial migrant labourers, who typically represent the poorest segment of any population, are also denied access to statesponsored interventions that are intended to alleviate the effects of poverty,  interventions that are almost always delivered in fixed geographic locations.  They are left behind precisely because life demands that they be transient  Rogaly, 1998. The children of migrants are often compelled to travel to worksites with  their parents. Smita 2008 estimates that, of the total seasonal migrant population in India, as much as one-third is made up of children from infancy to  fourteen years of age. They accompany their parents to the temporary habitats  and they are among the most vulnerable segments of the population. They  are one of the most educationally and socially marginalized groups. Their  access to primary schoolinga constitutionally guaranteed right in Indiais  severely curtailed as their caregivers migration patterns result in a disruption  of regular and consistent formal education. The net result of this disruption is  the intergenerational transmission of illiteracy and innumeracy. Both of these  conditions contribute to the vicious cycle of poverty, whose hunger seems,  most unfortunately, insatiable. KILNS THAT STAND WATCH As we walked down the road and away from the parked auto-rickshaw, we  began to see row upon row of tall chimneys, which rose from dozens of oversized brick kilns. On that slightly hazy but otherwise blue day, it was quite  the sight to behold along the West Bengal skyline. Upon arrival at the first brickfield, we immediately noticed the logs, stacked  high and awaiting to be used to fire the kiln. We watched as two modestly built  men grabbed one of the large logs, which was about the size of a very large  tree branch, and lifted it onto their shoulders, carrying it toward the kiln. We continued a little farther along, not far from the open pit, and walked  by the squalid mud hutsthe temporary housing for brickfield workers  and their families. Each mud huts roof was comprised of a tattered blue or  orange tarpaulin sheet. The sheets flapped in the light breeze, which was  noticeable even though the huts were pushed right up against each other. I  could not quite tell how many huts there were, but it looked like there were a  few dozen separate units crammed, side-by-side, into a small stretch of land. 
Chapter Three Elise and I paused for a moment to try and take a better look, but Soumitra  encouraged us to carry on, saying that we should not go over any closer to  take a look at them. We dont want the owners to take notice of us, Soumitra said as he motioned us to continue walking toward the schools. The previous day, during our pre-departure orientation meeting, Jon Ellis,  the Program Coordinator for the Loreto Sealdah Schools Resource Centre for  Social Transformation Brickfield School Project, had been direct as he told us: These people, the brickfield workers, live in very tough social conditions and  work in a harsh physical world. There is no way around it. They are poor destitutely poorand they are going to remain poor their whole lives. Be  aware that the brickfields are considered to be closed places. The owners are  suspicious of visitors. It is obvious to anyone who visits them that they are  quite oppressive places. As we continued past the brickfields, the hazy air was choking with ash and  coal soot from the kilns furnaces. I learned quickly not to breathe too deeply,  as that created the feeling of having clogged my nostrils and having scratched  the back of my throat. Small, short breaths, I reminded myself as I walked. HAZARDING THE BRICKFIELDS As we continued up the dirt road, I had trouble reconciling the solitudes  of what I witnessed. I watched as both adults and adolescents dug for clay  with crude tools and their bare hands, molded the clay into bricks, and lifted  dozens of the unfired bricks onto wobbly, wooden carts. They then hauled  the carts, loaded with bricks, up the banks of the clay pits to stack them for  pickup and delivery to the massive kiln. It was obvious to me that it was  grueling work. The tattered expressions of familial poverty in India were contrasted by  what I saw in the faces of the children, who were playing next to the sunbaked  cement building that they knew as their school. The smiling schoolchildren  laughed and joyfully sang and played as they learned basic literacy and numeracy skills in their native language. It was a sight to behold in the openness  of the brickfield school yard. When we had interviewed Sister Cyril Mooney, a living saint for many of  the poor of Kolkata, she had told us that she was shocked by what she had  learned from Jon Ellis. This is what she learned, which reflected her inspiration to establish the initial brickfield schools:

A Modicum of Opportunity in the Haze of the Brickfields	 23 Sister Cyril: They are mostly migrant children from Bihar. They travel with their  family, their whole family, including the smallest children, and they are occupied  the whole day with making bricks. On a good day, they can make 1,000 bricks.  And for 1,000 bricks when we first went there, they were getting 50 rupees; less  than a dollar. And now they get 100 or 200 rupees. But even that is still only an  absolutely basic amount that can keep them minimally from starvation. This is the daily reality for about seven months of the year for these serial  migrant workers and their families. They leave their remote villages to live  and work between Indias monsoon seasons in the vast brickfields. They have  no choice but to carry out hard labor, day after day, to support their families  between the rainy seasons when the brickfields will be rendered into inaccessible mud pits. Staggeringly, it has been estimated that there are close to 15 million people  working in approximately 30,000 brickfields scattered across the countryside  of India. As Jon explained, the Resource Centre for Social Transformation  was making a very small dent in improving the educational opportunities of  the children of the brickfield workers in West Bengal: We are running schools at present in only 27 brickfields. And, in West Bengal  alone, the number of brickfields is probably more than 2,000. We know that  there are a lot of children in the brickfields who still cannot attend school. We  do what we can. Upward of sixty percent of the school-aged children who live in extreme  poverty come from Indias rural communities. These children have little to no  time to attend school. They must help their parents either with daily domestic  adult chores or, in some instances, through paid labour Smita, 2008. While child labor is outlawed, families have no choice but to work; no one  seems to be exempt. The arithmetic is simple: more hands equate to more  bricks made, and, since the families are paid on a piecemeal basis per brick,  it only makes economic sense to take on the work as a family. The brickfield  owners do not require that the children of the migrant workers work. However, family necessity puts them to work. It is also obvious that, because India  has one of the fastest-growing economies in the world, the demand for bricks  will only increase. Child labor will not disappear. This has led to serious lacunae as regards the educational condition of the  children of the brickfields workforce. Since the active season is from November to May, the families stay at their work sites for that period only and then  they return to their home communities for the remaining few months of the  year. The children cannot, in reality, be successful in their home communitys  school because of their long absence. The children are thus kept out of school 
Chapter Three for the whole year. The result is an inertia; the notion of educational opportunity for the migrants children is, all too often, nothing more than an illusion. Finding ways in which to bring a formal education to the doorsteps or  workplaces of serial migrants, like the brickfields, has required innovative  and entrepreneurial solutions to create schools. These schools are not much  like the schools that most people imagine, and their operation requires a  commitment to train semiliterate and marginally numerate and unemployed  youth, who are drawn from the same local communities as the children, to  become part-time barefoot teachers. THE BAREFOOT TEACHERS Sister Cyril Mooney developed the Barefoot Teachers Training Program in  the 1980s. Referring to the philosophy that motivated her to create the Barefoot Teachers Training Program, Sister Cyril said: People need only feet to walk; shoes are a luxury. Given the millions of children  who need to be educated in India, a highly theoretical two-year training teacher  training course is an unrealistic luxury. We offer short-term courses, stripped off  all extraneous theory, that orient teachers to an education system where children  learn through fun-filled activities like song, dance, and story-tellingwhere  dry textbooks are replaced with simple, yet exciting aids made from materials  available in their environments and customized to respond specifically to the  childrens needs. A brickfield school is, quite literally, nothing more than a cinder block or  redbrick shed surrounded by a packed down and well-worn yard space. This  space serves as the classroom floor. The shed that stores the learning materials is only slightly larger than the garden-variety shed typically found in  many backyards in the self-named Developed World. The shed is made from  the same gray or red alluvial soil that the brickfield workers mold into bricks  day after day with their hands. As I looked around, I recalled what Sister Cyril  had said in one of our earlier conversations: These kinds of children should be exposed to a different type of teaching; a  teaching that presumes that they need to learn from their own environment,  which is the best place to learn. This barren place was the environment where they would try to learn. The first school was located on slightly higher ground than the open mud  pits that dotted the surrounding brickfield. Each brickfield was, in turn, surA Modicum of Opportunity in the Haze of the Brickfields	 25 rounded by one brickfield after another, each one identifiable by a large kiln  that was used to fire and harden the molded clay. The kilns chimneys rose  into the haze of the blue sky. Sanjay stood in front of the students, who were seated on the dirt. At the  front on a small ledge, he and his barefoot-trained teaching colleagues had  angled a small, old-fashioned blackboard with a few mathematics equations  listed on them: 3  2  5  4  5  2  4  2  6  2  4  4  Sanjay spoke to the class of about thirty small children and invited one, a  small boy, to come forward to solve one of the problems. The child, covered  in well-worn, dusty clothes, paused and waited with the broken piece of chalk  that Sanjay gave him. He held it firmly in his hand. Sanjay paused for just a moment and then pointed at the 3  2  equation and the child nervously scribbled an almost undecipherable number on  the black slate. I thought it was a 5, but it was hard to tell. Sanjay patted the boy on the top of his head and the child quickly rushed  back to his place on the ground. His wide smile looked as though it might last  for the duration of the morning. While Sanjay was teaching, Sahanaj, another of the barefoot teachers, was  standing about ten meters away. She was sharing the same small patch of  hardened ground and teaching a group of about twenty children. They appeared to be younger than the ones that Sanjay was teaching. Sahanaj drew a small circle on the small two-foot by two-foot blackboard  at the front of her classroomthe same open space Sanjay was using, but  space that was oriented perpendicular to Sanjays to create an L-shapeand  wrote the number 1 next to it. Then she drew two small circles and wrote  2, and three small circles and 3. The children sat and fidgeted while she  wrote something in Hindi. While Sahanaj was teaching, it was hard to tell if the children were listening, let alone absorbing what she was saying. When I focused in on the teaching and learning dynamic, what I saw was remarkably similar to what I have  seen in countless classrooms in North America.
Chapter Three As I continued to watch, though, something different struck me. Some  students were watching their teacher and paying attention, but many others  were distracted by the arduous work that was going on around them in the  brickfields. There was a kind of vacant look in their eyes. I wondered what  was going on in their minds. But then I realized that, in many instances, children were just children, and prone to distraction in any environment. I also  noticed that some were more interested in the chatter coming from a group of  boys in Sanjays next-door classroom. Just down the road was another brickfield school, where Arbind and Priya  were team teaching. At least, that is what I thought they were doing. When  I asked Soumitra if this was how they always taught, he knowingly smiled  and replied, Certainly, as if stating the obvious to the confused foreigner. I am not sure I asked the question I had intended to, but I did not bother  restating it. Instead, I decided that the moment was better spent observing  because I could ask questions later on. Maybe I would be fortunate enough to  get a few answers by watching and not speaking. The students in Arbind and Priyas class looked older than the ones in Sanjays and Sahanajs classrooms. I guessed that the children were somewhere  between ten and twelve years old. Their clothes were more worn than those of  the children in Sanjays and Sahanajs classrooms. The garments were dustier,  and their colors seemed to be more faded. I guessed that, perhaps, their school  clothes were used for more than just going to school. However, I caught myself  as I realized that this might just be a story that I was conjuring in my own mind. Dissimilar to the first school, the yard was littered with empty plastic  bottles and other garbage. The garbage was all strewn about the schoolyard,  being blown about by the light breeze. That did not seem to matter to anyone  there. The children stepped around and over the refuse, seemingly content  with the fact that they had a school to attend. I could not help but notice that  Soumitra had tossed the wrapper from his own stick of gum on the dirt floor  without a care. Arbind and Priya looked like they were perhaps in their early twenties, but  as is often the case, it was quite hard to tell. Arbind was wearing a striped  blue cardigan over his grayed white dress shirt and dark slacks, while Priya  had on a lavender outfit and long draping ochre scarf. It was clear that they  were in charge. They looked like teachers. The students stood in a circle, but only some of the children were covered  by the partial shade from the single tree in the yard. The others were bathed  in the hazy sunlight, and seemed to be unfazed by standing in the sunshine. I ended up becoming distracted by the sight of large container ships. I  could see them behind the students, traveling up and down the Hugli also  called Hoogly River, an arm of Indias famous Ganges River. The river 

A Modicum of Opportunity in the Haze of the Brickfields	 27 made me think of the history of the S.S. Komagata and the connection that  Canada has to this part of the world. Almost all of the children were moving about as Arbind and Priya rhythmically spoke and sang. A rope was strung between the tree and the cinder  block shed, on which were hanging laminated sheets of paper with the numbers 1 through 20 written on them with colorful, hand-drawn pictures of a  single umbrella, two shrubs, three insects and so on, to illustrate what each  number represented. The lesson resembled some of the systematized pandemonium that often  occurs when a few dozen children are up on their feet and moving about an  open classroom or gymnasium, despite the fact that the teacher is trying to  teach something. At first, I did not notice it, but after a few minutes it became obvious. Three  of the young girls were standing in the circle participating in the lesson, each  one with a very small child clinging to her back. I was struck by the fact that  each of these students was at school learning but, out of necessity, they each  had to bring what was most likely a sibling along with them. I figured that  they must be caring for their siblings while their parents toiled away in the  brickfields. These older girls shifted uncomfortably, trying to distribute the  extra weight as they moved. They smiled as they tried to find a way to support  themselves and also their familial responsibilities. At the end of the school day, which amounted to about two hours of the  morning, the class ended with what can best be described as the brickfield  school version of the game Duck-Duck-Goose. The children sat in a shape  that was supposed to be a circle but was more like an oval. On Priyas command, two children rose to their feet and raced around the small blob of  humanity, trying to win by being the first one back to her or his spot on the  hard ground. They had ear-to-ear grins as they tried to best each other. Once  again, they simply reminded me of the schoolchildren I might find on any  playground in Canada. The Resource Centre for Social Transformation operates out of a cluttered  meeting room stuffed full of educational resources and a few folding chairs  in the Loreto Sealdah School. It is a private school for over 1,500 girls, and  it has established brickfield schools in a few dozen of the more than 3,000  local brickfields. It is a drop in the bucket, admitted Jon, but he also seemed reticent with  having to accept that fact: We simply dont have the capacity to work everywhere. Not being able to get  into every brickfield is in many ways not a problem for us. We cant, at least not  currently, stretch ourselves any more than we presently do.
Chapter Three Without these schools, the children of migrant workers may never have  been afforded the opportunity to attend school at all. Staffed with Barefoot  Teachers, the school focuses on delivering early literacy and numeracy skills.  Children learn in their native language through simple, fun-filled activities that  use resources that are sourced from locally available, and often recycled, materials. Sitting in the shared office space at the Loreto School, and surrounded  by the bundles of dusty papers that made up the student records, Jon said: Sadly, as I have said, it is obvious that the needs are tremendous. Sometimes  it bothers me that were not providing a better standard of education than we  are. But, we are doing what we can. We have to work with the capacity of the  teachers that we have. What we are trying to do is to give her or him some basic  literacy and numeracy skills so that maybe she or he can move one rung up the  social ladder in India. The arrangements for these schools are tenuous and require difficult negotiations with the brickfield owners. When questioned by outsiders, the owners  are quick to point out that they do not employ the children, since child labor  in India is largely outlawed. As Jon Ellis pointed out, the owners were only  convinced to permit the establishment of the schools when the NGOs sold the  idea that the parents and older siblings could be much more productive and  profitable if they did not have to worry about tending to the young children  who were often underfoot. Jon explained to us that when he ventured into the  brickfields, the general view among the people he spoke to about the plight  of the children and their families was that brickfield owners would not allow anybody to go into their property and do anything with their workers.  The owners were suspicious that the outside agencies, who claimed that they  wanted to offer the brickfield workers aid and support, were really there to  interfere with their business operations. However, over time, the attitudes of many of the brickfield owners in West  Bengal had softened toward the Resource Centre for Social Transformation.  Jon stated: They have allowed us to run schools in their brickfields and they now allow  us to run health camps as well. True enough, occasionally there is a brickfield  owner who doesnt want anything to do with us, but since we dont have the  capacity to work everywhere its not a problem for us. The success that has been achieved does not gloss over the back-and-forth  negotiating that had to occur over a period of years. Pointing to the diplomatic  approach she took when she first started meeting with the brickfield owners,  Sister Cyril said:

A Modicum of Opportunity in the Haze of the Brickfields	 29 I felt that there were two choices before us. We could go in and start being activists, and start a big row about these poor people not being paid properly. And,  what would have happened was the gates of the brickfield would be closed on  us and that would be the end. We wouldnt get back in. Instead of that, I decided  that we would go in as friends, as allies. We talked to the brickfields owners and  told them what we felt about these children. Rather than being appropriately indignant toward the profit-focused owners and managers who cared very little for the welfare of the serial migrants  that they took advantage of, this globally recognized septuagenarian nun took  a different approach. Sister Cyril noted: I explained that if the small ones were in school and were not hanging around  the work sites and breaking the bricks, which is what they used to do, then the  brickfield owners would benefit and profit. The small children would oftentimes be playing around and half of the bricks their parents would make would  get broken. We convinced the managers and owners that if they allowed us to  establish schools, the children would not get in the way and that their parents  would be freer to do more work. The parents could earn more money because  they could make more bricks, which is what the owners were after. We sold it  as a win-win situation. As a result, the brickfield schools were established not so much for the  purpose of providing educational opportunities, but because they met a very  real economic need in the eyes of the managers and owners. Referring to the philosophy that motivated her to develop the Barefoot  Teachers Training Program almost four decades ago, Sister Cyril Mooney  is quick to note that people need only feet to walkshoes, she claims, are a  luxury. Given the millions of poor young children who need to be educated  in India, Sister Cyril will tell you that a highly theoretical two-year training  teacher training program is an unrealistic luxury. If you give her the chance,  she will add that teaching elementary education may indeed be somewhat  complex, but it does not have to be made more complicated with so much  theory that it becomes inaccessible to individuals who could otherwise teach  basic literacy and numeracy to some of the worlds most disadvantaged children. Many modernized Western forms of education, she says, have devolved  into cumbersome catchphrases and inaccessible technical jargon: One of the most important things in all of these methods we use is to plant hope  in peoples hearts. We teach in ways that get them, students, parents, and the  barefoot teachers, to realize you can move out of these terrible situations if we  are willing to make the effort, and we try to help as much as possible. The rest  of the developing world should open its eyes and look around it and see where 
Chapter Three the areas of need are, and focus their teachers energies towards addressing  those needs. And also, be aware that when you become too highly organized,  you lose. You lose a lot. PROMISES THAT ARE HARD TO KEEP On the fourteenth of September 2005, the heads of state of the members of the  United Nations gathered in New York to endorse the Millennium Development Goals, referred to as the MDGs. In essence, the MDGs represent eight  aspirational targets intended to improve the lives of billions of people in Developing World countries by 2015. More than a decade later, it appears that  those signatory nations are still committed to achieving them even if the actual quality of life of the very poor has not improved much in material terms. The second Millennium Development Goal was a commitment to the  provision of free, universal primary education. It is hard to argue with the  very real impact that would come through the realization of this goal. This  is especially true for those children who are trapped in a poverty that they  cannot escape. However, enacting policies targeted at moving the needle on  this single social policy leveruniversal, free primary educationhas come  with a tremendous cost. Indias commitment to Education for All, the governments response to  Goal Two, has resulted in a massive teacher shortage across the country, but  a shortage that is most acute in the poorest and most remote communities.  Some estimates suggest that close to twenty percent of the teaching jobs in  government-run primary schools sit vacant. Put another way, there is a massive collective shortage of qualified primary teachers right across India. What the figures obscure is the fact that some regions in India face an even  greater shortage of teachersareas like Bihar and Jharkhand, where most of  West Bengals brickfield workers hail from. These areas are home to about  one-third of Indias billion-plus population. There is a shortage of more than  twenty-five percent of the necessary primary and secondary teachers in the  government-run schools. Such stark numbers paint a bleak picture of the likelihood of getting qualified teachers into the brickfield schools. SERIAL MIGRATIONS IMPACT   ON CHILD DEVELOPMENT Children are the most unrecognized and vulnerable group among internal migrants. Children migrate independently or as dependents when their families  migrate. Migrant children often lose access to basic entitlements, miss out on 

A Modicum of Opportunity in the Haze of the Brickfields	 31 schooling, and are subject to health and security risks. Child migrants forgo  the critical inputs necessary for their physical, psychological, and intellectual  development during their formative years. This has an irreversible impact on  their emotional and cognitive development. Migration delays school entry, denies or interrupts schooling, increases  the number of children dropping out and, ultimately, leads to child labor.  Child migrants are found to be working in sectors such as construction, brick  manufacturing, salt making, sugar cane harvesting, stone quarrying, working  on plantations, and fishing. In these sectors, they are an integral part of the  labor processes, which benefit from their small hands and light bodies. Payment of wages at work sites on a piece-rate basis allows children to work for  long hours as unregistered and invisible labor in family labor units. Being  constantly on the move, migrant children face the disruption of friendships  and they lack a peer support network. These social conditions hamper their  sense of security and familiarity and, furthermore, expose them to risks of drug  abuse and sexual exploitation. When they do attempt to return to school, reintegrating migrant children poses a serious challenge since migration-induced  dropouts account for a large segment of the out-of-school youth population. Research across India is beginning to piece together a picture of an increasingly mobile labor class. Addressing the risks faced by this population,  especially those risks felt by the children of migrants, must be made a key  priority in order for India to meet its development targets. Source-based  interventions can protect children from the greatest risks of migration and  ensure that no family is forced to remove their children from school due to  migratory pressures. SMALL INTERVENTIONS,   IMMEASURABLE POSSIBILITY No one seems to be delusional with regards to the impact that the brickfield  schoolsstaffed with non-certified Barefoot Teacherswill make. The  schools, with their teachers, are only a small intervention intended to slow  down the ever-expanding numbers of the illiterate and poor in India. Nevertheless, if you spend a day at a brickfield school with the Barefoot Teachers,  you are left with the impression that, in the area of educational opportunity, it  is through these initiatives that India might have a real chance of ensuring that  the fundamental right to education, which is guaranteed by its constitution, is  translated from paper into practice. Jon noted: We are realistic with what we expect. We like to think we are giving them a bit  of extra strength and that, perhaps, we are opening a few doors for them. We are 
Chapter Three certainly opening the possibility of literacy, which, in a few cases, may lead into  other types of work. In the end, I am content in what we are trying to do because  even these children are entitled to some kind of education. It is no longer acceptable to refuse to provide them with one; an education. A visit to the brickfield schools can offer hope that these kinds of initiatives  will help ensure the fundamental right to primary education for our youngest  citizens, many of whom have been historically disadvantaged and who, in the  absence of practical interventions, are destined to endure a life in poverty. Largely unheard of and seemingly unheralded, the Barefoot Teachers who  teach far away from the comfort of classrooms take literacy and numeracy  to the doorstep of the underprivileged and marginalized in the brickfield  schools. In doing so, they demonstrate that small steps forward are not only  imaginable but also possible. Jon spoke about the patience that initiatives like  the brickfield schools require: One aim that I have, personally, is that as long as there are children in the  brickfields who do not have access to school, we need to find ways to run more  schools in more brickfields, and prepare the teachers who will have to work in  them. But, I know we cant do it all right now. CREATING OPPORTUNITIES   TO FIND SUCCESS Globally, much has happened since the United Nations formulated the Millennium Development Goals. However, in some regards, very little has  changed in terms of substantially realizing those goals and progressing beyond words and into concrete implementation. All children deserve an equal  opportunity to succeed in life. Education is a powerful driver of development  and one of the strongest instruments for reducing poverty and boosting shared  prosperity. When children go to school and learn, they create opportunities,  transforming and empowering their lives and their communities. Harnessing the power of education, in close cooperation with other social  sector levers, is key to addressing the damning effects of poverty. No nation can claim to have succeeded if it has not educated its most vulnerable  citizens. Not only is formal education important in reducing the effects of  poverty, but it also plays a key role in an individuals overall well-being.  The power of education, said the indomitable Nelson Mandela as cited in  Strauss, 2013, n.p., is that it extends beyond the development of skills we  need for economic success. It can contribute to nation-building and reconciliation. Nowhere is formal education more impactful than during a childs  early years Ramey  Campbell, 1991.

A Modicum of Opportunity in the Haze of the Brickfields	 33 The staggering interrelationships between child labor and education are not  hard to find. In India alone, for example, the Office of the United Nations  Special Envoy for Global Education Brown, 2012 estimates that: 	 115 million child laborers are involved in hazardous work 	 61 million children are shut out of primary schools 	 34 million adolescent girls are not in school 	 16 million children with disabilities are not in school. Education is regarded as a crucial component of any effective effort to  eliminate child labor, a frequent correlate of familial poverty Bigelow   Peterson, 2002; Okyere, 2012. Relative deprivation, in terms of familial income, can yield absolute deprivation in terms of a childs development and capacity for success Sen,  1999. Arguably, child labor is the result of many interlinked factors Okyere,  2012. Childrens participation in the labor force is varied and volatile, and  adjusts in response to changing market and social conditions. Interventions  that are intended to put an end to child labor are matched by the flexibility of  the large, global, unprotected, potential child labor force International Labor  Conference, 2002. Poverty and social exclusion, labor mobility, discrimination, and a lack of adequate social protection and educational opportunities  all influence child labor outcomes. Far too many children, through no fault of their own, cannot access the  education they need to improve their life circumstances. Abject poverty is  more than not having money; it is a form of social exclusion. Regrettably,  it is sometimes even sustained by society through child labor practices since  they offer short-term economic benefits for a country and privileges for a few.  However, not only is this an abuse of human rights, it is also an immense  waste of national human potential. Researchers and policymakers recognize that education can make a significant and long-lasting difference in the lives of children who experience  poverty Barnett, 1998; Brooks-Gunn, 2003; Karoly et al., 1998; Stebbins   Knitzer, 2007. However, an enduring challenge has been identifying ways in  which to create concrete learning opportunities for some of the poorest children in the Developing World. Brickfield schools and the Barefoot Teacher  Training Program are responding to that challenge. Amid the harsh toil of life in some of Indias brickfields, a few nongovernmental organizations NGOs are working to improve the seemingly  inevitable future for these young children. A handful of NGOs have managed  to get permission from the brick factory owners to establish schools in the  brickfields so that the undocumented child laborers can have a chance to receive an education for at least a portion of the day.
Chapter Four Beacons of Hope Twenty  Years after Genocide When I boarded the first leg of my flight to Rwanda, I felt fairly confident in my  research plan even though I realized that the complexities of a post-genocidal  reality could never be predicted, especially by an outsider. Though my research  approach had been approved by an institutional research ethics board and was  backed by a funding body, I knew, based on my experiences with about ten  previous qualitative research studies, that I would most likely have to make  some minor adjustments on-site once the interview process began Gay, Mills   Airasian, 2012. I was aware that the requirements of research tend to become more complex and demanding in international collaborations Green   et al., 2004; Hennink, 2008. I was prepared for most things that might come  my way. Or so I thought. Examining the unknown, not just conceptually, but in encountering lives  lived in wholly different circumstances, is part of what attracts me to extending my curiosities beyond my own national borders. And, obviously, one  does not embark on studying life on Rwanda with any sense that it will be just  another research study. I had a particularly unsettling feeling about this upcoming journey, despite my previous experience with international research  and data collection, analysis, and interpretation. As I checked my bags, I tried to attribute my uncertainties to the long hiatus between the emails that my Rwandan host, Olivier, and I had exchanged.  In the two months leading up to my departure, I sent him almost half a dozen  emails, and had heard nothing by way of reply to many of the questions I had.  Then, about thirty-six hours before my flight was scheduled to leave Winnipeg, I received an email from Olivier: Nothing to worry about. All is good. I will meet you at the Kigali airport when  you land. Have a safe flight.
Chapter Four His four-sentence response did not leave me with a sense of confidence or  comfort that there was, in fact, Nothing to worry about. THE 1994 RWANDAN GENOCIDE On the night of April 6, 1994, two surface-to-air missiles were fired at the  Dassault Falcon 50 private jet carrying Juvnal Habyarimana, the president of  Rwanda, and the Burundian president, Cyprien Ntaryamira, along with seven  other officials and a three-man French crew, as the jet approached Kigalis  airport after peace negotiations in Tanzania. All of them died in the crash. Within hours of the assassination, Hutu extremists began slaughtering  Tutsis and Hutu moderates. Over the ensuing months, the genocide gathered  momentum and an estimated 800,000 people died, a group made up of the  majority ethnic groups of Tutsis and Hutus but that also included members of  the minority Twa ethnic group. Eventually, the Rwandan Patriotic Front the  RPF, led by Paul Kagames rebel forces, defeated the Hutu government and  seized power by defeating the civilian and military authorities responsible for  the killing campaign in July. According to numerous reports, as the RPF soldiers advanced south down  the eastern side of the country and then swept west, they drove military, militia, and other assailants from the region and so made it possible for Tutsi to  emerge from their hiding places in the swamps and bush. The RPF soldiers  saved tens of thousands from annihilation and relentlessly pursued those  whom they thought to be guilty of genocide. In their drive for victory, the  RPF killed thousands. Exact numbers may be impossible to know, but the  RPF likely killed tens of thousands during the four months of combat from  April to July and into September. As the summer faded into the fall of 1994, Rwanda was barely a carcass  of a nation that had been ravaged by genocide. With hundreds of thousands  dead, millions displaced, and the psyches and hearts of its people broken, the  country was a desolate place. Many in the international community held little  hope that life would ever normalize again for Rwandans. The carnage had  laid bare for the world the complicities of Rwandas systems of governmental and social institutionslike schoolsto promote the kinds of divisions  that were unleashed on the evening of April 6 with a sickening brutality. The  genocide and its aftermath tore away any semblance of trust that may have  existed among Rwandans. The survivors of the genocideTutsi, Hutu, and  Twawere demoralized and divided. When the new government took control, its primary concern was to guarantee that lethal extremism, fed through the orchestrated colonial rhetoric of 

Beacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 37 ethnic division, would never be repeated. Security and stability were the first  concerns, coupled soon thereafter with basic humanitarian reliefshelter  and foodas attention then slowly shifted to improvements in health, the  economy, and education. Education was regarded as one of the primary levers  that could be used to build a new national identity, an identity as Rwandans  instead of as Hutu, Tutsi, or Twa. Rwandans aimed to create a school system  that would build a nation. They could not have known that, twenty years after  the genocide, they would still be working to climb out of the shadows of the  trauma that had enveloped the country. A RESEARCH PLAN IN PLACE Hello. Professor? A smiling face greeted me and a man extended his gracious hand. Yes, hello. I replied. You must be Olivier? I asked. Yes, sir. Very nice to meet you. Olivier continued smiling as he ushered  forward his colleague, who had been standing a few feet back. His grin was  equally welcoming. This is my colleague, Christian. He is the chair of the  Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective. As I collected my first bag, Christian explained that he and Olivier would  be riding with me on the hotel shuttle bus so that we could discuss the particulars of my research study. Through a series of emails, I had arranged with Olivier, the clerk of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective, to come to Kigali, Rwanda, and to collect  data over eight days, working with individuals who had survived the 1994  Rwandan genocide and who had gone on to become teachers. My research interest, I had explained, was to examine the ways in which teachers who had survived atrocity conceived of peace and committed themselves to peace education. There had been limited communication between us after the initial emails  approving tentative plans. However, in the few early ones where we did  connect, Olivier verified that fourteen members of the Rwandan Genocide  Teachers Collective had agreed to participate in the study. He confirmed  that I should plan to come to Kigali in late April 2014. Early April would be  too busy, Olivier wrote, since the official commemoration of the twentieth  anniversary of the genocide would be in full force. We have arranged for five people to be interviewed on Saturday and five  more on Sunday, Christian said as we squeezed into the small minivan that  served as the hotels shuttle bus. Sure, I replied. Ten will be just fine. While this was not the number of  participants I had initially hoped for, I was content to know that there were, in 
Chapter Four fact, ten confirmed interviews. I was very tired as I had spent close to twentyfour hours en route. As I waited to check in at the hotel, Christian asked if we could have dinner  the next night to get better acquainted and to work out some other details. Over dinner tomorrow, we can discuss a number of topics related to your  work and try to figure out how you will interview all of them, Christian noted. I dont think that will be a problem. I have interviewed larger groups, I  replied, attempting to assuage any questions that Christian might have about  my research abilities. I can put together an interview schedule and I can give it to you tomorrow  evening, I said. Then maybe you can let each person know what date and  time they should come? Christian, who was still sporting the same welcoming smile, replied, Oh  no, Professor. They are all coming at the same time, five on Saturday and five  on Sunday. It will be in the afternoon each day since they have community  service on Saturday and church on Sunday. I responded, somewhat reluctantly, Okay. Five and five, and in the afternoon, I guess, it is. It was getting very late and I could feel that I was getting  more tired, and slightly irritable. I paused and wondered what had happened  to the study protocol I had planned, which was, of course, one that they had  previously seemed willing to facilitate. TREPIDATION Over dinner, I learned from Olivier and Christian that the individual interviews should become two focus group sessions out of necessity. It is simply easier, Olivier offered, if they come together at the same  time. It is more comfortable for them this way. Its what we need. You understand, of course? Yes, I understand, I responded. I did not think I could protest given the  timing of the interviewsin three daysand the fact that my hosts had facilitated my access to the Collectives members. As we talked about life in contemporary post-genocide Rwanda, they informed me that we could not, in fact, use their office space to hold the interviews. We cannot use your offices? I asked. Christian smiled and disclosed that the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective did not have a real office, but rather, the organization operated with a  post office box and a website. We can just use your hotel room. Okay? Olivier quickly added in a presumptive manner.

Beacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 39 He did not wait for my reply. We told them to just come to the hotel.  Dont worry, Professor. Nothing to worry about. We will be there also. We  can help you. Yeah, sure. I guess so, I said. My thoughts began to race as I envisioned  seating guests in a small room that was comprised of a bed, a desk, and maybe  two chairsI wasnt sure if I was remembering that correctly. I had just come  up with a tentative seating arrangement when I remembered that Olivier and  Christian would also be coming. Seven. Plus me in the room. Eight of us? Do I have that number correct?  I asked. Christian and Olivier looked amused at my confusion. No, Christian said. The ten participants include usOlivier and myself.  Five are coming each day. And, so with you, that makes six. He held up six  fingers, and looked at me. Between the jet lag, and what I thought were the initial side effects of the  antimalarial medication, my mind was spinning. Got it. Five plus me in the  room; six, I said. They simply smiled and nodded their heads. I finally had it correct. After dinner, we walked back to my hotel, chatting about European football clubs. However, my thoughts wandered. I wondered what other researchers did when confronted with similar situations. What do you do when you  are informed of significant changes that immediately require you to change  your research approach and design? As I lay awake in bed that night, still dealing with the effects of jet lag,  I realized I had six days to fill up without any interviews to hold. I decided  to contact the hotels front desk in the morning to inquire about booking a  driver. Just as I became content with my new plan, the electricity went out. My room was pitch black. Load sharing, maybe? But, all the same, a blackout. When I checked in, I thought I heard the staff mention something about  Kigali dealing with rolling power outages, and some vague reference to the  electricity being cut off starting at ten oclock. Dark until six in the morning, someone had said. Nothing to worry  about. Just pitch black. The few Rwandans I had met so far were certainly trying to impress upon  me the fact that there was nothing to worry about. I tried to fall asleep but I could not. Instead, I lay awake in the dark, my  body denying the time zone switch and my ears registering the determined  sounds of Kigalis mosquitoes. My mind began to wander. Malaria? Six people in this small room? No electricity for the next eight hours? Really; what  had I gotten myself into? Just as the sun started to rise outside my window,  I finally fell asleep.
Chapter Four KIGALI MEMORIAL CENTRE I had planned to visit the Kigali Memorial Genocide Centre at the beginning  of my trip. Most of the information I had read online mentioned the profound  emotional impact that this Centre had on its visitors. I knew I had to go. I asked my driver, Emmanuel, if he could wait outside for an hour and  a half, the time I estimated it would to take me to visit the Memorial. Emmanuel pleasantly agreed, and told me that he would wait in the shade by his  car just in case I needed a little more, or a little less, time. I arrived that morning knowing that the crowds would grow throughout  the day, as Rwandans and others commemorated the twentieth anniversary  of the 1994 genocide during Kwibuka20. Kwibuka means remember  in Kinyarwanda, the official language of Rwanda, and Kwibuka20 was designed as a global framework for activities, events, communities and people  participating in the 2014 commemoration of the Rwandan atrocities. I rented an audioguide and wandered around the memorial. I was struck by  the strange serenity of a place dedicated to horrific acts, a feeling amplified  by the calm voice narrating the events of the genocide. The remains of more  than a quarter of a million people, gathered from different districts of Kigali,  were buried in the cemetery of the memorial site. The grounds were neatly groomed, free of litter, and noticeably linear. On  this particular day, the sunshine illuminated the massive gray slabs of concrete that covered the tombs. It felt like a sacred space. The Kigali Genocide  Memorial contains oral testimonies collected from genocide survivors. There  are documents, publications, and human bones and skulls on display. Weapons such as machetes, clubs, and swords used during the genocide have also  been included. The Memorial exhibits rosaries, photographs, identity cards,  shoes, and clothes. These artifacts serve as graphic reminders of the lives that  were suddenly extinguished during the deadly conflict. For me, perhaps the  most solemn moment was when I stood in front of the display that revealed  row upon row of family photos of the victims: a photo-memoir of family  bonds and love eviscerated in 100 days of carnage. I stood in a sobering silence, trying not to stare at the images. But I did. As  I looked at them, not a single thought went through my characteristically busy  mind. I just gazed at the thousands of photos selected by family members to  memorialize their losses. When I exited the memorial, I noticed a large, well-dressed crowd gathered  at the entrance. Some people held flowers and many wept inconsolably. Making a point not to gawk at their sorrowful exhibition, I walked past the crowd  and made my way back to my taxi.

Beacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 41 Emmanuel, who had been lounging in the backseat of his cab, hopped out,  smiled at me, and said, Right on time. Lots of people crying. Shall we go? Sounds good, I simply replied. KIGALIS NEIGHBORHOODS On the ride back from the Kigali Memorial Centre, Emmanuel and I agreed that  he would be my on-call driver for the duration of my trip. We exchanged phone  numbers and decided that the next day, he would guide me around Kigali. The time that we spent together gave me the opportunity to hear his story.  I asked him some questions, switching between English and French, which  seemed natural for both of us. Mostly, though, I was fully absorbed as Emmanuel revealed some of his firsthand experiences of living through the  genocide, and then of surviving in a post-genocide world. He had been one of countless children who lost most of their family members  to horrific atrocities. When he was fourteen, the threat of the genocide subsided,  but Emmanuel decided not to return to school. Instead, he began a transient life.  Emmanuel tried to go back to school once, as a sixteen-year-old, but, as he put  it, he couldnt do school. Going to school was impossible, he said. It was  just not possible to return. Il tait tout simplement trop difficile de revenir. Emmanuels story resonated with Kings 2014 words: As students returned to post-genocide schools, they faced a multitude of challenges p. 111.  It was obvious to me that Emmanuel had experienced overwhelming trauma.  For him, formal schooling ended at the outset of the genocide. As we talked, it became clear that Emmanuel was, in many ways, still  living through the aftereffects of the genocide. King 2014 estimated that  More than 1.2 million children were left orphaned, representing 16 percent  of the entire population, or nearly one-third of all children p. 115. Emmanuel had been one of those childrenchildren who were now the adults  responsible for rebuilding their country. While we stopped at a roadside cart to purchase drinks, Emmanuel disclosed that his dreams had ended with the genocide. He had not held a steady  job since then. He worked in construction, then in a hotel, did some manual  labor, and now had settled on driving a taxi, at least until something better  came along. Are you married? he inquired. Yes. And I have three children, I replied. I would like to marry one day, Emmanuel said. He smiled. Then he  paused for a moment, and turned the conversation to his two younger sisters.
Chapter Four His youngest sister had died in 1996an outcome of the genocide, he said. I wanted to know how she had died, but I did not want to ask. I wanted to  try to understand Emmanuels story, but I was loath to become an intrusive  researcher scrutinizing a subject. I chose not to ask anything at all about his sisters, and we simply stood in  silence next to his cab. A few moments later, he told me that his sister had  succumbed to une maladie du gnocide. A Google translation would never  convey the soberness with which Emmanuel uttered that phrase: a sickness  from the genocide. Numerous reports Human Rights Watch, 1996 identified that the Interahamwe, the Hutu paramilitary organization that had rampaged during the  1994 genocide, had used rape as one of the most atrocious forms of murder  and torture. Although not a new weapon to terrorize and degrade individuals during conflicts, the use of rape as a means to achieve the obliteration of  Rwandas Tutsi population was starkly depraved Human Rights Watch.  During the Rwandan genocide, people who were HIV positive were used as  weapons to inflict a long and lingering trauma on its victims. Perhaps it was not the trauma of wartime rape or the resulting HIV that  had taken the life of Emmanuels sister. Maybe she had gotten sick from  something else related to the genocide. At least, this is what I tried to console  myself with as we stood in the morning heat sipping our cool Fantas. As  much as I wanted to, I did not believe the story that I was trying to tell myself. After staring at the expanse of the banana plantation in the nearby valley, I changed the subject back to Emmanuels struggles to find permanent  employment. While many economic indicators suggest that the quality of  life in Rwanda has improved, estimates suggest that close to 45 percent of  Rwandans currently live in poverty, compared with an estimated 57 percent  in 2006 African Development Bank, 2012. Making idle small talk about  chronic unemployment was just easier to chat about than the depth of human  suffering that his sisters and he had endured. ONE BED, A FEW CHAIRS,   AND TWO FOCUS GROUPS The five focus group participants arrived en masse each day; five on Saturday  and five on Sunday. I had purchased a cell phone and had given my number  to Olivier and Christian. They texted me when they arrived at the hotels front  entrance: We are here. I headed downstairs and through the green grounds  of the hotel. Security made them wait until I arrived at the gate. As I approached them, I was greeted mostly with the civility of firm handshakes and 

Beacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 43 warm smiles, but also with a few hugs, like those I typically give to relatives  on special occasions or, sometimes, to very close friends. I just accepted it as  this: life in Rwanda. People hug. Once inside in my room, we worked together to rearrange the furniture  so that the six of us could all sit comfortably. I handed out the Informed  Consent forms and pens, and reminded my guests that they did not have to  participate. Even if you do participate, I told them, you do not have to say  anything. They smiled and nodded their heads. I told them about the member-checking process and explained that I would  email each one of them a copy of the focus group transcript. I tried to reassure  them they could withdraw from the study at any point. I took more smiling head nods as being a group, yes. And then we talked. As I listened, they transitioned from guests in my  cramped hotel room and into the studys participants. The ten participant teacherseight men and two women, all members of  the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collectivehad been in Rwanda in 1994,  survived the genocide, and had subsequently become teachers. As a group,  they taught across the grade spectrum in primary and secondary schools. The  majority traveled for at least one hour by bus to participate in the study. One  of the teachers, named Thierry, had traveled from a town near the RwandaTanzania border, a bus ride of almost three hours. I was ever more grateful  for their commitment. COMMITTING TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE One of the most compelling reasons I had for conducting the study was to  find out how the survivors of such barbaric acts could muster the strength,  commitment, and compassion to become teachers, peace educators, and to  face the children andor grandchildren, in some cases, of those who had  perpetrated the genocide. There was also a dearth of research on the factors  that motivate some trauma survivors to take on the emotionally taxing role of  teacher. No studies to date had explored teachers needing to face the progeny  of their perpetrators and to teach them how to peacefully coexist. The reasons why people choose the teaching professions above other  career options has remained a popular area of research since at least the  mid-1970s, if not longer. It was 1975 when Dan Lortie published the book  Schoolteacher: A Sociological Study. Lortie and many others have identified  vocation, a sense of calling, as a key motivating factor for those choosing  the teaching profession. Given everything my study participants had endured,  had responding to a vocational call led them to become teachers?
Chapter Four I quickly learned that, while a normative understanding of vocation a form of public service that generates lasting personal and professional  fulfillment to those who offer it Hansen, 1995was one aspect of the  Rwandan teachers motivation, there were other reasons that they became  teachers. As Sonia commented, teaching was an extension of who she was,  what she and other Rwandans had endured, and what she could offer to  build a new Rwanda. Some of their comments about talent, desire, and interest, taken at face value, might resemble any other teachers remarks, but  the shared desperate context of genocide underpinned every statement the  participants uttered. Sonia: I decided to become a teacher because I felt I had a talent to teach. I am  a genocide survivor and the 1994 genocide is my story, and the story of my  country. This is why I wanted to teach. For Eric, surviving the genocide played a vital role in his decision to become a teacher. He said he could remember first thinking about becoming a  teacher while he was in primary school right after the genocide ended. As he  was completing his first university degree, he made his final commitment and  chose to become a teacher. Eric said emphatically, I knew teaching is what  I needed to do. It was clear that Eric, Sonia, and the other members of the Rwanda Genocide Teaching Project felt a sense of calling or duty to become teachers. This  calling, though, seemed much larger in scope than one focused on individual  fulfillment. It was evidently tied to building a peace-oriented post-genocide  Rwanda. They believed they could contribute to setting a nations path toward reconciliation. David: After the bad history of the genocide against the Tutsi, I wanted to participate in building our Rwanda as a teacher. I wanted to build a good future for  Rwandans, a good future for the world, and a world without genocide; a world  without any kind of violence, and a world without any kind of injustice. In Davids mind, this was the work to which Rwandan teachers were  required to commit if they wanted to help rebuild a nation and to create a national identity of being a Rwandan in the minds of schoolchildren. Like many  teachers in very diverse social contexts, these teachers reminded me of the  work by Giroux and McLaren 1986, who identified the capacity of teachers  to act as transformative intellectuals. David and his colleagues believed  it necessary to exercise forms of intellectual and pedagogical practice that  attempt to insert teaching and learning directly into the political sphere beBeacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 45 cause formal education represents both a struggle for meaning and a struggle  over power relations Giroux  McLaren, 1986, p. 215. A number of researchers for example, see Bar-Tal  Rosen, 2009; Harris, 2004; Reardon, 1997, among others suggest that a wide spectrum of  post-conflict educational initiatives have been adopted around the world as  a means of reconciling estranged communities. The initiatives range from  peace education, curricular reforms, and the reshaping of historical narratives, to the development of integrated schools geared toward reconciliation.  Regardless of the specific initiative, research demonstrates that in order to  alter pedagogical practices from supporting state-sanctioned forms of oppression, teachers need to adopt an agenda of peace education that is built on a  framework of justice. Jacob: I wondered what my contribution could be. How could I help children to  become good citizens and to live in country where there is peace? That is when  I decided what my contribution would be: to repair Rwanda, a country that had  suffered through genocide. I thought I could teach children how to live in a  country where they could develop without the fear of being persecuted. I wanted  to live in a country without any more atrocities, and, by becoming a teacher, I  might help to achieve this. It was clear that these teachers believed in the power of formal education  to build a peaceful nation, and that they wanted to participate directly in that  process. Perhaps not surprisingly, such beliefs align with the work of Reardon  1997, pp. 3132 who proposed that teachers can enable students to renounce the institutions of war and replace it with institutions more consistent  with the visions and values of peace and justice. Bar-Tal and Rosen 2009  suggest that teachers play an important role in socializing and persuading  entire generations to make peace a priority. So, the members of the Rwandan  Genocide Teachers Collective were not the first to think of themselves as  effecting such changes as they embarked on such an enormous task. THE IMPACT OF SCHOOLING PRIOR TO 1994 More than a century ago, Emile Durkheim 18971951 rejected the idea that  teachers could transform society and resolve its ills. Durkheim argued that the  enterprise of formal education is only the image and reflection of the current  state of any society. Durkheim offered a view that education was a conservative social enterprise, one that imitates and reproduces, not one that creates  an alternative vision of society.
Chapter Four While some unapologetic optimists may dismiss Durkheims claim outright, it is important to note that, throughout history, there have been obvious  instances that have highlighted the intersection of politics and education,  wherein various dictatorial and authoritarian regimes have used the education system and its teachers as political pawns to reinforce broad social and  political structures that can be used as levers to stoke conflict Davies, 2010;  Vongalis-Macrow, 2007. In Nazi Germany, for example, newly elected  Adolf Hitler almost immediately made changes to school curriculums and  to teacher preparation. Education in racial awareness began, and children  were constantly reminded of their racial duties to the national community.  Biology, along with political education, became compulsory. In biology  classes, students learned about worthy and unworthy races, and about  breeding and hereditary disease, in order to cement the superiority of Aryans  over all of the lesser races Wegner, 2002. Hitler saw formal schooling as an  important lever that could cast the image of Aryan superiority in the minds  of Germanys youth. This is an important point to understand because of one rampant presumption too easily adopted by teachers and teacher-educators: that all teachers,  by virtue of choosing that vocation, have an instinctual moral compass that  drives them to be innately good, expert, and honorable. History tells us that  the teaching workforce is just as likely to be infected by the apparatuses of  state-sponsored manipulation as anyone else. In fact, the teachers in my study spoke firsthand of how the pre-1994  Rwandan government manipulated the education system, specifically its curriculum and teachers, to promote fear and hatred among children Freedman  et al., 2008. As two of the teachers noted: Thierry: In 1994, the school system was a divisive system and some of the  teachers created the divisions. Xavier: The curriculum was taught through the wheel of politicians. The history  of Rwanda was presented to students in ways that mirrored a political propaganda that led to an ideology that endorsed the kind of hatred that could lead  to genocide. As shocking as it sounds, Bird 2003, p. 36 recalled that in pre-1994, A  senior Ministry of Education official in Rwanda stated that in a mathematics  lesson it would be common for a teacher to say, You have five Tutsis, you  kill three, how many are left? This is a graphic illustration of fostering division through teaching practices. The school system before the genocide,  Christian said, was based on hatred and discrimination. It was not inclusive.  Some benefited, while others were told they could not amount to much. 

Beacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 47 Over the course of our conversations, the teachers offered examples of what  the pre-1994 Rwandan school system was like. Many of the illustrations that they provided mirrored the conflict-provoking  manifestations of education that Bush and Saltarelli 2000 proposed. In pregenocide Rwanda, there was: 	 A history of an unequal distribution of education wherein some were denied access, while others were not. 	 A pattern of using education as a means to cultural repression or ethnocide. 	 An intentional use of education to serve the political goal of manipulating history. 	 A widespread mandated use of class texts that reinforced ethnic stereotypes  and bias. 	 A deliberate plan to use formal schooling as a means to decrease self-worth  or to encourage scapegoating. 	 The systematic use of the education system to reinforce inequality, low  self-esteem, and ethnic stereotypes. Through these mechanisms and others, the Rwandan education system  was used as an implement to stoke conflict and violence in ways that exacerbated, rather than addressed, the ugly history of ethnic divisions created  via colonization. The colonial powers had effectively ingrained in Rwandans the blind acceptance of the Hamitic myth to control them. Acceptance of the myth created a division among Rwandans based on the illusion that a superior group  of nomadic invaders, the Tutsi, an ethnic group the colonizers claimed looked  more European-like, had migrated to Rwanda and were destined to rule over  the more primitive Hutu who existed simply to serve them Van den Bersselaar, 2006. A series of political regimescolonial and Rwandanused the  school curriculum and teachers to promote views that led Hutus and Tutsis to  perceive each other as enemies Osler  Starkey, 2010. Specifically, Eric noted that, prior to the spring of 1994, the history of  Rwanda that we taught was done through the wheels of politicians and it mirrored a propaganda laced with an ideology of genocide. Research focused on post-conflict states is increasingly acknowledging  that the wrong kind of education aggravates tensions between different ethnic groups. Education can drive a wedge between people instead of uniting  them Bush  Saltarelli, 2000; Davies, 2005a, 2005b, 2010; Osler  Starkey,  2010; Vongalis-Macrow, 2007. This line of research is significant because  formal schooling is generally regarded as a panacea for a broad spectrum of  social ills.
Chapter Four Yet, nave assumptions abound that formal state-sanctioned education approved curriculum and trained and certified teacherscan only positively  shape the understandings, attitudes and, ultimately, the behaviors of individuals. Such beliefs ignore the evidence that formal schooling can produce  negative and harmful effects. In fact, education has been used to exacerbate  ethnic hostilities and tensions through uneven access to education, the use of  education as a cultural weapon, the manipulation of history, curriculum, and  textbooks for political purposes, and the segregation of education to ensure  inequality and stereotyping. In the case of Rwanda, these teachers made it unfailingly clear: formal education can have a destructive impact on intergroup  relations Bush  Saltarelli, 2000. IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE GENOCIDE In the aftermath of the genocide, as Xavier recalled, many Rwandan children were taught in temporary schools that were set up by United Nations  volunteers King, 2014. Volunteers staffed a lot of the schools, Xavier  remarked. Sometimes the teachers were Africans who had come from  away to help. Other times it was U.N. volunteers who taught, but they did  not understand us and what we had been through. In addition, for many  Rwandans, especially those who lived outside Kigali, there was little to no  access to government-run schools for a number of years in the immediate  period after 1994. Eric: After the 1994 genocide against the Tutsiswhen I was in primarywe  had no teachers. Many of my teachers were killed during the genocide; they  were some of the victims. A few days prior to the focus groups, Christian had recounted that there  was no school for him to attend after recovering from his injuries upon being  rescued by the Rwandan Patriotic Front. The RPF soldiers rescued him after  he had pretended to be dead for days. He explained that he spent almost two years out of school before he was able  to return. I just couldnt go, Christian said. I had too many bad thoughts,  too many bad things had happenedeven before the genocide against the  Tutsi. School was not a place where I felt like I belonged anymore. He explained that once the rampaging ended, he wandered among refugee  camps, sometimes also living with various relatives who had survived the  genocide. None of these places provided the stability and safety that he felt  he needed in order to focus on his studies. He simply survived for two years,  etching out a life.

Beacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 49 Recollections like Christians are consistent with the literature on the immediate context in post-1994 Rwanda. Earnest 2013 suggested that the  Rwandan education system was devastated during the genocide. By the end  of the conflict, almost two-thirds of the countrys schools were destroyed or  severely damaged, and of the teachers who survived the atrocities, few were  actually qualified to teach Earnest, 2013. The education system was particularly targeted during the genocide; teachers as educated, thinking people,  were singled out for assassination. Sadly, teachers were both victims of and  perpetrators of genocide in state and church schools Obura, 2005; WalkerKeleher, 2006. Until I interviewed these teachers, I did not realize the extent to which the  teaching workforce in Rwanda had not only been systematically victimized,  but also how some had been the perpetrators of the ideology of genocide.  More alarming is that I was unaware of how hard it could be for child survivors to feel safe in schools when schools were previously sites of hatred  and division. THE RISK OF TEACHING THE   OFFICIAL HISTORICAL NARRATIVE I have little doubt that the teachers I interviewed were committed to moving  away from the artificial classification systemone that had been imposed  by European colonizers and had become ingrained in how Rwandans saw  themselves and each otheras belonging to the social constructions labeled  as Tutsi, Hutu, or Twa. Instead, they stressed that there was one nation, one  people, and they said repeatedly: We are Rwandans. We are one people.  The clear ethnic divisions between Hutu and Tutsi were etched into the pre1994 schools textbooks, and minds of many of the teachers. Yet, as I listened, I was struck by reference to these specific categorizations  when referring to the events of the genocide. It was difficult to describe it as  anything but the genocide against the Tutsis. Olivier: Genocide destroys the minds of people, those who participated, those  who did not and those who come after. That is what we learned from the 1994  genocide against the Tutsis. Christian, Sonia, Raisa, and Gervais all emphasized that students needed to  know about the root cause of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsis. In fact,  it was clear to me that, as a group, the members of Rwanda Teaching Genocide Project supported the officially sanctioned labels of the ethnic groups  involved in the 1994 genocide.
Chapter Four I never asked if they were, or had been prior to 1994, formally identified as  Tutsi or otherwise. The subject never came up, and, given their emphasis  on the pathway forwardone without the old ethnic divisionsI chose not  to inquire. Yet, in the context of their commitment to teaching their students  to be one people, it seemed paradoxical to identify the victims as singularly  being the Tutsis, thereby promulgating the ethnic divisions among Rwandans  with the fact that Tutsis stood alone as the victims. In her book, From Classrooms to Conflict in Rwanda, Elisabeth King 2014  raised the implications of the stigmatization and devaluation of Hutu suffering  both during and after the genocide. As one Hutu woman told King p. 117, I  lost three-quarters of my family during the war. But we Hutu dont have any  right to say that we lost people. King contends that, in general, Rwandans have  simply found new ways to use these old ethnic distinctions: To the government, survivors refer to Tutsi and perpetrators to Hutu p. 117. Arguably, there may not be a single, identifiable root cause that can explain the depth and breadth of the atrocities committed in the 1994 genocide.  The conventional view is that the 1994 genocide was built on a festering hatred between the Hutu and Tutsi, a hatred that was embedded into Rwandan  society centuries ago by a series of colonial powers. The various colonizers,  Germany and Belgium, enacted mechanisms of oppression, categorizing people along ethnic lines to create both a monarchist class and a subjugated class.  Over the centuries, colonial oppressors stoked and fanned deep-seated hatred  among Rwandans until the point of combustion. It would not take much to  cause an explosion, and on the night of April 6, a spark was provided. Such a view, however, does not fully explain why, in some areas that were  almost entirely populated by Hutu, Hutu slaughtered Hutu with maniacal  abandon. There are documented cases in which the machete was wielded to  settle personal disputes, steal property, and, in some cases, brandished for the  sadistic thrill of killing. In post-conflict states, many times, state-sponsored histories have been  rewritten in ways that favor the development of a unified country Kearney,  2011. In an examination of Northern Ireland, Nolan 2007 notes how an emphasis was placed upon the importance of creating a shared understanding of  history. This was the case in 2014, twenty years after the Rwandan genocide.  A critical unifying feature of the countrys education system in 2014 was the  adoption and implementation of a state-sanctioned and mandated official history of the 1994 genocide. Gervais: The education system now is one that is trying to correct the mistakes  that have been committed by the people who were leaders before the 1994  genocide against the Tutsis. It used to be that when you lived with your neighbors you had to judge them based on whether they were Tutsi or Hutu. Today 

Beacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 51 Rwanda is trying to create a new generation. We want to create a society where  we give a chance to everybody. As I listened to Gervais and his colleagues, I wondered if there might be  a danger in developing a school system that systematically created a unified,  national memory of what Adichie 2009 has called the single story. It is  a version of reality that separates a pre-genocide history, one based on clear  ethnic and class divisions, and the creation of a new post-genocide national  identity that renders ordinary Rwandans collectively innocent for their ancestors, formerly labeled as Hutu, Tutsi, and Twa, past actions. Some scholars have emphasized the need to portray history as it occurred,  and in ways that acknowledge the pre-conflict injustices and inequalities as  they were prior to reconciliation seeking Davies, 2004; Laplante, 2008.  Time will only tell what the impact might be on Rwandans when their future  is cast through an unquestionable rendition of history that identified Tutsi  as victims and Hutus as perpetrators. At the same time, teachers suggest the  country will move forward without a division between Tutsi and Hutu. PEACE AND RECONCILIATION EDUCATION Scholars and international bodies have consistently pointed out the crucial relationship between education and reconciliation Barakat et al., 2008; Minow,  1998; Smith  Vaux, 2003. In order to address conflicting ethnic relations,  education reforms have to take a prominent role in peace-building initiatives.  According to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization as cited in Nicolai, 2009, teaching children how to live together  peacefully, by recognizing the other and by overcoming prejudices within  the individual and between individuals and communities, should be the main  objective of peace initiatives. At the end of a conflict, it has become common for governments to turn to the education sector to find ways in which to  foster social and political reconciliation and integration. Arguably, education  can provide opportunities to dampen the impact of the conflict, to nurture  and sustain an ethnically tolerant climate, to desegregate minds, to foster  linguistic tolerance, to cultivate inclusive citizenship, and to disarm history  Bush  Saltarelli, 2000. Sonia: Peace education means that people live in peace without violence and  with their human rights intact. The members of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective were steadfast in their belief in the transformative power of peace education initiatives 
Chapter Four and genocide studies to wipe out any vestiges of the history of hostility that  had fueled the 1994 genocide. Xavier: Peace education is built on teaching people how to live in harmony  without violence. It is built on respecting human rights. It is when students learn  about how they can live without making someone else suffer. Their beliefs did not seem misplaced given that the political will to work  towards the social integration of conflicting ethnic groups is crucial for  reconciliation initiatives Steiner-Kahmsi, 2003, p. 181. Interestingly, given  the dark history of how state-sponsored education has been manipulated for  ill-intended means, it is important to recognize education for reconciliation  as a still overtly political process, though it is aimed at creating peace. It is a  process that requires ongoing commitment, effort, and vigilance. These teachers, perhaps like millions of other teachers, want to construct  what it means to be a citizen of a nation, and, more broadly, the global community. They are committed to the intellectual, social, and emotional development of children who begin to regard themselves as citizens of one nation  who can peacefully co-exist alongside their neighbors. As Gervais said, We  hope we are going to change peoples behaviors. We hope that our students  are going to be good builders of peace. We hope that they too will contribute  to develop future generations that do not care for all of those divisions that  used to exist. It is obvious that a fundamental commitment of the members of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective is their desire to vanquish any psychological ghosts of the ethnic divisions that led members of previous generations  who, even though they may have attended school together, and in many cases,  because they attended school together, viewed their own ethnic groups as virtuous while learning to label the other ethnic groups as evil. Jacob: I would like to see the new generation having peaceful coexistence for  the common good of their country. That requires tolerance and where there is  a problem, dialogue should work over confrontation. And, I would like that  generation where everybody struggles for individual and national development. It is clear that they are trying to shift their students away from identifying  solely along ethnic lines that emphasize blood ties, color of skin, and ethnic  origincharacteristics that tend to divide people along us versus them dichotomies. What they hope for is to create, in their students minds, a broader  national identity as children of Rwanda who will develop as the citizens of a  unified nation Gaudelli, 2003.

Beacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 53 The teachers regarded schooling as a social commitment that could detoxify the next generation of Rwandans from the ideology of genocide King,  2014. As for the future, these teachers wanted to create a new meaning of  being Rwandan. That much was obvious. ENDURING LEGACY Beyond the obvious atrocities and physical scars that the genocide created,  numerous psychological impairments were created, the evidence of which can  be observed through the increased prevalence of depression, anxiety, and posttraumatic stress disorder, among other mental health impairments, faced by  todays Rwandans Bolton, Neugebauer  Lincoln, 2002. These teachers are  concerned with the enduring legacy of mental distress caused by the 1994 genocide that continues to plague the population two decades after the genocide. Gervais: I worry about some of the predictable consequences of the future. How  will grandchildren of those who survived genocide but lost their families think  about the perpetrators? I worry about the grandchildren of the genocides perpetrators. All of the testimonies have been recorded and are stored on a server.  If someone looks on Google what will she see? What will that child think if her  grandfather killed ten or twenty people? It was evident that Rwandans continued to struggle with the legacy of  genocide in April 2014. In an interview with a convicted member of the Interahamwe militia, Nyirandegeya Mwamini, journalist Lillian Leposo 2014  quoted the jailed Mwamini as saying: The genocide will never fade out, even to killers, or those who participated, like  us, that picturewhere the international community has seen you as a killer can never go away from you easily, and just say it is over. But my hope is not  for me; it is for my children and those who are linked to me, that they can never  be part of what I went through. For some of the other participants, there was a concern that the visual  symbols of the genocidethe memorials that mark the places that served as  killing fields and serve as reminders of the horrors of what Rwandans did to  each othermay not remain standing beyond the current generation. Sonia: I am concerned about the sustainability of the genocide memorials and  the history they represent. Will they still be there in fifty years? Will the understanding of the suffering we endured remain if the visible memorials are gone?
Chapter Four Sonia told me that, from time to time, she visits what is left of the old  Catholic church in Nyamata where so many died. On the Friday prior to the  first focus group, I had visited the Nyamata church with Emmanuel. NYAMATA CHURCH As Emmanuel drove me to the memorial on our third trip, he asked, Well, sir,  what do you think of Rwanda? Then he added, Que pensez-vous jusquici? It is a beautiful country and the people are amazing, I replied. Cest  vraiment un pays des mille collines, I added in French. Oui, vraiment, Emmanuel replied. But a sad country; nest-ce pas?  he added. I guess so, Emmanuel. But, youve all been through a lot, I replied.  Vous avez eu lhistoire difficile. Our guide at the Nyamata memorial was a survivor of the genocide. Emmanuel acted as my translator as the guide spoke in Kinyarwanda. The guide  told us about those who had sought refuge in the church as we walked slowly  through it. They thought that they were safe hiding in a Roman Catholic  church, at least until the Interahamwe and the Rwandan Government Forces  violently burst through the doors with rifles, grenades, and machetes. The guide drew our attention to some holes in the sheet metal awning outside the front entrance and pointed to some pockmarks in the bricks. Grenades, said Emmanuel. The men, women, and children who had been inside the church were massacred. The small children were picked up by their feet and their tiny skulls  were smashed against the walls. The guide pointed at one of the churchs  interior walls and made a swinging motion with his hands and arms to demonstrate how this was done. Now a genocide memorial site, the churchs interior was full of disintegrating, bloodstained garments that once clothed the bodies of young, innocent  children. There were shoes lined up, items of clothing draped over the pews,  and small skulls assembled. In painstaking detail, our guide told me how  each child was brutally torturedthis one, attacked with a machete, has a  slash mark, another with some pointed holes was struck in the head with a  spearbut most were bludgeoned to death. For a few hundred Rwandan francs, the guide allowed me to descend into  the tombs to see the rows and rows of skeletal remains that were boxed up  neatly in the wooden crates serving as familial caskets. The genocide memorial at the Nyamata church was beginning to show its age, with signs of  crumbling bricks and unkempt grounds. How long would it stand as a memoBeacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 55 rial? For now, it provides a graphic and horrifically vivid reminder of one of  the many killing campaigns that punctuated the history of the late twentieth  century, reflecting the truth that genocide has occurred over and over again  Slovic, 2007. On our way back into the city, we stopped near a large plantation field. Emmanuel explained how his parents had sent him into that exact banana plantation to hide during the warring chaos. He and his two sisters had survived by  playing a weeks long game of hide-and-seek. The rest of the family did not  get out of the house before the militia arrived and killed them. Il tait un jeu malade, Emmanuel said. Winning at a childs game, of all things, had saved their lives. Emmanuel explained that they left the cover of the fields and ventured  back to their homes and those of their neighbors to scavenge for whatever  food and supplies they could find. He described how they had to be strategic  and quick because they knew that the Hutu militias would return, and, if  found, the Interahamwe would kill them. There were not enough Tutsis still living to satisfy the thirst for blood  that Interahamwe had, Emmanuel said. So sometimes they came back and  hacked at the corpses. Just in case one of the bodies lying there was still alive. BEYOND RWANDAS BORDERS The world is painfully aware of how the 1994 Rwandan genocide ended: the  cavalry did not arrive to save them. The international community did not intervene to stop the slaughter that began in April 1994. The Developed World,  and, explicitly, the member-states of the United Nations, sat idly by, claiming  neutrality while the slaughter unfolded on the nightly news. Pascal: It is important that the legacy of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsis  be understood that while Rwandans perpetrated it, Rwandans also ended it. The  international community stood idly by during the genocide, but rushed in as  soon as it was over to help us. The political and moral stance of the outside world needs to be labeled for  what it was at the time: a display of utter apathy and the abandonment of a  people at a time of tremendous need. It seemed fairly clear to me that we, in the pseudo-enlightening discourse  of the Developed World, have a lot to learn from the survivors of the 1994  genocidethe victims and perpetrators, and their sons and daughtersas  they stand side-by-side and take on the hard work of moving slowly forward 
Chapter Four on a pathway to reconciliation. Was it fair to label only those who did the  killing as the perpetrators in the Rwandan genocide? And then, after two days of sessions in my awkward and cramped hotel  room with the future teachers of Rwanda, we were done. I turned off the  recorder and thanked each person for making the journey and taking part  in the study. Before the room emptied, I handed a brown envelope with  180,000 Rwandan francs in it to the group leaders, Christian and Olivier.  This would amount to about thirty Canadian dollars for each person, and  would cover any bus fares and a meal before they headed home. It was, as  Olivier had told me at dinner on the second night, customary to offer cash  as a thank you. As we walked back to the hotel gate, I eavesdropped on their congenial  banter about shopping, dinner plans, and misgivings about having to visit too  many relatives while they were in town. I caught myself listening as keenly  as I had been the whole weekend, and then consciously reminded myself that  they were no longer willing participants in a study. NTARAMA MEMORIAL SITE The Ntarama Genocide Memorial site was the last stop on my research trip.  Traffic was slowed that day by large trucks and tour buses rumbling along the  roads. Lots of people are here for Kwibuka, Emmanuel said. I am hoping  it stays busy. I could use the business. I want to buy a house one day. As we climbed out of Emmanuels taxi, he explained that the Ntarama  church was a place where some of the most brutal killings of the genocide  had taken place. The sites custodian, who also functions as the guide, explained that about five thousand people, many of whom were women and  children, were killed here. The children were taken into the one-room school  and systematically killed. Many women were raped before being killed, and  others suffered the degradation of having a long, sharp pointed stick inserted  into their vaginas, and then forced upward. Emmanuel stopped translating at that moment and went silent even though  the guide kept speaking. I did not need to know anything more about what happened with that stick.  I did not want to imagine. I understood enough. After Emmanuels silence, he started to speak again and explained that the  people who had been hiding in the separate kitchen building were burned to  death. The custodian, who showed us through the church and other nearby  buildings, told us that he was fifteen in 1994, and that he was the only surviving member of his very large family; the rest were all killed.

Beacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 57 It was a short stop, maybe an hour. I knew I was done. The jet lag, the side  effects of the antimalarial medications, the heat, and the food poisoning I had  experienced on the previous weekend were making the emotional weight of  this last day almost unbearable. As Emmanuel and I drove back, I looked out  the open cab window and tried to let my mind escape to admire the beautiful  landscape and the hills of Rwanda. Do you think you will want to go see the mountain gorillas, sir? Emmanuel asked. I am free to drive and could find you a good, honest guide? I knew Emmanuel needed the business; he had told me as much. While  people back home had encouraged me to go gorilla trekking while I was in  Rwanda, I just could not fathom how to turn off my emotions to have some  fun on the trip. No, Emmanuel, I replied. My research is done, and its time for me to  go home. AFTERWARD Quite a few times, I began to try and work through the data I collected during  the fieldwork on the study and stopped. I hit an impasse. Almost each time I  got jammed, I thought about my two encounters with Dr. Elliot Leyton in the  late 1990s on the grounds of St. Angelas Academy in Prelate, Saskatchewan.  Elliot, as he asked to be called, maintained a hunting cabin nearby and visited the academy to smell the wild rose bushes. I need to come by and smell  them, he said as he told me about the emotional baggage he carried with him  from his trip to Rwanda in 1996, where he studied the Rwandan genocide for  his book Touched by Fire: Doctors without Borders in a Third World Crisis.  Elliot, a professor of anthropology at Memorial University, and among the  most widely consulted experts on serial homicides, had a look etched on his  face as he told me about the impact of the 1996 trip on him; a particularly  lasting impact in spite of all he had learned by studying other serial killers. I  can still recall that look. Periodically, I returned to the data I had collected and attempted to make  some sense of my notes and the transcripts. I read and re-read as much as  I could on post-genocide Rwanda, peace education, and international research approaches. I knew that social science researchers such as Creswell  2013 and Hennink 2008 had proposed that it is not unusual for qualitative researchers to enter the field and to begin to collect data, only to find  that the research questions must change, the forms of data collection must  be altered, and the individuals to be studied and the sites to be visited need  to be modified. But I do not think Creswell and Hennink were thinking of a 
Chapter Four post-genocidal reality in which every socially constructed act, like teaching,  has to be rethought. The notes I had scrawled down in my study journal a few days after my  return to Canada hinted at my doubts and echoed the sentiments of Freedman  et al. 2008, who asked themselves after their research study in Rwanda had  ended: Was this project a failure or success? As they did, I noted, much less  eloquently, that coming up with an all-or-nothing conclusion to this kind of  work is not only impossible but also unrealistic. As a researcher, I want to explore the outcomes of peace and reconciliation education. I want to examine how teachers who have survived  atrocities conceive of peace, and commit themselves to peace education. In  some modest ways, I think I did accomplish this goal and perhaps something else: in some ways, the study opened up the opportunity for me to  better understand what Strong-Wilson 2013 referred to as a critical selfconsciousness, one that does not mindlessly dwell on the emotional baggage of the past. The study provided a means to consider the aftermath of  a single, but impactful, dark period in history through a perspective that is  critically aware of other places and times, through the experiences of some  of those who survived it. This awareness gives rise to possibilities for learning and acting in the present. HOPE IN THE PALL OF UNIMAGINABLE VIOLENCE Twenty years after the genocide ended, there is much to admire about  Rwanda. The banana plantations are green and full of fruit. When classes end,  schoolchildren emerge from their studies laughing and playing, as children  tend to do once the dismissal bell rings. The physical beauty of the hills and  valleys, and the indomitable spirit of Rwandans, stand in jarring contrast to  the abhorrent cruelty of those once-hindered days in 1994. To me, it is clear that the Rwandan teachers I interviewed are fully committed to genocide studies and peace education. It is also clear they want to  build a unified national identity for Rwanda. Amid all this, Rwandans are  still going through some fairly significant political struggles. Freedman et al.   2008 comment that teachers have become a key lever to promote the official historical narrative of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsis. I have  little doubt that I was offered, in part, the official narrative. And, as Freedman   et al. wrote: The inability to discuss issues of ethnic identity, the distortions of a history that  government wishes to tell, the constraints against teaching students how to be 

Beacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 59 critical thinkers, and, above all, the fear of productive conflict have profound  implications for the establishment of a progressive history curriculum and a  healthy democracy. p. 309 Therein lies one danger to moving forward. The Collectives members are committed to acting as social reconstructionists who will try to reverse, rather than reproduce, the norms  and values that contributed to the 1994 genocide as critical pedagogues  Stanley, 1992. For them, education is a means for transforming a longstanding mind-set that once emphasized violence and fostered a culture of  maliciousness, into the possibility of an idealized, unified Rwanda. They  are committed to teach students the knowledge, skills, attitudes, and values that are needed to bring about behavioral changes that will discourage  conflict and violence in Rwanda. They aim to promote alternative ways of  dealing with conflict, which they hope will create the conditions that are  conducive to peace, whether at an intrapersonal, interpersonal, intergroup,  national, or international level. The teachers perceptions of their role as agents of change echo the recommendation of a report by the International Commission on Education for  the Twenty-First Century Delors, 1996. Education is known as any act or  experience that has a formative effect on the mind, character, or physical ability of an individual Burcu, 2012. In the technical sense, education is viewed  as a process by which society deliberately transmits its accumulated knowledge, skills, and values from one generation to another. A World Bank study  2005 identifies formal education as a key social lever to prevent conflict.  It is of utmost importance in the post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation process. To be a positive force for change, education must be supported  by schools and staffed with teachers who are committed to inclusivity. As  Arendt 1961 proposed, teachers must take seriously their responsibility as  mediators between past and future. This is the critical role that educators  play in shaping a society. While teachers and the system they work within can be co-opted by  regimes that are committed to violence for political purposes, such as was  the case in Rwanda, they also offer the potential to dismantle the ideology contributing to structural violence that can lead to mass atrocity and  genocide. However, such a weighty responsibility rests on the shoulders of  educators who know, all too well, that once again humanity faces challenges  of unprecedented proportions, which include the continued development of  weapons of mass destruction, conflicts between states and ethnic groups, the  spread of racism, and an increase in other forms of violence United Nations  Development Programme, 2013. In many respects, we expect quite a lot 
Chapter Four from teachers. We do not, however, have much of a choice given the fact  that education is the most effective method for preventing future genocide  and for fostering common citizenship Kamboly, 2007. LINGERING TENSIONS The teachers, all victims of and survivors of the 1994 genocide, were silent  on the impact that the event has had on the contemporary Hutu. Aside from  the tens of thousands of Hutus who were killed, many had been forced into  committing atrocities during the 1994 events against their wills. This is where  I keep finding my mind wandering, beyond the formal findings. For me as  a researcher, there remains a lingering and internal tension. I am left with a  sense that there is another dimension to the official historical narrative that  remains unspoken and unshared. I am not certain that I know why this is the case. I have thought about it,  and I have also tried to stop thinking about it. As much as I want to try and  understand, I know that I can never fully appreciate the pressures that these  teachers are under. Living and teaching in a post-conflict nation is very different from teaching in Canada or the United States. What is clear is that wounds, especially ones carved deeply over centuries,  require time and a real commitment of energy to be healed. Admittedly, there  probably is no such thing as healing from genocide. Perhaps, however, the  Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collectives successes and, in a larger fashion,  Rwandas future, involves a recognition that the new chapter that Rwandans  hope to write may never be totally decoupled from the harrowing history of  the 1994 genocide. While the terms Hutu and Tutsi may, in fact, one day  vanish from the contemporary discourses of schoolingand if you listen to  the voices of these teachers that would be for the betterit is hard to argue  for Never Again if the state-sanctioned narrative obscures the painful history that Rwandans share. If teachers hope to empower their students to think critically about the  impact of their choices, then those same teachers must face and understand  the history that they have inherited and learn from it before they can profess  to teach about it. Futuresall of our futuresare inextricably linked to our  individual and collective pasts. The Holocaust, the killing fields of Cambodia in the 1970s, the ethnic  cleansings in the Balkans in the mid-1990s, Rwandas 1994 genocide, and  the ongoing brutality of the Islamic State have proven that mass atrocity can  happen in any nation, on any continent, at any time in history. We cannot, 

Beacons of Hope Twenty Years after Genocide	 61 however, in response to these disturbing facts, shrink into either the darkness  of despair or into disinterested apathy about some distant people. Educators  need to continue to examine the factors that enable individuals collectively  and individually to perpetrate mass violence and to expose the instruments  they use as fuel, including the education system. These steps are crucial for  developing pedagogical practices and programs, and for re-committing efforts to teach students to recognize evil for what it is and to identify ways in  which they can work to counteract it.
Chapter Five Refugee Camp Schools  beneath a Setting Sun The classroom huts were arranged around a central courtyard, which displayed signs of the wear and tear of decades of use. The courtyard garden  was sparse, but was still alive, at least in parts. The walls and ceiling of the  classroom were constructed from woven bamboo. Classroom hut lined up after classroom hut. It was clear that the design and construction of the facilities  had been carefully planned. The walls of the classrooms were engineered and  assembled to let the natural light in, an important feature since the classrooms  were not wired with electricity. The tightly thatched, bamboo-weave roofs  kept the heavy seasonal rains out. The floors of the classroom were slightly  raised and made of concretefor obvious reasons. In most cases, it used to be that a single blackboard featured at the front of  a classroom hut. However, almost a decade after initial resettlement efforts  began, with the camp population around twenty percent of what it had been at  its peak, many of the classrooms have been torn down. The surplus of some  classroom equipment served as a visual reminder of the tear-down. Many of  the half-empty classrooms actually had two or three blackboards arranged at  the front, but each month, fewer and fewer students were seated in front of  them to learn. The teachers still used the blackboards for direct instruction, which was the  preferred method of teaching in the refugee camp schools. They wrote out the  daily lessons using small, broken pieces of chalk, clearly aware that some of  their teaching supplies were dwindling. Students sat quietly in their places  and copied from the blackboard in their tattered lesson books. One of the head teachers in the refugee camps schools, Dorji, told me that  sometimes students were called to the front of the classroom and allowed  to write something on the blackboard at the teachers request. However, the 
Chapter Five teachers, he added, only called on the students who they knew had the correct answers to write on the blackboard. We wouldnt want the children to see and copy down the incorrect information, Dorji said. Mistakes on the blackboard; that is never good. Only  the smart students get invited to write on the blackboard. Such a disciplined commitment to exactitude and precisionlike the construction of the classroom huts and the care given to the school grounds seemed to illustrate one of the reasons why the educational managers and  program support staff of Bhutanese Refugee Education Programs believed  that their schools and their students were a shining example of success. They  held tightly to this belief with respect to a variety of organizational arrangements and structures of refugee camp school programs, which were offered  under the political direction of the United Nations High Commission for  Refugees referred to as the UNHCR. THE EMERGENCE OF A REFUGEE CRISIS Worried that the growing ethnically Nepali minority, who represented almost  one-fifth of Bhutans total population, threatened the culture and, more importantly, the political dominance of the Bhutanese Drukpa majority, in early  1989, the thirty-three-year-old King of Bhutan proclaimed a policy of One  Nation, One People. Henceforth, it seemed that, by virtue of a royal edict, it  became government policy that all Bhutanese would be required to dress and  speak like Drukpas. Even though the ethnically Nepali population had lived,  farmed, and contributed socially to Bhutan for generations, the teaching of  the Nepali language to ethnically Nepali schoolchildren was banned. They  would have to learn Dzongkha. All citizens would also have to wear Drukpa  attire, the gho coat for men and the kira for women Acharya, 2011. Beginning in 1990 and continuing into early 1991, a massive tsunami-like  wave of members of the ethnic minority Nepali population living in southern  Bhutan began to flee rising levels of violence and persecution at the hands of  the Bhutanese government. Dissimilar to what happens in many other refugee  crises, the majority of the approximately 120,000 total Bhutanese refugees arrived en masse. They found shelter on the banks of the Kankai Mai River. In  the absence of a coordinated effort to support the establishment of the camps,  in combination with the lack of international aid, a cycle of poverty quickly  took root. A cholera epidemic spread and claimed numerous lives International Organization for Migration, 2008; Jesuit Refugee Service, 2015. Initially, the international community hoped that the Nepali government  would integrate the Bhutanese refugees and offer them access to Nepali 

Refugee Camp Schools beneath a Setting Sun	 65 citizenship. However, Nepal was consumed by a political upheaval of its  own, including a Maoist rebellion that began in 1995 and continued for   the next decade, ultimately ending the monarchy. Political instability, along  with the challenges posed by other refugees already living in Nepal, meant  that integrating the Bhutanese refugees into Nepal was not a viable option.  Denied their citizenship rights due to religious and cultural differences,  the group eventually sought protection in the UNHCR-established refugee  camps in Nepal, which was granted to them in late 1991. At that time, the  UNHCR commenced an almost twenty-five-year commitment to provide basic sustenance through the World Food Program referred to as the UNWFP,  health care, and education services. Ultimately, over the ensuing years, the  population swelled to almost 120,000 ethically Nepali Bhutanese refugees  who were living in seven camps located in the Jhapa and Morang districts of  eastern Nepal Brown, 2001; International Organization for Migration, 2008;  Pande, 2008. Early on during the Bhutanese refugee crisis, the Nepali government  entered into repeated talks with the Bhutanese government to negotiate the  safe return of the refugees to their homes. All of the talks failed. In 2006, all  parties decided that third-country resettlement was the only option for the  Bhutanese refugees to enjoy the protections of citizenship Brown, 2001;  Pande, 2008. The year 2007 was a significant milestone in their collective history as  refugees because it marked the year in which seven host countriesAustralia, Canada, Denmark, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the United Kingdom,  and the United Statesagreed to and embarked on the resettlement of the  Bhutanese refugees. It also marked the beginning of the transition to close  the Bhutanese refugee camps. As the resettlement progressed, it became increasingly clear to the staff of the non-governmental organization who managed the camps schools on behalf of the UNHCR that they would encounter  some unanticipated challenges. These challenges arose as they worked to  find durable and lasting solutions for the few thousand remaining Bhutanese  refugees who either could not, or would not, be resettled. REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT According to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, resettlement is the transfer of refugees from an asylum country to another nation that  has agreed to admit them and ultimately grant them permanent settlement.  The process of resettlement of a refugee population does not typically occur in a single wave. It is important to note two features that are sometimes  
Chapter Five obscured by the humanitarian crisis of refugee resettlement. These are the  stark facts that: 1 refugee camps were not intended to be permanent fixtures;  and, 2 even within a single camp, not all refugee experiences are the same  De Montclos  Kagwanja, 2000; Sinclair, 2001. The Bhutanese refugees  were, in many respects, a diverse group in terms of their life histories and  backgrounds. They represented more than sixty castesthe system of dividing society into hereditary classesand were also a religiously diverse group  whose majority practiced Hinduism, but which also included those who  followed the traditions of Buddhism, Kirat, and Christianity International  Organization for Migration, 2008. DESIGNING EDUCATION PROGRAMS   FOR UNCERTAIN FUTURES In 1992, the UNHCR delegated the responsibility for the provision of  secondary and higher education programs and services for the Bhutanese  refugees living in Nepal. This responsibility was delegated to the Nepalese  offices of Caritas, a non-governmental agency, under the management of  the Jesuit Refugee Service office in South Asia. The Jesuit Refugee Service referred to as the JRS is an international Catholic non-governmental  organization whose mission is to accompany, serve, and advocate on behalf  of refugees and other forcibly displaced persons. The JRSs programs are  found in fifty-one countries where the staffs provide assistance to: refugees  in camps and cities, individuals displaced within their own countries, asylum  seekers in cities, and those who are held in detention centers. The main areas  of work of the JRS are in the field of education, emergency assistance, health  care, livelihood activities, and social services. The JRS, in turn, contracted  out the day-to-day operations of the Bhutanese Refugee Education Programs  to Caritas Nepal. As is the case for all children, refugee children and their parents consider  school to be a safe place where students can learn, develop socially and emotionally, and thrive Sinclair, 2001. Attending school helps refugee children  and their families to restore some sense of normalcy in their liveseven as  they live statelesswhile they develop and even begin to think of their future  goals, ones that extend beyond the all too often harsh reality of a refugee  camp Dryden-Peterson, 2011. While the conditions are commonly accepted  by the residents, the conditions in the camps are very different from those  under which people live in nearly all other circumstances. As a result, the  teachers who commit to work in refugee camp schools, and the administrators who support them, deal with challenges that are uncommon to almost 

Refugee Camp Schools beneath a Setting Sun	 67 all mainstream schools Kirk  Cassity, 2007. The challenge of providing  education to refugees is complex because it involves, among other factors, the  interplay of economic, social, political, psychological, ethnic, and religious  tensions Sinclair, 2001. Although teacher recruitment, training, and retention are challenges across  many contexts OECD, 2005, they are particularly vexing in refugee camp  settings Ring  West, 2015. Beyond the typical scarcity of attracting and  retaining a cadre of talented individuals who might serve as teachers, refugee  camps face the uniquely unstableand, at times, hazardoussociopolitical  challenges that accompany humanitarian crises Ring  West, 2015. Even in  the face of such tremendous hardships, refugee parents place a high value on  education and the hope that it offers for a more prosperous and safer future  for their children Dryden-Peterson, 2011. Yet, as Dryden-Peterson 2015  pointed out, refugee education is of low and uneven quality globally. As a  result, even those resettled refugee children who have been able to access  education in their countries of first asylum are likely to have skills and knowledge far below the expected grade level for their age p. 10. The quality of the educational programs and services in refugee camp  schools is largely influenced by the quality of the teachers who work in the  schools Dryden-Peterson, 2015; Ring  West, 2015. As is the case in any  context, it is insufficient to simply place an unor under-prepared adult at the  front of a classroom and expect that learning will happen. More needs to be  known about how to best attract, train, and retain teachers in refugee camp  schools. This is especially true since education pushes humanitarian action  beyond a medicalized endeavor intended to save lives. Education becomes a  commitment that shapes futuresnot only the immediate ones of those who  leave the camps, but also those who remain in the camps once the repatriation  or resettlement process has begun. REACHING OUT TO DISTANT RELATIVES Initially, I had hoped to visit the Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan for my research project. I had contacted JRS International in early 2014 and, via email,  I had inquired about the possibility of conducting a small-scale research  study. I wanted the study to focus on the challenges that educators in refugee  camps face with respect to teaching peace and peace education. My interest in  this research question stemmed from the fact that the students and the teachers have had to endure intense conflict and war. At first, the JRS staff I contacted seemed interested in facilitating the  necessary contacts. However, my optimism faded upon receiving an email  
Chapter Five in late 2014, stating that the schools staff in the Zaatari camp, and, indeed  the whole organization, was overwhelmed by the scores of refugees flooding  the camps. Coordinating the logistics of my study, they said, was just more  than they could commit to at the time. It was clear to me that I had been disinvited, even if understandably so. I replied that I understood, but politely inquired if they might suggest an  alternative location to the Zaatari camp. A few weeks later, I received an  email suggesting that there was a possibility that something could be arranged  to host the project in northern Iraq. The offer came around the same time that  the news media were reporting that the Islamic State of IraqISIS as we  have come to know themhad engineered a prison break in Khalis, which  is about fifty kilometers north of Baghdad. I declined the offer, but asked if  they had another option. Some time later in the spring of 2014, someone from the JRS organization emailed me back, writing that they had considered connecting me with  their JRS office in Beirut, Lebanon, as an alternative, but had decided not to  because there had been a recent rash of kidnappings of foreign aid workers  in the country. I told them that I appreciated their willingness to help me,  and then resigned myself to allowing the research idea to remain dormant,  or potentially wither and die. There had simply been a convergence of geopolitical events and bad timing on my part. I recognized that the staff at JRS  International had more pressing concerns than to help a Canadian academic  with his research. About a month had passed when, to my surprise, I found an email from  the JRS folks in my inbox with the subject line: Could the BREPs in Nepal  work? After some initial Google searching, and some back-and-forth emails,  I learned about the history of the Bhutanese refugees in Nepal and the plan to  close the camps in late 2016. As my JRS contact put it, it would be a rather  unique opportunity to examine a refugee camp that was nearing closure. It is quite rare these days, the email read, to find a camp that is being  closed. And, while we have experience opening and operating them, closing  onewhile a positive outcomewill bring some unique challenges. Might  this be of interest to you, and can it work? As I re-designed the research study in my mind and on paper, I did so  with the awareness that there were only a handful of studies on refugee  camp schools and, of the published studies and reports focused on refugee  camp schools, almost all focused on the experiences of the students and not  on those of the teachers, administrators, or program managers Sesnan et  al., 2013. Therefore, I sought to create an ethnographic case study Creswell, 2013 that might illustrate some of the challenges that refugee camp  school teachers, administrators, and program managers face. I imagined 

Refugee Camp Schools beneath a Setting Sun	 69 that it was challenging to provide students with an education that prepares  them academically, psychologically, and socially for the transition into  their new home countries, communities, and schools, while at the same  time facing the reality of both dwindling human capacity and diminishing  financial resources. While it was not the study that I had planned to do, it was an opportunity  that I did not want to miss out on. Beyond the uniqueness of examining a  camps school closure, and the unlikelihood that I would be snatched, held  for ransom, or murderedreal possibilities in some of the earlier potential  locationsthe prospect appealed to me personally. Although I never met  them, my maternal grandmother was a tribal woman from Nepal and my  maternal grandfather was Anglo-Burmese, the child of a British soldier and  a Burmese tribal woman. I felt like I was being drawn by distant familial ties  to work with this community. It seemed to be the perfect way to close out  three years of researching the practice of teaching in some very challenging  global contexts. A FOCUS ON CELEBRATING SUCCESSES During the three-day on-site field visit to the Bhutanese Refugee Education  Programs the BREPs as they are referred to by the JRSCaritas Nepal  staff, almost all of the educators associated with the BREPs made a point  during the conversations to highlight the historical successes of the Bhutanese  refugee camp schools and the students who attended them. On the first day at the initial orientation meetings, which were held at the  JRSCaritas Nepal offices in Damak, Sister Lourda Mary Thumma, a Roman  Catholic nun who was serving as the field director of the JRSCaritas Nepal  Sub-Office, stressed: At the beginning, the output from the BREPs was very good. When the Nepali  national average for class ten exams was around thirty to forty percent, the refugee students scores were in the seventies to eighties. The refugee children were  our asset and we had to show it to the outside world and say: see the Bhutanese  refugees, in their refugee status? Their commitment is so much. They are doing  so well; why not come forward and help? The pride associated with achievements of the students was genuine, and  many of the reasons provided by the interviewees are well documented in  other research conducted on the BREPs for example, see Brown, 2001;  Jesuit Refugee Services, 2015; Pande, 2008. The various officials and  administrative support personnel I met in the Damak sub-office identified 
Chapter Five the following factors as significantly contributing to the favorable conditions that permitted the establishment of the Bhutanese refugee education  programs: the exodus-like migration of the historically Nepali Bhutanese  refugees, the commitment of the Bhutanese refugee community to education, and the relatively high level of education and professional status that  some of the refugees had prior to their displacement. As Sister Lourda Mary commented, the sudden and massive arrival of the  Bhutanese refugees had created an immensely critical pressure, but also had  provided an opportunity: Because so many of the Bhutanese refugees arrived all at once, the organization  of the camps and schools happened all at once. This was both a positive and a  negative. The initiative was there to establish schools, but there was a big need. A little later on she added: The time that the community gave, that the teachers gave, and that the volunteers gave was a big part of the success. It is like watering a big garden; there is  no direct personal benefit. But, there is a community benefit. Mr. Loknath Pokrel, who himself had arrived as part of the first wave of  refugees, was serving as the assistant field director of the JRSCaritas Nepal  Sub-Office. He held a measure of pride with respect to what his people had  achieved when he spoke: The education in the Bhutanese refugee camps were initiated by them, the  Bhutanese refugees, and were mostly managed by them. After arriving in  Nepal, the community felt that the biggest thing they had brought with them  from Bhutan was a desire for education. And, the little thing that the children  themselves could carry forward was an education. We felt the greatest resource  we had was ourselves. A little later in the morning, over chai, Loknath said that the fundamental  principle that had been embraced early, with respect to the daily management of the schools, could be summed up in a three-part statement, which  was the schools credo: by the Bhutanese; with the Bhutanese; and, for  the Bhutanese. He added that one of the only assets that the Bhutanese  refugees had when they arrived in Nepal was a firm commitment to educate  their children. Another advantage that the BREPs had over some other refugee camp  contexts was the fact that a critical mass of the adult population was educated  or were willing to become educated. This is not always the case in refugee  camp contexts, as sometimes the level of literacy and numeracy within the 

Refugee Camp Schools beneath a Setting Sun	 71 adult population of a refugee camp is low. Prakash, an assistant head teacher  at one of the two remaining BREP schools, was open about this: Even though many of them were farmers, there is no doubt that it helped that  some of the refugees had held jobs in the government as civil servants. They  became the first teachers in the schools. Over a period of about twenty years after they were first established, the  BREPs school operations grew to become much more than just primary and  secondary schools. They became centers for vocational training and community engagement. Martha was one of the two remaining permanent, officebased resource teachers who worked out of the Caritas sub-office in Damak.  She traveled the ten or so kilometers to the schools two to three times a week  to work with the teachers who taught the spoken English classes. She said: We began to offer adult language programs in spoken English for adults who  had not attended formal schools. Our programs were inclusive. We added  programs for the disabled and established child play centers and then, youthfriendly after-school centers. The model was an inclusive one. The tone Martha used reflected a sense of accomplishment with the fact  that the programs and services offered in the BREPs had grown, particularly  with respect to the variety of services that the JRSCaritas Nepal staff offered. Shakun, one of the head teachers in the BREPs two remaining schools, said: As part of the vocational training initiatives, the BREPs established a community technology access program. We offered such things as computer operating  courses, web design, and basic Internet user courses to refugees and the surrounding community. During the orientation meeting, Loknath had explained that over 10,000  Bhutanese refugees had benefited from the BREPs vocational training programs. The otherwise undereducated adults had been able to get training in  such areas as: computers, hairdressing, dressmaking, auto repairs, and secretarial skill development. The courses, he explained, could last anywhere from  two to three months and up to six months. Sister Lourda Mary added that the staff from JRSCaritas Nepal and the  school management team knew they had to find ways to reach the Bhutanese refugees who, if not educated, would likely get left behind once  resettlement began: Beginning early, some time around 1998, the UNHCR sponsored the vocational  training. It was designed to help the school dropouts specifically, and provide 
Chapter Five them with basic skills to earn a living. This vocational training was well taken.  The refugees who complete the courses become an asset if their training gives  them an opportunity to, at least, have a chance to enter into the job market in  developed countries. According to Loknath, the vocational training programs, while initially  developed to support school dropouts who needed some skills if they were  to survive and provide for their families, were expanded to include other  individuals who were considered vulnerable, such as the disabled, those  suffering from addictions, and divorced and widowed women. The goal was  to equip as many Bhutanese refugees as possible with some form of education, and not to leave any behind simply because educational opportunities  for betterment did not exist. The many successes of the BREPs should not be overlooked or disregarded.  It is well documented that these refugee camp schools can serve as examples  of the positive effects that earlyand midstage refugee camp schools can have  on refugee communities and refugees who, all too often, face a stark reality that, at times, offers little promise of improvement Brown, 2001; Jesuit  Refugee Services, 2015; Pande, 2008. THE HUMAN CHURN OF RESETTLEMENT However, the reality that began in 2007 in the seven Bhutanese refugee  camps was that each week, hundreds of Bhutanese refugees began to leave  Nepal, bound for a new life in a new country. While resettlement offered  excitement and hope for a secure future, it also brought daily changes for all  Bhutanese refugees. Loknath stated: There are some, and I think myself included, who have been worried that the  younger generation who are leaving will lose their Bhutanese identity. There was certainly an impact on those who prepared to depart as they  faced the anxiety of leaving behind friends and the comforts of the lives that  they had known for nearly twenty years, as they headed to a foreign land  filled with unfamiliar traditions and unknown challenges. There was also  anxiety for those whom they left behind. While appreciative of the opportunities that resettlement brought, Shakun admitted: Resettlement was a good thing, but it also caused a disruption in the community  and the education system for those who remained behind as others left. Fairly  early on during the resettlement process, some of the schoolchildren and their  families simply began to wait in anticipation for their travel papers and date 

Refugee Camp Schools beneath a Setting Sun	 73 of departure. Waiting became a preoccupation. And, over time, it has had an  impact on their motivation. More and more just began to wait; unmotivated to  contribute to camp life. Both Loknath and Shakun commented that some of the older generation  of Bhutanese refugeesthose who had not been born andor raised in the  camps as childrenwere not keen on the idea of third-country resettlement.  Neither Loknath or Shakun said that these refugees were unappreciative of  the host countries generosity to accept Bhutanese refugees. Rather, the very  prospect of resettling to a country so very different from the ones they knew  was too overwhelming for some of the older Bhutanese refugees to think  about. These refugees still held out hope, more than twenty-five years since  first arriving, that they would either go home, back to Bhutan, or even,  in some cases, remain in what would be left of the camps and live out their  remaining days in Nepal. At the time of my research study, in mid-December 2015, approximately  18,000 Bhutanese refugees remained in two of the original seven camps: the  Beldangi and Sanischare camps. The other five camps had been closed and dismantled. Communities were consolidated, and refugees who had known their  neighbors and had developed a sense of community over almost a twenty-year  period of living stateless were relocated to the remaining two camps. While recent global history has, unfortunately, taught us how to assemble  refugee camps and, all too often, how to expand them to squeeze in more human suffering, we do not have much firsthand experience with planning for  closing them down. The loss of community and the connections that come  from belonging to a camp and from belonging to a school community had  rendered some of the remaining refugees strangers to each other. I learned before I arrived, through email communication with the JRS Caritas Nepal sub-office, that the UNHCR was planning to close the two remaining camps and withdraw their support by the end of 2016, even though it  was anticipated that close to 3,000 Bhutanese refugees might not qualify for  resettlement, or even want to be resettled. However, email exchanges about  the inevitability of what lay ahead could not capture the anxiety that many of  the few thousand remaining refugees were feeling. Those who remained, either awaiting the opportunity to resettle or holding onto hope that they would  be able to return to Bhutan or stay in Nepal, all faced the loss of neighbors,  companions, and family members as they were to leave the camps. As Prakash, one of the assistant head teachers, said: Many of the refugees who live in the camps were born stateless and have no  recollection of Bhutan. Some of the older members of the community who  remain here cling to the faint hope that, at the closure of the camps, they will 
Chapter Five be permitted to return to Bhutan. Yet others recognize that their ethnic origin is  Nepali and want to be absorbed into the local population. But, with one year to  go, no one is quite sure what will happen. Over almost a decade, grandparents had lost grandchildren, siblings had  become separated by continents, and extended families disintegrated. Each  change that is experienced at the camp level has an even larger impact on the  refugees at a personal level. Schools had lost teachers, principals, and counselors. And, the JRSCaritas sub-office, which had invested in developing not  just the teachers, but also the local leaders who were responsible to provide a   community voice in how to best manage the schools for the Bhutanese refugees, was also gone. It was under those circumstances that the refugee camp  school program managers were attempting to maintain a semblance of the highquality educational standards with which the BREPs had long been associated. INITIAL PRESSURES CAN LEAD   TO CRACKS LATER ON Both Sister Lourda Mary and Loknath noted, in a number of our conversations, that from the outset, the schools faced the ever-present challenges  associated with teacher recruitment, preparation, and attrition. For example,  from the beginning, the Bhutanese refugee camp schools faced the challenge  of what some participants referred to as a brain drain. Based on her experience working in the BREPs, Martha noted: Quite a few teachers, once they acquired some training and a few years of experience, became attracted by the job offers from outside the camps. This was  especially true of resource teachersthe ones trained for curriculum development and professional workshops. The program managers and directors of the BREPs recognized early on  that the cross-border movement of skilled labor constitutes an integral part  of globalization. It was a goal that they used to prepare the Bhutanese refugees for resettlement. Meeting the needs of the Developed World, that is, for  a well-educated and highly skilled workforce, was one of the goals of the  educational programs, and one that Loknath said they used to remind everyonestudents, their parents, and the teachersof why the success of BREPs  mattered so much. However, anticipating something and experiencing it are not always the  same. Loknath said that the speed of the vicious cycle of flight of human  capital and teaching talent caught the organizers of the schools by surprise. 

Refugee Camp Schools beneath a Setting Sun	 75 It was clear that the constant churn of talent had worn out some of the programs staff: The very first real challenge we faced was a brain drain. I know that refugees  are not allowed to officially work outside the refugee camps but, in Nepal, the  Bhutanese refugees have the same ethnic background as the Nepalis. Theythe  Bhutanese refugeescould move out of the camps and take opportunities in  the private sector and get a good job to earn good money. It was a challenge  for usthe brain drainbecause we had to keep training teachers regularly as  some teachers left for jobs outside the camps once we had trained them. Once  the resettlement process began, the effects of the brain drain became exponential. At least as early as 2001, the UNHCR had identified that the phenomenon  most commonly referred to as the brain drainthe flight of the best and the  brightest from Developing World to Developed Worldcan lead to adverse  economic conditions in the places that are the least prepared to deal with them  United Nations, 2001. Another challenge that became evident can best be described as a form of  inertiaan outcome of the uncertainty of whether the refugees were going  to return to Bhutan, remain in Nepal, or be resettled to a third country. Sister  Lourda Mary noted: I think the uncertain future they faced was a problem for them. Not knowing  if they were going to stay in Nepal, return to Bhutan, or be resettled led some  to become frustrated with the situation and this caused a drop in some of the  teachers motivation. As it became clearer that the only durable solution to the Bhutanese refugee  crisis was third-country resettlement, the strains on the resourceshuman and  financialbecame even more obvious. Loknath elaborated: Once the third-country resettlements began, our teacher training efforts increased by double, maybe triple. Our teachers, our asset, the ones we had  trained, were among the first to be resettled. We were already facing a brain  drain, but then it became worse. The frequency of our teacher training programs  increased considerably as compared to our earlier efforts. We needed to ask the  UNHCR to increase the teacher-training budget. We got some money, but it was  barely enough as the need to retrain and retrain again never ended. In some various and obvious ways, the obstacles that were emerging during the earlyand midstage period of the Bhutanese camps and, by extension,  the schools, foreshadowed some of the more profound challenges that the  schools would face as they began to wind down operations.
Chapter Five UNSETTLING STORIES OF THE RESETTLED Loknath pointed at picture on a shelf in his office as he spoke. We hear from many of our resettled students that they are faring well and getting  on well. One of my students who was resettled in 2013 said that he is in one of  the top colleges in New York where the children of U.S. senators are studying. But, Loknath also acknowledged that even though the vast majority of  the students from the Bhutanese refugee camp schools had found academic  and social success after resettlement, there were stories trickling back to the  camps about some individuals who had not successfully transitioned out of  the camps to life in their new host countries. Without providing any details or  statistics, he simply said some who resettled had met a sad end. While suicide is still a major cause of death in the United States, particularly among immigrant groups Sher  Vilens, 2011, the high incidence of  Bhutanese suicides is somewhat shocking because, collectively, the community represented one of the newer groups of refugees to be admitted to  the United States and it had been through formal resettlement pre-departure  orientation programs Glionna, 2014; Mishra, 2014; Preiss 2013. In part,  such orientation programs are meant as prevention measures against such  disastrous outcomes. According to the Refugee Health Technical Assistance Center RHTAC,  which is principally funded by the Massachusetts Department of Public  Health, the 2011 statistics estimated that approximately 11 out of every  100,000 people within the United States died by suicide. However, among  refugee groups, the rate of suicide was higher and the RHTAC reported in  2011 that the rates of suicide within the Bhutanese refugee community were  more than three times as high as that of the general population. Clearly, some  of the resettled Bhutanese refugees were struggling to adapt to their new lives. Sister Lourda Mary said that the transition from the simplicity of a refugee camp, in which the Bhutanese refugees were surrounded by people who  looked like them, spoke in languages that they understood, and had a shared  common history and refugee experience, brought about some profound  psychological and cultural challenges for some. It took a lot to adjust to an  unfamiliar big city or large town in the Developed World. While it was true that many of the young Bhutanese adapted well and felt  equipped and empowered to pursue their dreams, there were also, she said,  documented cases of severe depression and instances of suicide attempts and  death by suicide by the newly resettled Bhutanese refugees. There was, she  added, not much more that the school staffs could do to better prepare them.

Refugee Camp Schools beneath a Setting Sun	 77 AS DUSK BEGAN TO SETTLE   OVER THE REFUGEE CAMPS Over the three days that I spent visiting the various offices and schools in  the refugee camps and talking with staff, it became clearer to me that everyone involved in the BREPs recognized a number of explicit challenges that  late-stage refugee camp schools face. Those challenges were at risk of being  obscured as an outcome in the midst of the heavy focus on the important and  positive effects that the earlyand midstage BREPs had on their students and  their families. As the refugee camps and the schools began the formal transition process to closure, all of the individuals I spoke withfrom the program  managers, to the head and assistant head teachers, right through to the officebased resource teachersin some fashion, spoke at length about a number of  profound challenges the BREPs faced that worried them. In general, as the population in the camp dwindled, the majority of the  adults and children who remained in the two camps had much lower literacy  and numeracy levels than those who had already been resettled. Yet, it was  precisely this segment of the remaining adult population from which the current corps of teachers had to be drawn, and many of the new teachers had  either not completed their formal secondary schooling while in the refugee  camps, or had chosen to exert little effort in completing it. Martha remarked: The last two years have been a real struggle to find qualified adults to train as  teachers. Most of the educated refugees have been resettled and now we are left  to train illiterate adults to become teachers. At a different point in one of our many conversations, Loknath had commented: Whereas early on we had more reliable and confident teachers and resource  teachers, now we have a group of young and inexperienced teachers. The best  teachers we have today would not be able to get into that group of the previous  cohorts of resource teachers. All of the teachers we have now require much  more help from the CaritasJRS, Damak office. We still have some schoolbased resource teachers, but they need a lot more support from the office-based  resource teachers. Dorji, another head teacher in one of the camps schools, whose daughters  had already left the camps and resettled in the United States, said: As a result of constant resettlement, students can easily see different teachers  in a single year. It used to be the same teacher for the whole year. The current  teaching staff is young and their maturity level and experience is low.
Chapter Five When we were driving between the two camp sites in the UNHCR-supplied  Toyota Land Rover, Sister Lourda Mary had a sobering internal assessment  of the challenges. This assessment demonstrated her sense that where donor  agencies were targeting their limited resources was impacted by the existing  humanitarian crisis emanating primarily out of Syria and the global politics  surrounding refugee resettlement. Whereas North American teachers are keenly aware of the negative effects  of narrowly ascribing educational success to standardized test scores, the  plight of the remaining Bhutanese refugees was directly tied to low student  achievement test scores that the educators had no ability to improve. Sister  Lourda Mary commented: This is one of the greatest challenges. Because of the turnover in the teaching  staff, the experienced and best-trained teachers have left the camps. This has  affected the standard of education quite a bit. We can see this, and so can our  funders, in the changes in the results of the Class 10 Exams. They have dropped  over the years and we know that they will not get better. The program managers and school administrators knew that JRSCaritas  Nepal and the BREPs were facing increased pressures associated with donor  agency expectations for high levels of student achievement. Donor agencies needed to promote the academic quality of the schools  programming to benefactors, but they knew that the previously high levels of  academic achievement were no longer sustainable. Dorji pulled out a large,  dusty, ledger-style accounting book from behind his desk, opened it, and  pointed at the grade records he had kept over the years: The level of student achievement on Grade 10 results has decreased over the  past ten years. The students today are not as well prepared by teachers who  themselves are not as well prepared. But, we know that our funders are still  looking at the Level 10 exam results to see if we are doing a good job. The school managers were, therefore, left to try to prepare relatively unor  underprepared adults to become teachers in the face of dwindling resources  to prepare them. These new teachers, who had limited preparation to teach,  would increasingly come face to face with students who were disengaged  from learning and did not want to study. They too lived in limbo, and were  simply waiting for their turn to be resettled. A recurring challenge in refugee school contexts is the persistent challenge of diminishing human and financial resources Inter-Agency Network  for Education in Emergencies INEE, 2011; Ring  West, 2015. Research  suggests that there is an important inverse relationship between teacher  turnover rates and student achievement results Ronfeldt et al., 2013. In 

Refugee Camp Schools beneath a Setting Sun	 79 other words, as the level of teacher turnover increases, the level of student  achievement decreases. A frequent reality facing any refugee camp school is the scarcity of adults  qualified andor prepared to teach INEE, 2011. In many post-conflict  emergency and refugee contexts, unor under-qualified adults are put into  classrooms, and many of them do not last long Ring  West, 2015. The  disruptive effect of relying on so many marginally qualified teachers, combined with the high rate of attrition of the limited number of teachers who are  professionally prepared, and truly committed to teach, not only negatively  impacts the students, but also negatively affects those teachers who remain in  the camps Ronfeldt et al., 2013. The lack of motivation displayed by the students intensified the already  challenging work that the teachers had to be prepared to face each day. Sister  Lourda Mary added: As more families were resettled, the refugees left behindchildren and parentsare less motivated for school and studies. This teaching has become more  of a struggle. Loknath offered his assessment of what was happening in the camps and  schools: The teachers are facing students who are not motivated to study. They are just  waiting to be notified they are leaving the camp. Some of the teachers are not  motivated either, for the same reason. Many families left in the camps have  extended family that have already been resettled. They send money transfers  back to the camps. Having access to money in the camp without having to earn  it has caused apathy. As reported in other research on education in refugee and displacement  contexts INEE, 2009; Ring  West, 2015; Sesnan et al., 2013, many of the  individuals noted that, in refugee camp settings, the limits put on the existing  financial incentive programs for teachers might work against teacher recruitment and retention efforts. Brown 2001 noted that, with respect to the Bhutanese refugees abilities to land teaching jobs outside the camps, the educational standards of  the teachers are relatively high and so the private-school head teachers and  parents are normally happy to accept them p. 126. Thinking about the financial incentive program for teachers, Dorji commented: When we first started the BREPs the teachers were very happy to be paid a small  cash incentive to teach. It was not much, but it was something. Now the cash  incentive means very little to them.
Chapter Five Based on research conducted in African refugee camps, Crisp 2003 suggested that there is ample evidence that refugees, caught in protracted situations of uncertainty, become increasingly reliant on money remitted to them  by family members who have succeeded in leaving the camp and resettling,  and earning money themselves. While a fundamental principle of operating  and staffing refugee camp schools is to recruit, train, and retain a cadre of  qualified teachers drawn from the refugee population Brown, 2001, the  reality is that refugees, like anyone else, are rationally motivated by the  availability of income Sesnan, 2012, p. 88. As if it had not been clear enough from the materials that I had read prior  to arriving, this visit laid bare how the challenges associated with recruiting  and retaining a qualified teaching workforce become more pronounced in  late-stage refugee camp situations. Impending closure means that there are  fewer and fewer incentives available to entice, motivate, and persuade the  remaining adult refugee population to serve as teachers. Later on, in another  conversation, Loknath stated with an air of despair: We have seen an increase in suicide, mental health issues, and depression  among the younger adults and youth population still remaining in the camps.  I would describe our current students and teachers as: distracted, demotivated,  and disturbed. In the case of the BREPs, the progression of resettlement accelerated the  loss of the literate and numerate adults, specifically those who had been recruited and trained to become teachers, and their children. As has been noted  in other research on refugee resettlement see MacLaren, 2014; Takizawa,  2015, it is common for the best and brightest to be the first to be resettled.  This process creates an atmosphere of fear in refugee communities that, as resettlement progresses, they will lose the benefit of having qualified teachers,  social workers, and community leaders drawn from their own kin MacLaren,  2014; Takizawa, 2015. It is common for the recipient countries to apply some form of ability to  resettle criteria to potential refugees Takizawa, 2015. In turn, as the number  of refugees who remain in the camp decreases, fewer of them are regarded as  desirable to new host countries as their ability to resettleoftentimes a combination of formal education, command of the host countrys official language  or languages, and verifiable work experience Takizawa, 2015is considered to be much less likely. Even though the school administrators and program managers described  some of the teaching corps as being marginally literate and numerate, and  also as somewhat disinterested in teaching, they were all who were available to teach the remaining students. Many of them were said to suffer from 

Refugee Camp Schools beneath a Setting Sun	 81 serious issues related to their physical, emotional, and mental well-being.  In the case of the Bhutanese refugees, by late 2015, the effectiveness of the  resettlement program had reduced the camps populations down to about  fifteen percent of its historically high level, and had concomitantly depleted  the teacher talent pool dramatically. It also depleted the overall capacity of  the community members to care for each other because the educated adults  who had backgrounds in social work and counseling had also been resettled. In addition, the sheer scale of the humanitarian refugee crisis added to the  uncertainty that already existed in the camps. Rachel, another office-based  resource teacher from the Damak sub-office, but who had only been assigned  to it for about a year, said: Many refugees are now worried about the announcements that the UNWFP  United Nations World Food Program is going to shut down or decrease food  rations. This is causing worry and fear. And, now we are seeing some of the  refugees protest with sit-ins. After visiting a number of the remaining BREP sites, we sat down for  lunch in one of the few remaining family-run restaurants in the camps, which  was really just a small, sheltered patio outside what looked like just another  bamboo hut. During our conversation, Sister Lourda Mary commented: We know that the UNHCR is facing a big financial crisis. We are aware of the  limited funding available. We are not sure what that means for the last year of  our programs. Even once the UNHCR pulls out in December 2016, we expect  that there will be a few thousand refugees still left here. But, then what? No  one knows the answer. The UNWFP has told us that it plans to provide assistance to the remaining Bhutanese refugees until the camps reached a residual  populationmaybe around 3,000 to 5,000 people remaining in the camps. At  that point, the responsibility for continued aid shifts fully over to the UNHCR. After lunch, we drove by a group of a few dozen Bhutanese refugees who  were quietly gathered around the UNWFP Distribution Centre, and I wondered  if, given the scale of the humanitarian crisis the world was facing in late 2015,  the commitment was attainable. As we continued on our way in the UNHCR  Land Rover, I asked Sister Mary Lourda what was going on. She answered: Their food rations have been cut. Less rice. Less cooking oil. Just less. They are  not happy and this is the local version of a protest. They are a peaceful bunch so  they will simply sit in silence to make their point. As a result, by December 2015, the BREPs were facing the harsh reality of losing their funding as the UNHCR and donor agencies shifted their 
Chapter Five focus and financial commitments to address the overwhelming humanitarian  crises emanating from Syria, Iraq, and many of the central African countries  besieged by conflict. These sociopolitical factors, they believed, contributed  to rendering the remaining Bhutanese refugees and their plight somewhat  invisible in many public spheres. A CONFLUENCE OF FACTORS While chronic underfunding limits the abilities of humanitarian agencies to  provide high-quality educational programs and services in refugee camp settings, so too do less obvious funding regimes that are tied to static measures  of academic achievementsuch measures are devoid of the contextual factors that exist in refugee camps Brown, 2001; Ring  West, 2015; Sesnan  et al., 2013. When the need to produce results becomes paramount to the  continuous funding for school programs and initiatives, cracks will develop  for each and every refugee student across the global contexts Kamau  Fox,  2013. What might be unique to the Bhutanese refugees in late 2015, however, was the confluence of two factors, which were: 1 the fact that donor  agency expectations were based on laudable, historically high levels of student achievement in the BREPs, but ones that were no longer achievable; and,  2 the intensification of the plight of refugees caused by the sheer magnitude  of the refugee crises that had swept across the globe by late 2015. With both the UNHCRs and UNWFPs budgets buckling under the historically high needs for humanitarian aid and greater pressures on humanitarian agencies than had ever before been experienced Crisp, 2003, donor  agencies were faced with the dilemma of where best to strategically invest  their limited resources. In an era of demonstrable return-on-investment-style  metrics, metrics that are commonplace in corporate and non-corporate board  rooms alike, the BREPs program managers and educators were uncertain  about the ways in which they could continue to provide schooling for the  remaining refugee population. THE FACE OF THE RESIDUAL CASES I had read about the case of Shanti Ram Acharya, who, when he was seventeen years old, had crossed back over the Bhutan border after traveling from  Nepal and across Indias Darjeeling region to visit an uncle who lived in  Bhutan. Acharya was apprehended by the Bhutanese government, accused  of terrorism, and held in a detention center for eight years. Once released, he 

Refugee Camp Schools beneath a Setting Sun	 83 returned to the Bhutanese refugee camp, but, with a terrorism-related charge  on his record, he was ineligible to be resettled even though his immediate  family had moved out of the camp and lived in the United States. When I  asked Loknath if he knew Acharya, he said yes. And he added: Its been particularly hard on his mom. Its true he didnt have the proper papers,  but all he did was visit his uncle in Bhutan. Hes in his late twenties and is probably never going to be able to leave Nepal. It is one more tragedy that will be  leaving many behind with nowhere to go. This is what a residual caseload means, in human terms. What is  unique to the context of refugee resettlement, however, is that the residual  caseloadsthat is, those individuals who remain stateless while other  members of a specific refugee population have been resettledhas proven  to be a vexing problem for humanitarian workers across refugee contexts  for decades Crisp, 2003. HEADING OUT The few buses that still traveled down the camps gravel roads kicked up dust  that filled the air before slowly settling down. After two and a half days of  visiting with different staff at the school facilities in the two remaining camps  and the office-based staff in Damak, I needed to take a walk. With my hosts  from JRSCaritas Nepals permission, and a promise that I would be careful,  and that I would meet them at the other side of the camp, I decided to take a  walk through what was left of the Beldangi camp. As I walked down the main street, I could see a few of the remaining  money transfer agencies. But, there were only a few. They looked different  from the pictures I had seen in some of the African refugee camps with their  abundance of Western Union and Money Transfer signs hanging next to  the SIM card billboards. It is common to find a Western Union sign in a refugee camp, advertising  its services as resettled family members and friends send money from time to  time back to their loved ones who remain in the camp. But, as the population  of the Bhutanese camps decreased, the camps once busy market-places had  disappeared. I made me think about how increased urbanization has drained  many rural communities, towns, and even some smaller cities in North America of their best and brightest. The decade-long success of Bhutanese refugee  resettlement had clearly led to an inevitable decline in the local economy.  This became so obvious to me as I walked through the camp.
Chapter Five Just before I reached the far end of the camp, I saw rows of dozens of  solar ovens the size of 1990s-era satellite dishes. They had once been used  by families to cook their meals, but now they were arranged as surplus material to be discarded. While it seemed like a bit of an odd sight to seea  scrap heap of aluminumI wondered if the surplus reselling business might  provide some of the remaining Bhutanese refugees with some source of income. However, I did not ask Sr. Lourda Mary, as it had been a long three  days, during which I had asked quite a few questions. I simply climbed into  the white SUV, slumped back into the dark leather upholstered seats, and  closed my eyes. OPTIMISTICALLY PREPARING   FOR THE NEXT CAMP CLOSURE Teachers in many Developed World countries recognize that there is no  shortage of challenges in school-based education, and some of the biggest  challenges can appear frustratingly intractable. It is hard to ignore the cold,  hard fact that money, especially when financial resources are limited, impacts  educational outcomes for all students. Every countrys future depends heavily  on the quality of the educational opportunities it provides to its youth. While  perhaps an imperfect relationship to mathematically quantify, increased financial support allows school systems to implement proven strategies such  as attracting the best and brightest to teaching, and then providing them with  ongoing professional development. It is also known that retaining excellent  teachers matters a great deal with respect to student achievement. And, as  is the case in many contexts around the globe, the program managers and  administrators who work with Bhutanese Refugee Education Programs were  keenly aware of these stark facts. However, the financial pressures that the UNHCR is under are historically  unprecedented given the sheer size of the current humanitarian tragedies that  continue to unfold before our eyes as we prepare to enter the 2020s Aiyar   et al., 2016. This fiscal exigency has had a dramatic impact on the provision  of educational programs and services in refugee camp settings across the  world. It is clear that the program managers of the non-governmental organizations that partner with the UNHCR to support the refugee camp schools  will be even more pressed to find durable solutions to educate a generation  of refugee schoolchildren. Long-term solutions to the challenges that face educators, administrators,  and program managers in refugee schools should be a concern for all of us  to consider. Even for those who think we need to invest more in our local 

Refugee Camp Schools beneath a Setting Sun	 85 schools and less in international humanitarian aid, the truth cannot be avoided  that, with globalization and increased migration, the plight of refugees who  are unor under-educated should warrant our attention. It is not a stretch of  the imagination to consider that they might possibly become our neighbors,  our colleagues, and our childrens classmates. And even though many teachers have experienced the reality of teaching recently arrived refugee students,  a majority of teachers have only a vague understanding of what school represented in a refugee camp context. In a broader political context, it is regrettable that far too many governments  in the Developed World have rather myopic and simplified understandings of  how refugee resettlement should occur. In their narrow models, drawn up by  policy wonks with limited understanding of life within a refugee camp, they  first assume that the refugee and her or his dependents gratefully arrive in the  host country. At the moment of the initial arrival, she and her family are taken  under the care of local volunteer agencies, often referred to as VolAgs, who  have been approved to work with the refugees on behalf of various government entities. Second, the refugee is given, on average, a sufficient number of  months of free or drastically subsidized housing and some food vouchers not  in a city of their choosing, but rather, one chosen for them. Once landed in her new host country, it is expected that, as soon as is  humanly possible, shethe refugee mother of fivewill find some form  of employment regardless of her English fluency. When there is space, additional English-language classes might be offered for a short period of time,  but this depends on both space and availability. It also ends regardless of  whether the refugee has achieved a basic level of language proficiency. Last,  through the simplified expectation of making it and achieving the insert host  country name dream, the refugee is celebrated for assimilating into her or  his new country and is treated the same as the domestically born citizens, and  the resettled refugee is eternally grateful to her host country for saving her. This imagined scenario is the stuff of Hollywood movies. The refugee  resettlement process is never this simple, nor obstacle free and, while many  refugees, even within the Bhutanese community, have achieved a considerable degree of vertical mobility and economic success in less than a decade,  there is still widespread doubt and fear about a lack of success. The root of the  policy problem is the use of archaic theories on recently resettled refugees  behaviors, many of them extensions of an assimilationist approach to immigration. Refugees are not immigrants. No one chooses to be a refugee even  though countless millions choose to immigrate each year. Given the sheer scale of the humanitarian crisis the world is facing in the  second decade of this millennium, it seems timely to re-orient approaches  to the resettlement of recently arrived refugees, who are typically regarded 
Chapter Five through a policy lens as if they were just another immigrant group and who  undergo what Rumbaut and Portes 2001, p. 6 referred to as a process of  segmented assimilation in which outcomes vary across immigrant minorities. Teachers know that it takes somewhere in the range of five to seven years  for a student to become literate in English as an additional language if the  student arrived semi-literate in her or his first language Clifford, Rhodes   Paxton, 2014. The reality, though, for many refugee students is that they are  pre-literate or non-literate, and have endured or witnessed tremendous suffering. For these students, it takes even longer to become literate in English. For  their parents and guardians, learning English and securing decently paying,  stable employment can be insurmountable. What this ethnographic study suggests is that segmented and targeted approaches Jamal, 2008 to the planning, funding, and operational aspectsones  that recognize that long-term refugee populations are not an undifferentiated  mass of humanity and ones that differentiate the levels and types of educational  programs and services accordingly based on the shifting needs of students  and teachersare essential to ensure the success of late-stage refugee camp  schools. Consideration should be given to funding mechanisms for educational  programs and services that are differentiated to match the challenges associated over the lifespan of a refugee camp. Such a lifespan funding regime might  be generally framed as: 1 early-stage: characterized by the immediate need  to establish schools in the camps; 2 midstage: characterized by the need for  the ongoing physical maintenance and improvement of the schools, as well as  refinement of their programs and services; and, 3 late-stage: characterized  by the human and social capital resource depletion that occurs during the final  stages of resettlement, making it difficult to maintain a high standard of quality  for programs and services. It is also important to consider political and policy approachesboth  structural and financialthat might act as bridges back to the refugee camp  communities for some of those who have left but might wish to return to  serve as teachers, as well as in other much needed professional capacities  that can serve the needs of those remaining in the camps. The current model  of resettlement builds a one-way bridge out of the camps and away from  the refugee communities. In essence, it drains the talent pool by removing  the most capable from the camp. Yet, pathways are required during the late  stages of refugee camp schools that can allow for talentin the form of  bright and committed resettled refugeesto flow back into the communities  for a period of time to serve them when those talents are needed most. These are seemingly simple yet impactful approaches that could be enacted, but only if the global communitys long-term commitment is to provide refugee children with the semblance of a quality education. It must not  

Refugee Camp Schools beneath a Setting Sun	 87 be a commitment simply made at the beginning of the establishment of the  camps when the media broadcasts the plight of the refugees into peoples  living rooms, but it must continue throughout the camps existence when the  media moves on to the next story. Attracting, developing, and retaining effective teachers is the most critically  important policy lever related to the provision of a quality education OECD,  2005. Such is the case across all educational contexts. In refugee camp  schools, however, there is little research focused on the experiences of teachers, administrators, and program managers that might inform policy-makers  about ways in which to improve teacher recruitment, professional development, and retention strategies beyond the initial stages of creating a refugee  camp school, lasting until the aspirational goal of closing them down becomes  realized because there is no longer a need for a specific refugee camp. The factors identified in this case study are not the only ones that affect the  quality of the educational programs and services available in refugee camp  schools, nor are they necessarily the most impactful factors in all refugee  camp school contexts. These factors do, however, act as an index to the extremely vexing challenges associated with providing a quality education in  one late-stage refugee camp setting. It is my hope that this study might add to  the limited available research and provide a useful starting point for greater  discussion about the challenges that refugee students, their families, and their  teachers face as they prepare for repatriation or resettlement. HOPE EVEN AFTER THE SUN SETS Even though one of the most impactful levers available to build a more peaceful future for refugees is through access to education, quality school programs  are all too often limited and uneven across regions and settings of displacement caused by conflict Dryden-Peterson, 2011; Winthrop  Kirk, 2005.  Clearly, there is a need to focus on a future that leads to repatriation, resettlement, and the transition from being stateless to an individual who belongs to  a country, not only for the best and brightest, but for all who are left to linger  in the refugee camps Sinclair, 2001. Given the fact that, at the global level,  historic numbers of refugeesparents and childrenare facing resettlement  that can take years if not decades in late-stage resettlement contexts, it is important to understand the complex sociopolitical factors that teachers, school  administrators, and managers face as they work to provide an education in the  shadow of what are the last vestiges of a refugee camp. It is nearly impossible to calculate the social and economic costs that are  incurred when refugees are deprived of a quality education. The UNHCR 
Chapter Five 2001 has stated that the likelihood of a productive and prosperous future for  a refugee who goes without a proper formal education is low. A refugee who  is denied access to vocational training opportunities or sufficient academic  preparation is more likely to become socially disengaged and be drawn into  criminal activity, organized crime, or paramilitary groups. Not only will a refugee who remains illiterate and innumerate be at a serious disadvantage personally, but she or he will be unlikely to be able to contribute to society in a meaningful way. It seems clear that providing a quality  education to refugeesfrom the genesis of camp until the sun has set on  itshould be a priority for the international community. If educators in the  Developed World are truly obligated to the successful integration of refugee  students and their families, they must be committed not just to the ones who  are the first and easiest to be resettled but all refugees, including those who  may never be resettled and are simply absorbed by their initial host country.  We must do more to support them from the birth of a refugee camp throughout the resettlement process. This is important collective work for teachers. Still, there is more that teachers can do at the individual level. They can  themselves commit to become more interculturally competent. They need  to learn how to better understand, evaluate, and relate to ambiguous and  uncertain intercultural situations that do not have simple origins or endings.  They need to be more critically aware of the relative validity and invalidity of their own frame of reference and the assumptive worldview that they  hold. In response, they are better able to select and to use communication  styles andor behaviors to create a better fit between the specific local and  intercultural context. As a professional community of educators, a professional community that  exists globally in various social and political contexts, some of which are very  challenging, we grow as we come to better understand the educational experience of people in other contexts. We should aim not only to understand the  experiences of the refugee students who arrive in our classrooms and schools,  but we should also become more critically aware of the struggles that our colleagues have faced in educating them before they arrive.
Chapter Six Looking Back The ethnographic narratives that comprise the stories of the book open with  my journey into the brickfields. I have tried to illustrate my experiences with the  ambitious people committed to the Loreto Sealdah Schools Resource Centre  for Social Transformation, and the teachers who teach at two of the brickfield  schools near Kolkata, India. In very real terms, this is where the journey that  comprises the narratives of this book began. This is where the germ of an idea  for a book grew, one that would focus attention on some of the challenging social contexts in which teachers work. I gained so much from my three years of international fieldwork, and I  have tried to convey what I experienced and learned about teachers, teaching,  and the human condition to the readers of this book. I hope that I have illuminated at least some aspects of it well. In the course of meeting the people  whose stories I have tried to represent in the book, I learned so much about  the profession of education, a profession that I was fortunate enough to join  in 1992. I am grateful that I am still continuing to work in this wonderful  profession more than twenty-five years later. I have learned that teachers are a hopeful lot. Even when surrounded by  abject poverty and the trauma of surviving mass atrocity, and facing the uncertainty of what lies ahead through resettlement, teachers maintain a certain  expectation that the future will be better for their students. The educators who  consented to be interviewed for my studies always remained hopeful. They  possessed not a glib sense of hope, but rather, one that was grounded in the  realities they faced, even while they recognized that things could go wrong  again. In fact, these realities proved to be something that I would come to better understand, to varying extents, as a result of each of the research fieldwork  experiences described in this book.
Chapter Six However, the point of highlighting the sense of hope is not to overlook  the significant challenges faced by the migrant worker families, or the committed group of educators who desperately cling to the faint possibility that  a brickfield school can make a difference in the lives of some of the worlds  neediest children. And, the point is certainly not to exploit this sense of hope  for my own, and our collective, comfort. These days, this type of exploitation  is far too easy to accomplish simply by pitying the poor, and then remarking  on how content we perceive them to be as they endure their circumstances.  We love a good story of optimism because we believe that it carries people  through seemingly impossible circumstances. It can be tempting to feel okay  about doing nothing in particular when we see people mustering a smile while  enduring the harshness of the social conditions they live in. Far too often, those of us who have been, by chance, born and raised in the  privilege of the Developed World find ourselves feeling helpless and powerless to actually aid in alleviating the plight of those who have been, also by  chance, born and raised in abject poverty. We sometimes seek to satisfy our need for a sense of justice with the idea  that if hope can still be found, even in small doses, then the lives of the poor,  oppressed, and marginalized cannot really be all that bad. Look, we tell ourselves, they are still able to smile. Almost self-indulgently, we want to believe, or maybe convince ourselves,  that if we listen carefully and take in someone elses story, then we have  contributed to their betterment, and the worlds, by simply paying attention,  listening, and then celebrating their resilience. Comforting sentiments such as  these ring hollow in terms of social change. No, this is not why we should take note of their residual hope. The reality  is that we directly reap benefits from the devastation forced on the people and  lands of the Developing World. As such, we can never do all that we should  do to help. But, despite that reality, we should never stop trying to change  ourselves and aiming to improve the odds for those who desperately need  better ones in order to succeed. We must not give up the hope that we can do  better, and, in fact, be better. What the migrant workers and the teachers in the  brickfield schools hoped for was the promise of everything that a good education could bring for children. We need to work together toward solutions that  will ensure that their hopes do not prove to be in vain. Furthermore, teachers in North American contexts need to learn from those  hopes in order to connect empathically with people across the world, people  who have experienced vastly different educational situations. They should  ensure that their own teaching practice is informed by a knowledge that students in their own classrooms may face barriers that do not immediately, or  clearly, present themselves. This is certainly true for some of our domestic 

Looking Back	 91 students, but it is also true for students who have migrated from far and wide.  Increasingly, teachers in North America interact with children whose families  immigrated by choice as well as children whose families were displaced by  war or other forms of violent discrimination. Statistics are impersonal. Listening to them repeated over and over again  on the news will not change that fact. The apparent light speed of the news  cycle makes it difficult to comprehend the magnitude of the current humanitarian crises. And, the vastness of the numbers of people who are suffering  can be mind-numbing. They also at times serve as a barrier. The human heart  cannot connect with vast swaths of unknown individuals. The human mind  cannot compute the extent of the misery. But they can connect deeply with narratives that expose the realities of  particular individuals. That is what the recounting of my fieldwork was intended to do. The migrant families who toiled in the brickfield school were burdened  by the manual labor that their own survival required them to do. The adults  bodies ached every day as they labored, but they continued to believe that,  somehow, their children might fare better than they had in life. And yet, even  amid a scene that made clear to me the misery of descending into the brickfields pits to mold and cart wagonloads of bricks day after day, children still  laughed and played in the schoolyard before and after their own work duties. Their parents, illiterate and innumerate themselves, were deeply grateful  for the possibility of a better future for their children. It is nearly impossible  to witness the daily living of such a community and not to have it nurture a  deep sense of empathy and a desire to do more to ensure that the children do,  in fact, access a better life for themselves. In my experience interviewing members of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective, I learned that peace education is a particularly complicated  endeavor when it is informed by teachers own experiences with being  stripped of a sense of common humanity. I am at a loss when I think of what it  might mean to stand and face, let alone teach, the children and grandchildren  of people who tried to exterminate my family, my children, and me. What these teachers have committed to is an awe-inspiring endeavor, to be  sure, and one that is driven by their desire to prevent future generations from  experiencing the same profound suffering that they did. But my experience  in Rwanda also left me with a haunting feeling that I am not sure will ever  dissipate, nor should it. My experience of meeting the Rwandan teachers,  each a survivor of genocide, and of visiting the genocide memorial, haunted  me quite profoundly for months after I returned home in the spring of 2014. The fact that the teachers, as children, had their core identities attacked  as worthless and had witnessed horrific violence against their own family 
Chapter Six members, meant that their teaching was driven by a need to prevent history  from ever repeating itself. Many of the teachers experienced profound interruptions in their childhood and their schooling due to both what they needed  to do to survive as well as to the emotional impact of the trauma they had experienced. In a more external sense, there was also simply a lack of facilities  available for schooling purposes. Becoming teachers as adults has allowed  them to contribute to, as well as turn on its head, the system that failed them  as children, in order to ensure a better, more unified future for todays Rwandan children. Often, the schools that these teachers had themselves attended  were vehicles of racially based hatred. That is something they are determined  to combat as adults and as members of the global profession of teachers. Systemic barriers very often operate in opposition to goals of this kind,  much like they have been operating in both the Rwandan schools and also  in the Bhutanese refugee schools that I visited. In the case of the brickfield  schools in Kolkata, the recruitment of fully qualified and talented teachers  has been starkly limited by the impoverished, remotely located facilities. The  truth is that masterful teachers do not tend to take up opportunities to teach  in such harsh environments because, frankly, they have alternative options.  While the alternatives to teaching may be limited and the tendency might be  to suggestwhat else could they do?my experience is that the brickfield  schools teachers, members of the Rwandan Genocide Teachers Collective,  or the program managers and educators who work in the Bhutanese refugee  camp schools could probably find work that is less emotionally and physically exhausting than teaching is. It was heartbreaking for me to realize the degree to which, even in the  midst of laudable United Nations intervention in Nepal, aid is given to those  who, by hard work, yes, but also by the luck of their born situations and opportunities, are considered to be desirable to the societies providing asylum.  There is something profoundly sad and unsettling about the fact that those  who are the most disadvantaged to begin with are further disadvantaged when  the tragedy of one of the worlds largest humanitarian crises unfolds. The very idea that receiving food, shelter, and access to a quality education  are all things that must be doled out based on the attention of media outlets  or how useful particular individuals prove themselves to be, politically and  economically, is disheartening. It is, unfortunately, a fact that utility is traded  for survival. It is not enough to simply be a human being. For the last twenty thousand refugees remaining in the Bhutanese refugee  camps, their futures and educational opportunities were being narrowed by  the resettlement of many of the most talented teachers who had initially  taken up posts in the camp, but who had also proven to be ideal candidates  for early resettlement. By mid-December 2015, during the late stages of the 

Looking Back	 93 camps existence, the point at which the last of the camps inhabitants were  being prepared to transition out, the only adults left were those who were both  unqualified and unmotivated to teach. However, with limited time and resources available to prepare potential  teachers, the program managers and school administrators still prepared them  to teach. Whether they taught out of either necessity or some sense of obligation, the program administrators of the BREPs resigned themselves to work  with whomever was available and at least mildly interested. They preferred,  whenever possible, to select those motivated to teach, but they were also  forced to take those without much motivation. They would not give up hope  for the childrens futures. The teachers, themselves refugees, represented a group of adults who had  been passed over for earlier resettlement as they watched family members  and others get resettled more quickly. Understandably, they missed their  families and friends who had departed. They were emotionally exhausted  and in limbo. Many of the remaining teachers were frustrated with a job that  they were never fully prepared to perform, tending to children who were in  similarly critical situations. They still taught as best they could. There are two things that are important to keep in mind as you think back  to the chapters that you have read. First, it is one thing to experience empathy, but quite another to exploit that empathy for self-satisfaction. You, quite  likely, felt helpless at some points as you read. That was not unexpected.  The worlds problems are vast, and you may have been left feeling that you  have limited means to help. It is, however, not a feeling with which you have  to stay. It is too easy to feel paralyzed to act and then to simply wallow in  despair as a way of alleviating that feeling of discomfort, believing that, as  time passes, you will forget about the people that the stories represent. The  stories, as well as the challenges that each one represents, are not going away  any time soon. We have to do something in reaction to these stories. A better reaction than paralysis is to couple the recognition of your limitations with an awareness of the individual power you have to make a difference. You can also open your eyes to recognize the collective power that  you have as a worldwide professiona collegiumof educators. You may  not be able to go teach in a brickfield school in Kolkata, but you are able to  greet the children in your classroom, arming yourself with knowledge about  the importance of global citizenship, and a deeper understanding of the lives  of migrants. You can find colleagues who share this commitment and work  together to connect local school-based programs to support initiatives like the  brickfield schools. The cost of educating a brickfield teacher through a twoday professional development workshop is about three dollars. This is little  more than what is costs to buy a cup of coffee.
Chapter Six You do not need to have the courage to face the children and grandchildren  of the gnocidaires who savagely butchered your family as the Rwandan  teachers I interviewed did. But, you do possess the ability to find the courage  to forgive your students parents and colleagues who may have said things  that have deeply hurt you. You can reach across the differences that exist in  our common humanitypolitical, linguistic, ethnic, cultural, and religious and commit yourself to teach in a way that acknowledges the inspiring words  of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., who said: all life is interrelated. We are all  caught in an inescapable network of mutuality, tied into a single garment of  destiny. Whatever affects one destiny, affects all indirectly. And, while there is no doubt that the financial and human resources required to support an effective teaching and learning dynamic are limited and  shrinking in the Developed World, you do possess the capacity to find innovative ways in which to collaborate with colleagues from across the world  and to grow professionally and interculturally. What is most important is  that you can lead the global profession by example. If you are one of countless teachers in an intercultural classroom, you can both support students by  enacting empathy and a willingness to learn about those aspects of various  cultures that are unfamiliar to you, and you can help your colleagues to learn  to do the same. This is, in itself, a life calling. The second thing to keep in mind is this: it is okay to notice the hope in  these stories. Do not feel guilty that you found a sliver of light in the midst  of darkness. Guilt is an anchor that holds us down and disables us. In fact,  finding a glimmer of hope is essential to understanding the experiences of the  educators I interviewed and the lives that the stories represent. Please let that  hope inspire you. However, please make sure it does not leave you apathetic  and inert because you have read about how unfair life can be. Do something  to change the social realities that you see in front of you and that you have  concluded are, in some distinct ways, simply unfair. Go out and do something  to make a difference. All of these things that I have outlined as goals for teaching, I wrestle with  myself. Becoming globally and interculturally competent has not been an  easy journey. I have made mistakes, more than I wish to acknowledge. You  are bound to do the same. Accept it, and try anyway. If you feel exhausted by  the work involved, take a break. Rest a little while and catch your breath. But  then, as soon as is humanly possible, get back at it. Education is an incredibly  powerful force for good when it is used as such. But, teaching interculturally  requires effort and commitment. Do not forget that fact. Recognizing the potential for marginalization and oppression in xenophobic forms of teaching is  key to ensuring that our apathy does not allow hatred to come in through the  back door of our classroom practice.

Looking Back	 95 It may sound insincere to thank you for reading this book, but I do want to  thank youand I mean it. I am in a privileged situation, being a researcher  who can fly all across the world to visit various educational contexts, gather  data, and then come back home to my own comfort and write about my  experiences. I feel that my work would be in vain if I did not try to share it  as widely as possible. For the sake of all those teachers who are in difficult  educational contexts and could not otherwise reach you, thank you for taking  the time to hear their stories, as filtered through my own experience as they  might be. And please, let your experiences with their stories encourage you  to combat the social and political divisions that exist in your own educational  contexts and in the communities in which you work. Work hard to find ways  in which to reconcile the broken social relationships that exist in our diverse  world. Find unity without requiring uniformity from everyone. Accept that  narrow definitions of social uniformity are undesirable and harmful. Allow  for the diversity in a large global family of human beingsthe diversity of  the teaching professionto exist without descending into idiosyncratic fragmentation that shouts out: We have nothing in common. The reality is that  our shared humanity and decency are the bonds that bind us together. Last, as teachers, fight for greater justice and peace. In your classroom, in  your school, in your community, in your nation, and among nations. Make  justice and peaceful coexistence a priority. Peace is always worth fighting  for. And, while you might not change the world, I can guarantee that you  will make a positive difference in someones life. It might even be your own.  Trust me.
Epilogue As I think back to the time I committed to connecting with the dozens of educators that I was fortunate enough to meet and to work with on these research  projects, and the years it took to bring their stories to this stage, it is obvious  to me that aspects of the ethnographic fieldwork and the participants stories  are indistinguishable from the social fabric of my own life. In fact, this intertwined existence was both an asset and impediment to writing this book. On  a few occasions, it caused me to wonder where my life as a scholar-educator  and researcher ended and where my life as a private citizen began. I never did  clearly delineate the two in my mind. As I wrote the early drafts of this book, I recalled that I was once asked,  after I gave an academic presentation about my work in Nepal to a group  of colleagues that I worked with but who by most accounts knew very little  about me and perhaps even less about my research program: Why do you travel across the world to spend time in and also live in  some harsh locations and work under difficult conditions? The professor  honestly inquired. The question seemed to be asked with tone of sincerity, but it also echoed  with an air of serious skepticism about my self-interest and motivation in  taking on this kind of work. Before I could answer the interrogator added, One of the things you said  is that you became quite ill after each one of these trips. Why do it if it costs  you so much? I struggled to find an intelligible answer. The question was clear and articulate. Admittedly, a simple response eluded me. How do I, or should I, reply? I wondered.
Epilogue The only answer that I could come up with was the one that I delivered  awkwardly to an interested scholarly audience. I offered that people, especially people who have suffered from conflict or who are under forms of  oppression, need allies who can help them to get their stories out into a wider  sphere. They need people who are committed to bring their experiences and  their stories, out of the shadows and into the light. Admittedly though, any narrative, ethnographic account is also an interpretation of the social involvement of the researcher in the field of study. When  I addressed my scholarly audience, I added to my response that I realized  that I could neither capture the fullness nor the exactitude of a picture of the  complex social lives that I was studying. All the same, I told them that I was  committed to try and represent what I was able to offer. Its all I could offer.  And, yes in doing so it cost me, a little. I accept the limited effects of my work as imperfect illustrations of the  complexity of human life. As Whyte 1964, pp. 34 stated, the researcher,  like his informants, is a social animal and any real explanation . . . of how  the research was done necessarily involves a personal account of how the  researcher lived during the period of study. It is clear to me that I sought out  being and becoming involved in the lives of some of the worlds oppressed  and marginalized, and tried to oppose the notional temptation to pretend to  maintain a convenient scholarly fiction that supposes a detachment between  the research and the informants. These supposed informants are, in fact, all  my relations.
References Acharya, J. 2011. Bhutanese refugees: The struggle in exile. In R. Hofmann    U. Caruso Eds., Minority Rights in South Asia pp. 2346. Frankfurt: Peter Lang. Adichie, C. N. 2009. The danger of a single story Video file. Retrieved from  https:www.ted.comtalkschimamandaadichiethedangerofasinglestory transcript?languageen. African Development Bank. 2012. African economic outlook: Rwanda. Retrieved  from http:www.afdb.orgfileadminuploadsafdbDocumentsPublicationsRwanda  20Full20PDF20Country20Note01.pdf. Aiyar, S., Barkbu, B., Batini, N., Berger, H., Detragiache, E., Dizioli, A., Ebeke, C.,  Lin, H., Kaltani, L., Sosa, S., Spilimbergo, A.,  Topalova, P. 2016. The refugee  surge in Europe: Economic challenges. IMF STAFF Discussion Note. Retrieved  from https:www.imf.orgexternalpubsftsdn2016sdn1602.pdf. Andrews, M. 2007. Exploring cross-cultural boundaries. In D. Jean Clandinin Ed.,  Handbook of narrative inquiry: Mapping a methodology pp. 489511. Thousand  Oaks, CA: Sage. Andrews, M., Squire, C.  Tambokou, M. Eds. 2008. Doing narrative research.  London: Sage. Arendt. H. 1961. Between past and future: Eight exercises in political thoughts.  New York: Penguin Books. Atkinson, P.,  Coffey, A. 2003. Revisiting the relationship between participant observation and interviewing. In J. F. Gubrium  J. A. Holstein Eds., Postmodern  interviewing pp. 109122. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Atkinson, P.,  Delamont, S. 2006. Rescuing narrative from qualitative research.  Narrative Inquiry, 161, 164172. Bar-Tal, D.,  Rosen, Y. 2009. Peace education in societies involved in intractable  conflicts: Direct and indirect models. Review of Educational Research, 792,  557575. doi: 10.31020034654308330969
References Barakat, B., Karpinska, Z.,  Paulson, J. 2008. Desk study: Education and fragility. Retrieved from http:toolkit.ineesite.orgtoolkitINEEcmsuploads1150 DeskStudyEducationandFragility.pdf. Barnett, S. W. 1998. Long-term cognitive and academic effects of early childhood  education on children in poverty. Preventive Medicine, 272, 204207. Bates, R. 2008. Teacher education in a global context: Towards a defensible theory  of teacher education. Journal of Education for Teaching: International Research  and Pedagogy, 344, 277293. Bennett, J.,  Bennett, M. 2004. Developing intercultural sensitivity: An integrative approach to global and domestic diversity. In D. Landis, J. Bennett,  M.  Bennett Eds., Handbook of intercultural training pp. 147165. Thousand  Oaks, CA: Sage. Bigelow, B.,  Peterson, B. 2002. Teaching justice in an unjust world. Milwaukee:  Rethinking Schools Press. Bird, L. 2003. Surviving school: Education for refugee children from Rwanda  19941996. Paris: UNESCO, International Institute for Education Planning. Bochner, A. P. 2007. Notes toward an ethics of memory in autoethnographic inquiry. In N. Denzin  M. Giardina Eds., Ethical futures in qualitative research  pp. 196208. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press. Bolton, P., Neugebauer, R.,  Lincoln, N. 2002. Prevalence of depression in rural  Rwanda based on symptom and functional criteria. Journal of Nervous  Mental  Disease, 1909, 631637. doi: 10.109701.NMD.0000030568.45847.AE. Brooks-Gunn, J. 2003. Do you believe in magic? Social Policy Report, 171, 316. Brown, G. 2012. Child labor  educational disadvantageBreaking the link,  building opportunity. London: Office of Gordon and Sarah Brown. Retrieved from  www.ungei.orgfi andeducationUS.pdf. Brown, T. 2001. Improving quality and attainment in refugee schools: The case of  the Bhutanese refugees in Nepal. In J. Crisp, C. Talbot,  D. Cipollone Eds.,  Learning for a future: Refugee education in developing countries pp. 109161.  Geneva: UNHCR. Burbules, N. C.,  Torres, C. A. 2000. Globalization and education: An introduction. In N. C. Burbules  C. A. Torres Eds., Globalization and education: Critical perspectives pp. 126. New York: Routledge. Burcu, A. T. 2012. Education. International Review of Business and Social Science,  8997. Bush, K.,  Saltarelli, D. 2000. The two faces of education in ethnic conflict: Towards a peacebuilding education for children. Florence: UNICEF. Castles, S.,  Davidson, A. 2000. Citizenship and migration: Globalization and the  politics of belonging. New York: Routledge. Chamberlain, K., Cain, T., Sheridan, J.,  Dupuis, A. 2011. Pluralisms in qualitative research: From multiple methods to integrated methods. Qualitative Research  in Psychology, 82, 151169. Charmaz, K. 1983. Loss of self: A fundamental form of suffering in the chronically ill. Sociology of Health  Illness, 52, 168195. doi:10.11111467-9566. ep10491512.

References	 101 Clandinin, J.,  Connelly, M. 2000. Narrative inquiry: Experience and story in  qualitative research. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Clifford, V., Rhodes, A.,  Paxton, G. 2014. Learning difficulties or learning English  difficulties? Additional language acquisition: An update for Paediatricians. Journal  of Paediatrics and Child Health, 503, 175181. doi:10.1111jpc.12396. Creswell, J. W. 2013. Educational research: Planning, conducting and evaluating quantitative and qualitative research 6th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ:  Prentice Hall. Crisp, J. 2003. No solution in sight: The problem of protracted refugee situations  in Africa. San Diego: Center for Comparative Immigration Studies, University of  California, San Diego. Davies, L. 2004. Building a civic culture in post-conflict. London Review of Education, 23, 229244. Davies, L. 2005a. Schools and war: Urgent agendas for comparative and international education. Compare, 354, 357371. Davies, L. 2005b. Teaching about conflict through citizenship education. International Journal of Citizenship and Teacher Education, 12, 1734. Davies, L. 2010. The different faces of education in conflict. Development, 534,  491497. Deardorff, D. K. 2006. Identification and assessment of intercultural competence  as a student outcome of internationalization. Journal of Studies in International  Education, 103, 241266. Delors, J. Ed. 1996. Learning: The treasure within. Report to UNESCO of the International Commission on Education for the Twenty-first Century. Paris: UNESCO. Delvin-Foltz, B. 2010. Teachers for the global age: A call to action for funders.  Teaching Education, 211, 113117. De Montclos, M. A. P.,  Kagwanja, P. M. 2000. Refugee camps or cities? The  socio-economic dynamics of the Dadaab and Kakuma camps in northern Kenya.  Journal of Refugee Studies, 132, 205222. doi:10.1093jrs13.2.205. Denzin, N. K.,  Lincoln, Y. S. 2005. The Sage handbook of qualitative research  3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Deshingkar, P. 2006. Internal migration, poverty and development in Asia: Including the excluded. IDS Bulletin, 373, 88100. Devereux, G. 1967. From anxiety to method in the behavioral sciences. The Hague:  Mouton. Dryden-Peterson, S. 2011. Refugee education: A global review. Geneva: UNHCR. Dryden-Peterson, S. 2015. The educational experiences of refugee children in countries of first asylum. Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute. Durkheim, E. 18971951. Suicide: A study in sociology. New York: Free Press. Earnest, J. 2013. Rwanda: Challenges for school leadership in a transitional, postconflict nation. In S. Clarke  T. ODonoghue Eds., School level leadership in  post-conflict societies pp. 7894. New York: Routledge. Ellis, C.,  Bochner, A. 2000. Autoethnography, personal narrative, reflexivity:  Researcher as subject. In N. K. Denzin  Y. S. Lincoln Eds., Handbook of qualitative research 2nd ed. pp. 733768. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
References Fantini, A.,  Tirmizi, A. 2006. Exploring and assessing intercultural competence.  World Learning Publications. Paper 1. Retrieved from http:digitalcollections.sit  .eduworldlearningpublications1. Fennes, H.,  Hapgood, K. 1997. Intercultural learning in the classroom. London:  Crossing Borders. Fox, C. 2008. Postcolonial dilemmas in narrative research. Compare, 383, 335347. Freedman, S. W., Weinstein, H. M., Murphy, K. L.,  Longman, T. 2008. Teaching history in post-genocide Rwanda. In S. Straus  L. Waldorf Eds., Remaking  Rwanda: State building and human rights after mass violence pp. 297315.  Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. Freire, P. 1983. Education for critical consciousness. New York: Seabury Press. Friedman, T. L. 2007. The world is flat: A brief history of the twenty-first century  3.0. New York: Picador. Gaudelli, W. 2003. World class: Teaching and learning in global times. Mahwah,  NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Gay, L. R., Mills, G. E.,  Airasian, P. W. 2012. Educational research: Competencies for analysis and applications 10th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. Ghodsee, K. 2016. From notes to narrative: Writing ethnographies that everyone  can read. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Giroux, H. A.,  McLaren, P. 1986. Teacher education and the politics of engagement:  A case for democratic schooling. Harvard Educational Review, 563, 213238. Glionna, J. M. 14 October 2014. Immigrant keeps suicide watch over fellow  refugees from Bhutan. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved from http:www.latimes  .comnationla-na-c1-bhutanese-suicides-20141008-story.htmlpage1. Green, L. A., Fryer, G. E., Froom, P., Culpepper, L.,  Froom, J. 2004. Opportunities, challenges, and lessons of international research in practice-based research  networks: The case of an international study of acute otitis media. Annals of Family  Medicine 25, 429433. Gubrium, J. F.,  Holstein, J. A. 2008. Narrative ethnography. In S. N. Hesse-Biber   P. Leavy Eds., Handbook of emergent methods pp. 241264. New York:  Guilford Press. Guo, L. 2014. Preparing teachers to educate for 21st century global citizenship:  Envisioning and enacting. Journal of Global Citizenship  Equity Education, 41,  123. Hansen, D. 1995. The call to teach. New York: Teachers College Press. Harris, I. M. 2004. Peace education theory. Journal of Peace Education, 11, 520. Hennink, M. M. 2008. Emergent issues in international focus group discussions.  In S. N. Hesse-Biber  P. Leavy Eds., Handbook of emergent methods pp.  207220. New York: Guilford Press. Hicks, D.,  Holden, C. Eds. 2007. Teaching the global dimension: Key principles and effective practice. London: Routledge. Human Rights Watch. 1996. Shattered lives: Sexual violence during the Rwandan  genocide and its aftermath. Retrieved from http:www.hrw.orgreports1996 Rwanda.htm. Inda, J. X.,  Rosaldo, R. 2007. The anthropology of globalization: A reader 2nd  ed. New York: Blackwell-Wiley.

References	 103 Inter-Agency Network for Education in Emergencies. 2009. INEE guidance notes  on teacher compensation in fragile states, situations of displacement and postcrisis recovery. New York: INEE. Retrieved from http:toolkit.ineesite.org  toolkitINEEcmsuploads1048INEEGuidanceNotesTeacherCompensation EN.PDF. Inter-Agency Network for Education in Emergencies. 2011. Third international  policy dialogue forum of the Taskforce on Teachers for EFA: Understanding the  role of teacher policy and programming for fragility. New York: INEE. International Labour Conference. 2002. A future without child labour: Global  report under the follow-up to the ILO declaration on fundamental principles and  rights at work. Geneva: International Labour Conference. International Organization for Migration, United Nations. 2015. World migration  report 2015. Geneva: IOM. International Organization for Migration, United Nations. 2008. The Bhutanese  refugees in Nepal: A tool for resettlement workers and sponsors. Nairobi: IOM. Jamal, A. 2008. Minimum standards and essential needs in protracted refugee situations: A review of the UNHCR programme in Kakuma, Kenya. Geneva: UNHCR,  Evaluation and Policy Analysis Unit. Jesuit Refugee Service. 2015. Top marks for Bhutanese refugee education program  BREP. New Delhi: JRS South Asia. Josselson, R. 2006. Narrative research and the challenge of accumulating knowledge. Narrative Inquiry, 161, 310. Kamau, C.,  Fox, J. 2013. The Dadaab dilemma: A study on livelihood activities and  opportunities for Dadaab refugees. Danish Refugee Council and UNHCR. Retrieved  from https:drc.dkmedia1654297dadaablivelihoodstudyfinalreport.pdf. Kamboly, D. 2007. Teaching genocide in Cambodia: Challenges, analysis and  recommendations. Documentation Center of Cambodia. Karoly, L. A., Rydell, C. P., Hoube, J., Everingham, S. S., Kilburn, R.,  Greenwood,  P. W. 1998. Investing in our children: What we know and dont know about the  costs and benefits of early childhood interventions. Santa Monica, CA: Rand. Kearney, J. 2011. A unified Rwanda? Ethnicity, history and reconciliation in the Ingando peace and solidarity camp. In J. Paulson Ed., Education and reconciliation:  Exploring conflict and postconflict situations pp. 151176. London: Continuum. King, E. 2014. From classrooms to conflict in Rwanda. New York: Cambridge  University Press. Kirk, J.,  Cassity, E. 2007. Minimum standards for quality education for refugee  youth. Youth Studies Australia, 261, 5056. Laplante, L. J. 2008. Transitional justice and peace building: Diagnosing and addressing the socioeconomic roots of violence through a human rights framework.  International Journal of Transitional Justice, 23, 331355. Leeman, Y.,  Ledoux, G. 2003. Preparing teachers for intercultural education.  Teaching Education, 143, 279291. doi: 10.10801047621032000135186. Lesposo, L. 2014, April 8. Rwandans continue to struggle with the legacy of genocide two decades later. Retrieved from http:www.cnn.com20140407world africarwanda-genocide-reconciliation. Lincoln, Y. S.,  Guba, E. G. 1985. Naturalistic inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
References Lindsey, R. B., Roberts, L. M.,  Campbell-Jones, F. 2005. The culturally proficient school: An implementation guide for school leaders. Thousand Oaks, CA:  Corwin Press. Lortie, D. 1975. Schoolteacher: A sociological study. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. MacLaren, D. 2014. Tertiary education for refugees: Transformational education  from the Thai-Burma border. In I. Bartkowiak-Thron  K. Anderson Eds.,  Knowledge in action: University-community engagement in Australia pp. 151 164. Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. Marshall, C.,  Rossman, G. B. 2011. Designing qualitative research 5th ed.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Maxwell, J. A. 2013. Qualitative research design: An interactive approach 3rd  ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. McGrath, J. E. 1982. Dilemmatics: The study of research choices and dilemmas.  In J. E. McGrath, J. Martin,  R. A. Kulka Eds., Judgment calls in research.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Merryfield, M. M., Lo, J. T.,  Kasai, M. 2008. Worldmindedness: Taking off the  blinders. Journal of Curriculum and Instruction, 21, 620. Miles, M. B.,  Huberman, A. M. 1994. Qualitative data analysis: An expanded  sourcebook 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M.,  Saldaa, J. 2014. Qualitative data analysis: A  methods sourcebook 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Minow, M. 1998. Between vengeance and forgiveness: Facing history after genocide and mass violence. Boston: Beacon Press. Mishra, T. P. 2014, January 7. American dream becomes nightmare for Bhutanese refugees. India Real Time, Wall Street Journal Blog. Retrieved from http: blogs.wsj.comindiarealtime20140107american-dream-becomes-nightmare-for  -bhutanese-refugees. Moorehouse, G. 1971. Calcutta: The city revealed. London: Penguin. Moreau, M. P. 2014. Introduction: Theorising and mapping inequalities in the teaching profession. In M. P. Moreau Ed., Inequalities in the teaching profession: A  global perspective pp. 326. London: Palgrave. Nicolai, S. Ed. 2009. Opportunities for change: Education reform during and  after conflict. Retrieved from www.unesco.orgimages0018001838183808e.pdf. Nissanke, M.,  Thorbecke, E. 2004. The impact of globalization on the worlds  poor. WIDERAngle blogs. United Nations University. Retrieved from https: www.Wider.Unu.EduPublicationImpact-Globalization-WorldE28099s  -Poor. Nolan, P. 2007. Difference, diversity and difficulty: Problems in adult peace education in Northern Ireland. International Journal of Educational Development, 273,  282291. Obura, A. P. 2005. Planning a systemic education response to the needs of orphans  and other vulnerable children OVC in Rwanda. Kigali: MINEDUC. OECD. 2005. Teachers matter: Attracting, developing and retaining effective teachers. Paris: OECD Publishing. doi:10.17879789264018044-en.

References	 105 Okyere, S. 2012. Re-examining the education-child labour nexus: The case of  child miners at Kenyasi, Ghana. Childhoods Today, 61. Retrieved from www  .childhoodstoday.orgarticle. php?id69. Osler, A.,  Starkey, H. 2010. Teachers and human rights education. Stoke-onTrent, UK: Trentham Books. Pande, R. N. 2008. Bhutanese refugee education programs: Research report. Lalitpur, Nepal: Jagadamba Press. Phillion, J. 2002. Becoming a narrative inquirer in a multicultural landscape. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 345, 535556. Polkinghorne, D. E. 2007. Validity issues in narrative research. Qualitative Inquiry,  134, 471486. Preiss, D. 2013, April 13. Bhutanese refugees are killing themselves at an astonishing rate. Atlantic. Retrieved from http:www.theatlantic.cominternational archive201304bhutanese-refugees-are-killing-themselves-at-an-astonishing  -rate274959. Ramey, C. T.,  Campbell, F. A. 1991. Poverty, early childhood education, and  academic competence: The abecedarian experiment. In A. Huston Ed., Children  in poverty: Child development and public policy pp. 190221. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Reardon, B. A. 1997. Human rights as education for peace. In G. J. Andreopoulos   R. P. Claude Eds., Human rights education for the 21st century. Philadelphia:  University of Pennsylvania Press. Refugee Health Technical Assistance Center. 2011. Suicide. Retrieved from http: refugeehealthta.orgphysical-mental-healthmental-healthsuicide. Riessman, C. K.,  Speedy, J. 2007. Narrative inquiry in the psychotherapy professions: A critical review. In D. J. Clandinin Ed., Handbook of narrative inquiry:  Mapping a methodology pp. 426456. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Ring, H. R.,  West, A. R. 2015. Teacher retention in refugee and emergency settings: The state of the literature. International Education Journal: Comparative  Perspectives, 143, 106121. Rogaly, B. 1998. Workers on the move: Seasonal migration and changing relations  in rural India. Gender and Development, 61, 2129. doi:10.1080741922628. Ronfeldt, M., Loeb, S.,  Wyckoff, J. 2013. How teacher turnover harms  student achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 501, 436.  doi:10.31020002831212463813. Rumbaut, R. G.,  Portes, A. 2001. Ethnicities: Children of Immigrants in America.  Berkeley: University of California Press. Sachs, J. 2005. Teacher education and the development of professional identity:  Learning to be a teacher. In P. Denicolo  M. Kompf Eds., Connecting policy  and practice: Challenges for teaching and learning in schools and universities pp.  521. Oxford: Routledge. Santoro, N. 2009. Teaching in culturally diverse contexts: What knowledge about self  and others do teachers need? Journal of Education for Teaching, 351, 3345. Santoro, N.,  Allard, A. 2005. Reexamining identities: Working with diversity in  the pre-service teaching experience. Teaching  Teacher Education, 217, 863873.
References Sen, A. 1999. Development as freedom. New York: Oxford University Press. Sesnan, B. 2012. Where have all the teachers gone? Why there are never any teachers in Africas refugee camps and what we can do about it. In J. Penson  A.  Yonemura Eds., Next steps in managing teacher migration: Papers of the sixth  commonwealth research symposium on teacher mobility, recruitment and migration pp. 8893. Paris: UNESCO. Sesnan, B., Allemano, E., Ndugga, H.,  Said, S. 2013. Educators in exile: The role  and status of refugee teachers. London: Commonwealth Secretariat. Sher, L.,  Vilens, A. 2011. Immigration and mental health: Stress, psychiatric  disorders, and suicidal behavior among immigrants and refugees. Hauppauge, NY:  Nova Science Publishers. Sinclair, M. 2001. Education in emergencies. In J. Crisp, C. Talbot,  D. Cipollone Eds., Learning for a future: Refugee education in developing countries pp.  184. Geneva: UNHCR. Slovic, P. 2007. If I look at the mass I will never act: Psychic numbing and genocide. Judgment and Decision Making, 22, 7995. Smita, S. 2008. Distress seasonal migration and its impact on childrens education. Brighton. CREATE Pathways to Access Research Monograph No. 28. Smith, A.,  Vaux, T. 2003. Education, conflict and international development.  London: DFID. Stanley, W. B. 1992. Curriculum for utopia: Social reconstructionism and critical  pedagogy in the postmodern era. Albany: State University of New York Press. Stebbins, S.,  Knitzer, J. 2007. State early childhood policies: Highlights from the  improving the odds of young children project. New York: National Center for Children in Poverty, Columbia University, Mailman School of Public Health. Retrieved  from www.nccp.org publicationspdftext725.pdf. Steiner-Kahmsi, G. 2003. Cultural recognition or social redistribution. Predicaments  of minority education. In Y. Iram Ed., Education of minorities and peace education in pluralistic societies pp. 1528. Ramat Gan, Israel: Bar-Ilan University. Strauss, V. 2013, December 5. Nelson Mandela on the power of education.  Washington Post. Retrieved from https:www.washingtonpost.comnewsanswer  -sheetwp20131205nelson-mandelas-famous-quote-on-education?utmterm  .d0c1e877c46e. Strong-Wilson, T. Ed. 2013. Productive remembering and social agency. Rotterdam: Sense. Sumner, W. G. 1906. Folkways: A study of the sociological importance of usages,  manners, customs, mores, and morals. Boston: Ginn. Tallon, R. A.,  McGregor, A. 2014. Pitying the third world: Towards more progressive emotional responses to development education in schools. Third World  Quarterly, 358, 14061422. doi: 10.108001436597.2014.946259. Takizawa, S. 2015. The Japanese pilot resettlement programme: Identifying constraints to domestic integration of refugees from Burma. In K. Koizumi  G.  Hoffstaedter Eds., Urban refugees: Challenges in protection, services and policy  pp. 206240. New York: Routledge.

References	 107 Tedlock, B. 1991. From participant observation to the observation of participation:  The emergence of narrative ethnography. Journal of Anthropological Research,  471, 6994. United Nations. 2017. International migration report. New York: United Nations.  Retrieved from http:www.un.orgendevelopmentdesapopulationmigration publicationsmigrationreportdocsMigrationReport2017Highlights.pdf. United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division  2016. International Migration Report 2015: Highlights STESASER.A375.  New York: United Nations. United Nations Development Programme. 2013. The rise of the south: Human  progress in a diverse world. New York: United Nations Development Programme.  Retrieved from http:www.undp.orgcontentdamundplibrarycorporateHDR  2013GlobalHDREnglishHDR201320Report20English.pdf. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 2013. Intercultural competencies: Conceptual and operational framework. Paris: UNESCO. United Nations High Commission for Refugees. n.d. Resettlement. Retrieved from  http:www.unhcr.orgresettlement.html. United Nations High Commission for Refugees. 2001. Learning for a future: Refugee education in developing countries. Geneva: UNHCR. Van den Bersselaar, D. 2006. Acknowledging knowledge: Dissemination and reception of expertise in colonial Africa. History in Africa, 331, 389393. doi: https: doi.org10.1353hia.2006.0005. Van Maanen, J. 2011. Tales of the field: On writing ethnography 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Vongalis-Macrow, A. 2007. I, teacher: Re-territorialization of teachers multifaceted agency in globalized education. British Journal of Sociology of Education,  284, 425439. Walker-Keleher, J. 2006. Reconceptualizing the relationship between conflict and education: The case of Rwanda. PRAXIS, Fletcher Journal of Human Security, 21, 3553. Walters, L. M., Garii, B.,  Walters, T. 2009. Learning globally, teaching  locally: Incorporating international exchange and intercultural learning into  pre-service teacher training. Intercultural Education, 201, S151S158. doi:  10.108014675980903371050. Wegner, G. P. 2002. Anti-Semitism and schooling under the Third Reich. New  York: Routledge Falmer. Whyte. W. F. 1964. The slum: On the evolution of street corner society. In A. Vidich  J. Bensman Eds., Reflections on community studies pp. 329. New York:  HarperTorchbooks. Winthrop, R.,  Kirk, J. 2005. Teacher development and student well-being.  Forced Migration Review, 22, 1821. World Bank. 2005. Reshaping the future: Education and post conflict reconstruction. Washington, DC: World Bank. Zhao, Y. 2010. Preparing globally competent teachers: A new imperative for  teacher education. Journal of Teacher Education, 615, 422431. doi:10.1177  0022487110375802.
Index Adichie, Chimamanda Ngozi, 51 assumptive worldview, 23, 6, 88 atrocity, 37, 59, 89 Barefoot: teachers, 2425, 2829,  3133; Teachers Training   Program, 24, 29 Beldangi refugee camp, 73, 83 Bhutan, King of, 64 Bhutanese: refugee camps, 64;   refugee education programs,   64, 6972, 74, 7778, 8082,   85, 93; refugees, 6466, 68,   7075. See also Beldangi   refugee camp; Sanischare   refugee camp brain drain, 7475 brickfield, 24; schools, 12, 1718,   22, 24, 2627, 2933, 8993 Budge Budge railway station, 18 Caritas, Nepal, 13, 66, 6971,   7374, 7778, 83 child labor, xii, 31, 33 colonization, 47 conceptual framework, 4 conscientizao, 6 Developed World, 1011, 24, 55, 74,  76, 85, 88, 90, 94 Developing World, 56, 11, 2930, 33,  75, 90 diversity, x, 17, 23, 95 Drukpa, 64 Durkheim, Emile, 45 Dzongkha, 64 Education for All, 30 emic, 10 ethnic identity, 58 ethnocentrism, 2 ethnography, 11 etic, 10 Freire, Paolo, 4, 6 Ganges River, 26 genocide. See Rwandan, 1994 genocide  against the Tutsi globalization, ix, xi, 11, 74, 85 Hicks, David, x Holden, Cathie, x Hugli Hooghly River, 26 Hutu, 3637, 42, 47, 4951, 55, 60
Index intercultural: awareness, 12, 4, 6;  competency, 57; critical awareness,  2, 47; sensitivity, 7 Interahamwe, 42, 5355 International Organization for Migration,  20, 64 Islamic State of Iraq ISIS, 68 Jesuit Refugee Services JRS, 13,  6471, 7374, 78, 83 Kagame, Paul, 36 Kankai Mai River, 64 Kigali Memorial Genocide Centre,  4041 kilns, 2122, 25 King, Elisabeth, 50  Kwibuka20, 40, 56 Kolkata, India, xi, 12, 17, 22, 89,   9293 Komagata Maru, 1819, 27 Leposo, Lillian, 53 Leyton, Elliot, 57 Lhotel Chez Lando, xii Loreto Sealdah Day School, 12, 22,  27, 89 Lortie, Dan, 43 Maoists, 65 migrant children, 21, 24, 31 migrants: forced, 1; internal, 20, 30;  seasonal, 21; serial, 20, 24, 2930 Mooney, Sister Cyril, i.b.v.m., xii, 12,  22, 24, 29 Moorehouse, Geoffrey, 17 narrative ethnography, 1011, 1415 naturalistic inquiry, 9  Nazi Germany, 46 Nepali Bhutanese, 65, 70 Never Again, 60 Ntarama church, genocide memorial,  5657 Nyamata church, genocide   memorial, 54 non-governmental organizations,   6566, 68 One Nation, One People, 64 peace and reconciliation education,  5155 post-conflict nationstate, 47, 50, 60 poverty, xii, 2123, 30, 3233, 40, 64 qualitative research, 910, 12,   1415, 35 refugee camps. See Beldangi refugee  camp; Sanischare, refugee camp;  Zaatari refugee camp refugee resettlement, 1, 6566, 78, 80,  83, 85 research approach, 1011, 35, 39, 57 residual caseload, 8283 Resource Centre for Social  Transformation, 12, 2223,   2728, 89 Rwanda, official historical narrative,  4951, 58, 60 Rwandan: 1994 genocide against the  Tutsi, 58, 49; Genocide Teachers  Collective, 13, 3738, 43, 45,   5152, 60, 92; Patriotic Front,   36, 48 Sanischare refugee camp, 73 Sealdah train station, 1718, 22 social roles, 2 suicide, 76 Sumner, Edward, 2 teacher professional identity, 3 trauma, xii, 37, 4143, 53, 89, 92 Trudeau, Justin, 19 Tutsi, 3637, 42, 4651, 58, 60 Twa, 3637, 49, 51

Index	 111 United Nations: Educational, Scientific  and Cultural Organization UNESCO,  6, 51; High Commission for  Refugees UNHCR, 6465, 71, 73,  75, 78, 8182, 84, 87; Millennium  Development Goals MDGs, 30, 32;  World Food Program UNWFP, 65,  8182 vocational training, 7172, 88 VolAgs, 85 work, 3D, 2021 World Bank, 59 xenophobia, 23 Zaatari refugee camp, 6768
About the Author Jerome Cranston, Ph.D., is currently the dean and a professor on the Faculty  of Education at University of Regina, Canada. He has a Ph.D. from the University of Manitoba, an M.Ed. from the University of Lethbridge, and both a  B.Ed. and a B.Sc. from the University of Alberta. He is a research associate  with the Arthur V. Mauro Centre for Peace and Justice and served on the Advisory Board and was a Research Affiliate with the Centre for Human Rights  Research, both at the University of Manitoba. Dr. Cranston researches and  teaches as part of a transdisciplinary, international community of inquiry  on topics of education, social injustice, peace, and human rights education.  An immigrant whose parents were immigrants, he is the grandchild of a  tribal Nepali grandmother and an Anglo-Burmese grandfather, and an AngloIndian grandmother, and descends from a Scottish grandfather, each of whom  was an immigrant. He accepts that he is both colonizer and colonized, but is  always consummately Brown.