The  Classroom Behavior Manual How to Build  Relationships with Students,  Share Control, and  Teach Positive Behaviors Scott Ervin

The  Classroom  Behavior Manual

Alexandria, Virginia USA The  Classroom  Behavior Manual How to Build   Relationships with Students,   Share Control, and   Teach Positive Behaviors Scott Ervin
N. Beauregard St.  Alexandria, VA 22311-1714 USA Phone: 800-933-2723 or 703-578-9600  Fax: 703-575-5400 Website: www.ascd.org  Email: memberascd.org Author guidelines: www.ascd.orgwrite Ranjit Sidhu, CEO  Executive Director; Penny Reinart, Chief Impact Officer; Genny Ostertag, Managing Director,  Book Acquisitions  Editing; Allison Scott, Senior Acquisitions Editor; Julie Houtz, Director, Book Editing; Megan  Doyle, Editor; Thomas Lytle, Creative Director; Donald Ely, Art Director; Masie Chong, Graphic Designer; Keith  Demmons, Senior Production Designer; Kelly Marshall, Production Manager; Shajuan Martin, E-Publishing  Specialist Copyright  2022 Scott Ervin. All rights reserved. It is illegal to reproduce copies of this work in print or  electronic format including reproductions displayed on a secure intranet or stored in a retrieval system or  other electronic storage device from which copies can be made or displayed without the prior written permission of the publisher. By purchasing only authorized electronic or print editions and not participating in or  encouraging piracy of copyrighted materials, you support the rights of authors and publishers. Readers who  wish to reproduce or republish excerpts of this work in print or electronic format may do so for a small fee by  contacting the Copyright Clearance Center CCC, 222 Rosewood Dr., Danvers, MA 01923, USA phone: 978750-8400; fax: 978-646-8600; web: www.copyright.com. To inquire about site licensing options or any other  reuse, contact ASCD Permissions at www.ascd.orgpermissions or permissionsascd.org. For a list of vendors  authorized to license ASCD e-books to institutions, see www.ascd.orgepubs. Send translation inquiries to  translationsascd.org. ASCD is a registered trademark of the Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. All other  trademarks contained in this book are the property of, and reserved by, their respective owners, and are  used for editorial and informational purposes only. No such use should be construed to imply sponsorship or  endorsement of the book by the respective owners. All web links in this book are correct as of the publication date below but may have become inactive or otherwise modified since that time. If you notice a deactivated or changed link, please email booksascd.org with  the words Link Update in the subject line. In your message, please specify the web link, the book title, and  the page number on which the link appears. PAPERBACK ISBN: 978-1-4166-3078-4    ASCD product 122033    n222 PDF E-BOOK ISBN: 978-1-4166-3079-1; see Books in Print for other formats. Quantity discounts are available: email programteamascd.org or call 800-933-2723, ext. 5773, or 703-575-5773.  For desk copies, go to www.ascd.orgdeskcopy. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Name: Ervin, Scott, author.   Title: The classroom behavior manual : how to build relationships with students, share control, and teach  positive behaviors  Scott Ervin.   Description: Alexandria, Virginia USA : ASCD, 2021  Includes bibliographical references and index.  Identifiers: LCCN 2021042031 print  LCCN 2021042032 ebook  ISBN 9781416630784 Paperback  ISBN  9781416630791 PDF   Subjects: LCSH: Classroom management--United States--Handbooks, manuals, etc.  School discipline--United  States--Handbooks, manuals, etc.  Classification: LCC LB3013 .E72 2021  print  LCC LB3013  ebook  DDC 371.10240973--dc23  LC record available at https:lccn.loc.gov2021042031 LC ebook record available at https:lccn.loc.gov2021042032 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21                                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12  

To Jessica God only knows what I'd be without you.

The  Classroom  Behavior Manual 1. A Dramatic Proposition.1 2. Before You Begin. 14 3. Before They Arrive.26 Part I: Relationship-Building Strategies.39 4. Relationship-Building Strategies.42 Part II: Relationship-Building Procedures.69 5. Relationship-Building Procedures.72 Part III: Control-Sharing Procedures.101 6. Student Job Procedures. 106

7. Transitions: The Lock-It-In Procedure.129 8. Academic Control-Sharing Procedures.137 Part IV: Control-Sharing Strategies.185 9. Gentle Guidance Interventions. 190 10. Mindfulness Breaks. 203 11. Delayed Learning Opportunities.221 Conclusion: It Starts with You. 266 Acknowledgments. 267 References. 269 Index. 270 About the Author. 277
1 A Dramatic   Proposition Fifteen minutes into my first day of teaching, blood splattered across my face. The day had started peacefully enough. I arrived to substitute in a 5th grade classroom. School started at 7 a.m., and my students for the day appeared to be sleeping.  I began teaching, even though no one was listening. Things were going better than I  had anticipated. Then it happened. While standing, chalk in hand, next to what we called a blackboard, I heard  a commotion somewhere outside the room. I turned quizzically toward my newly  acquired students, and one boy in the front row rolled his eyes, exasperated with my  slow comprehension, and explained the situation: Its a fight. I sprang into action, sprinting full speed out of the classroom and leaving 25 5th  graders to educate themselves. Following the noise, I ran into a small, smelly room.  I, a male substitute teacher on his first day, had just run into the girls bathroom. So  far, so good. I immediately came upon two 6th graders. One girl was fully on her back, her legs  furiously attempting to pedal-kick a long-limbed girl who had maneuvered around  the kicking action and was enthusiastically beating the snot out of the first girls face.  Blood was flying everywhere, and as I grabbed Punching Girls shoulders to pull her  off Kicking Girl, an inexplicably large amount of blood flew from the fist of Punching  Girl, landing on my face and neck.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Once I had separated Punching Girl from Kicking Girl, a female staff member  walked into the room and yelled, What the hell are you doing?! Looking back, I  think she might have been talking to me. As I remember it, the staff member walked with the girls to the office and I  went back to the classroom. I wiped the blood off myself with a dry paper towel and  attempted to teach. I was never asked about the incident. As it turned out, my adventure in the bathroom went only slightly better than  the rest of the day. Strangely, my heroics in the girls restroom did little to impress my  newfound class. Mostly asleep before the fight, once I returned from my adventure,  they had all woken up. A majority of the students refused to sit in their desks, or work,  or be quiet, or be pleasant to each other, or not swear at me. Breaking up another fight  in the classroom immediately before dismissal bookended the day nicely. When I received the 4:30 a.m. robocall for a kindergarten substitute position the  next morning, I gladly accepted. Fifth and 6th grade bathroom fight club officiating  would have to wait, at least for a day. Kindergarten: how hard could it possibly be?  Kindergartners were what, 5 years old? My second day was going to be so much better than my first. Like the previous posting, the school for day number two was in a rough part of  town. Dilapidated homes and boarded-up storefronts surrounded a sturdy but aging  school building. I checked in with an unenthused school secretary. While the neighborhood and school office staff were less than welcoming, the  kindergarten room, my home for the day, was like a scene from a Candy Land board  game. It was fantastically colorful and well decorated. The space was perfectly clean  and nicely organized. Exhaustive, detailed lesson plans were laid out neatly. They  expressly described each moment of the day: how to turn in work, where to sit, how  to line up for lunch. The days materials were arranged at right angles on the teachers  desk and reading tables. Most important, there were clearly stated rules on the board  next to a color-coded, card-based behavior chart, with each students name printed  neatly on a transparent plastic pocket holding three cards. I had hit the substitute teacher jackpot. This was going to be a piece of cake!  They had tested me the previous day, but the Gods of Education were smiling down  upon me now. With every possible angle and loose end already taken care of by   what appeared to be the best teacher in the history of the world, I casually perused  the days lesson plans before confidently leaning back in my chair and waiting for the  day to begin.

A Dramatic Proposition     3 Things began as I had hoped they would. Three rather timid small souls wandered through the door, wondering who I was and what I was doing there. This was a  welcome, healthy reaction to seeing a substitute teacher in the classroom. It was also the last normal event of the day. A guttural yell worthy of a battlefield charge rang out as a child with an angry,  furrowed brow barreled into Candyland. The complete lack of a reaction from the  other students to this feral lunatic should have tipped me off as to what I was dealing  with, but I immediately walked into the hallway and asked a teacher, whom I had  not yet met, what had happened in the hallway to have triggered this student into  exhibiting such rage. The teacher, looking confused, peered into my room and said,  Oh, thats just Robert. I stared at the teacher, stunned. Hes always like that. It felt like the wind had been kicked out of my chest. And it was about to get  worse. Just wait until you meet David. Youve got to be kidding me. I didnt meet David right away. We started without him, which was a great relief,  since Robert was walking around the room punching people, grabbing things out  of their hands and throwing them. At one point, he and another student squared  off, prizefighter style, in the corner of the room. I separated them. Keep in mind, I  had not yet had time to introduce myself to anyone. I was too busy running around  stopping kids from injuring each other or destroying the room. Roberts entry into  the room seemed to have caused a switch to be flipped in the minds of the previously  inert students. I had heard horror stories about teachers having to run around putting out fires. I wasnt putting out fires. I was in the middle of a fire . . . and burning. One boy kept yelling that he was about to lose his mind up in here. One girl was  crying hysterically for a reason that I could not begin to understand. It is possible that  she had been punched in the face. There is a very good chance that I would not have  noticed. There was too much going on to be able to know what happened. One boy  acted as Roberts sidekick, walking next to him as he whispered excitedly in his ear.  Robert was still yelling at the top of his lungs and still throwing things and punches.  The well-crafted lesson plans lay neglected as I ran around the room and dove across  desks to prevent child-on-child violence and property destruction. The secretary  came over the loudspeaker to ask for the attendance that I had forgotten to send. I  remember thinking, If I turn to find the attendance paper, one of these kids is going  to be killed.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Then David walked in. Fantastic. I will never forget how he walked into the room with a bizarre smile on his face,  looked at me, then, like a moth to flame, still smiling broadly, went immediately to  the only person doing her morning work in the room, took her paper, crumpled it up,  and threw it in the garbage. I began using both of my behavior management skills: screaming and yelling.  Neither had any effect. David and Robert wandered around the room. Robert hurt  people, and David took their stuff. Kids continued to cry, threaten, bait each other,  and run out of the room. I tried pulling kids cards. No one cared, except for one boy  who, when I pulled his final card, quickly evacuated the classroom. Thank goodness,  David was kind enough to go looking for him, even though I asked him to please,  please God, not do that. I called the principal to remove students four separate times that day. I could  have called 30 times. By the third removal, she was not pleased. Each student would  come back a half-hour after they left, and immediately go back to doing whatever it  was that got them sent to the office in the first place. I didnt get to more than 30 minutes of the beautifully crafted lesson plans that  had been left by the teachera teacher for whom I now had a lot of questions. I  believe that 15 of those minutes of instruction occurred during the brief period of  time when both Robert and David were in the principals office. After seven of the worst hours of my life, the children were gone. I cannot fully  express the amount of helplessness that one feels after attempting a job they always  wanted to do and failing completely. The profound defeat was overwhelmingand  was somehow made worse by the fact that the people who just defeated me were 3  feet tall. I slowly shuffled out of the classroom and down the hallway. Tired, dehydrated,  and done, I turned the corner into the office as the school secretary spoke. Heres  your sub now, she said to a woman with her back to me. The leader of the class that had just ripped through my soul turned around. My  first thought was that she looked like I felt. She was a young, tired-looking woman. I  guessed that she was around my age. Her eyes looked sad and anxious as she clutched  a water bottle while saying words that I didnt expect: Im so sorry. She wasnt trying to be funny or flippant. She was expressing sincere empathy  for what she knew I had just endured. What in the world just happened to me? I exhaled. I put my hands on the  counter between myself and the school secretary and slowly collapsed on top of the 

A Dramatic Proposition     5 linoleum, extending my outreached arms across the counter. If I had not still been in  shock, I think I might have started crying. They were completely out of control. How  in the world do you control those kids? I asked. She laughed a slow, sad laugh. Who said I can control those kids? Your guess  is as good as mine. I took today off for a mental health day. Im just here for an  Intervention Assistance Team meeting. How do you stay sane? Is it really like that every day? I wasnt in there with you, but I am guessing it is pretty much the same. Im  sorry you had to deal with them today. I just needed a break. And I dont stay sane.  This is my last year teaching. Im quitting. Im done. Its my second year. I have no  idea how Im going to make it to the end of the year. I taught 5th grade last year and it  was horrible. I thought kindergarten would be easier, but its not. I was stunned. But your room, its so perfect . . . youve got the rules up . . . and the cards . . .  doesnt that stuff help? It worked great for the first morning on the first day, and then all hell broke  loose in the afternoon. Ive been in hell ever since. What happened? What happened at the end of the morning that made them act  like that? I got the idea that this question would have offended her if she had any kind of  respect for me or my opinion. She let out what could be described as a cross between  a sigh and an exasperated chuckle. You mean, what did I do to mess them up in my first three hours with them?  Look, what you saw todaythey came in like that. A lot happens to these kids before  they show up on the first day of kindergarten. I felt bad for asking the question, but I pressed on. I needed help. I wanted  answers. Can you tell me anything that actually works in getting these kids to do  what theyre supposed to do? She picked up a box of files and started walking toward the door as she spoke.  Look, I really am sorry to put you through what you went through today, and I dont  want to be this negative. This isnt the person I want to be, which is why Im getting  out. But I have to be honest with you: nothing works. Nothing Works Those words haunted me, and with every day of the several months that I continued  to work as a substitute teacher, they proved to be more and more correct. Every day, 
The Classroom Behavior Manual I failed to get students to be cooperative, no matter how much or how loudly I yelled.  Every day, I saw the teachers and principals around me failing in very much the same  way. Even the most experienced educators were often no better off than I was. Even  those who were doing all of the right things to elicit positive behaviorsclearly stating rules, using consequences, having good lesson plans, praising positive behaviors,  and having routines set up for how to manage the roomeven those teachers had  rooms that were out of control. It seemed that nothing was working for anyone. During my masters program observations of different kinds of schools, suburban, rural, and private, I saw a similar dynamic. Students may not have been as difficult to control, but in every class, there always seemed to be at least one, but usually  a few, tougher students for whom traditional discipline strategies were ineffective,  and they often seemed to make the classs general behavior worse. These few students  appeared to be able to take over most classrooms, leaving their teachers at a loss as to  what to do. Nothing works. Even in the face of the mounting affirming evidence, I still  wondered, how could this be true? After all, students had been around forever, teachers had been around forever, teachers who teach teachers to teach had been around  forever, and the problem of having to get students to use positive, prosocial behaviors  had been around forever. How could educators not know exactly how to get students  to act in a way that made the classroom better, schools better, society better, and the  students themselves better? During the several months I spent in perhaps 20 different school buildings as  a substitute teacher, and then the two years I taught in my own classrooms, I was  determined to figure out what worked. To be clear, my open-minded curiosity  had no impact on my own behavior management deficits. I continued to yell and   attempt to intimidate my students, and every day I drove home defeated, exhausted,  and distraught. These Kids . . . What made the situation more frustrating was that, almost every day, I was asking for  advice for how to manage behaviors, just like I did on that second day of my teaching  career. And when actual advice was givensomething beyond nothing worksit  was almost always the same, and it often started with the same two words:  These kids . . . I was searching for how to manage the behaviors of all kids, but the answers I  received to my questions were answers for how to manage a certain kind of student. 

A Dramatic Proposition     7 As I was in a district that served a very high percentage of students who were poor  and members of minority groups, what was being communicated was clear, and the  advice was almost always similar: These kids need to be dealt with sternly. . . . They  dont get a lot of love at home, so they wont respond to it well at school. . . . Show them  who is boss. . . . Get up in their faces. . . . Dont give them an inch. . . . They wont take you  seriously unless you yell. . . . They only respect strength. . . . You have to be tough, or theyll  run all over you. In my interviews for teaching jobs, two years in a row, I was told by two different  principals to never smile in front of students. It was made clear to me that this was  a condition of my employment. Even then, I knew that these instructions on how to deal with these kids went  directly against what we know about how human brains work. The human brain  cannot effectively work, learn, and function when faced with fear and threats. The  human brain cannot function until the organism in which it is vested has been able  to establish a functional environment whereby the organism can have all safety, control, and love needs met. Even then, I knew that this advice about these kids was classist and racist. I  think we all did. But we took the advice anyway. We took this advice for the same reason someone  wandering for days in the desert will eventually drink the sand: there was no alternative. Behavior management advice given in college either didnt exist or was wholly  inadequate to the point of being insulting. Write good lesson plans and there wont be  any misbehavior? Really? Have consequences for misbehavior? Great. What do those  look like? Praise students? Huh. Why do the most difficult students act worse when I  praise them? Have routines for classroom tasks and clearly define rules? Great. What  do I do when students refuse to follow rules and procedures? What then? The terrible trick that is played on educators is that this ineffective behavior  management advice is not only ineffective with all kids, it is particularly ineffective  with these kids. It is so unsophisticated, and so dismissive of the effects of trauma,  that it is least effective with the students who need it the most! Tragically, this often  leads educators to feel hopeless about their ability to help these kids. The ugly truth is that when this advice causes you to crash and burn over and  over and over, most people, in their desperation to do the job that most of us have  been dreaming of doing since we were kidswill take any advice offered, especially  when everyone around us has that advice reinforced by principals and fellow teachers every day.
The Classroom Behavior Manual The truth is that we were all really good people doing very bad things to students.  We had all voluntarily chosen to work in that district, where a very high percentage  of our families dealt with high rates of generational poverty and our students experienced much higher than average rates of trauma. We wanted to help the students who  needed us the most. Why were we yelling at them all day long? Why were we working  ourselves to death in an attempt to scare and intimidate students into submission?  Why? Because we did not know what else to do. This horrifying way of working with students was able to exist in the vacuum  caused by not having quality ways to manage behaviors available to us. Cumulatively,  it turned the schools that I saw into machines that accidentally reinforced negative,  antisocial behaviors. In this vacuum, these schools, through no fault of their own,  systematically trained students to get what they wanted attention, avoidance, or  control through negative behaviors. Of course, this is not the fault of the students,  who depend on educators knowing how to manage behaviors. It is also not the fault of  the educators, who depend on universities to teach them how to manage behaviors. As I was working through my masters degree program, I knew and socialized  with teachers who taught in every kind of school with every kind of student. We often  discussed a similar trend: the these kids phenomenon also enveloped schools that  only had a small number of these kids. To be fair, students who grow up in generational poverty do tend to have more adverse childhood experiences ACEs. These  traumatic experiences give students a higher chance of having attention problems  and a higher tendency toward behaviors that many consider impulsive, among a  tragically long list of other negative effects American Academy of Pediatrics, 2014.  Many of these behaviors have been reinforced at home, often before the childs first  day of kindergarten. What I noticed and what I continue to notice now, years later,  as a behavioral consultant in these schools is that many teachers will subscribe to  the these kids fallacy with students whom they know to have had multiple ACEs:  Johnny is just different, and I need to treat him differently. I need to intimidate  Johnny into learning and listening to me. The irony is that this reaction to a student being perceived as more difficult is  the exact opposite of what Johnny needs, and will be especially ineffective with Johnny  because he has experienced more trauma than the average student. Students who  have had several ACEs, no matter how much money their parents make or what color  they are, need to have measures taken to make them feel more safe and less threatened, not less safe and more threatened. The use of intimidation and fear as a means of getting students to be cooperative  works the least with these kids, the ones who are in most need. This is yet another 

A Dramatic Proposition     9 terrible trick played on educators who, once again, may see their own failures as a  sign that there is no hope for their most vulnerable students. What I and other teachers accidentally took part in was a tragic one-two punch:  many of these students had an acute sensitivity to these assaults due to their level of  trauma, and we assaulted their brains with intimidation and fear. This misstep is a  major contributor to the school-to-prison pipeline. Educators are not taught how to  manage behaviors, so many accept the these kids fallacy out of pure desperation.  They internalize the fallacy and attempt to scare and intimidate students into working hard and behaving. When such tactics predictably backfire, educators suspend  the students. Tragically, this reinforces the negative behavior, because students who  are intimidated and scared every day understandably enjoy getting a break from the  intimidation and fear of school. Finally, to get more breaks from intimidation and  fear, they use more and more negative behaviors, successfully getting suspended  until they are expelled or they drop out. This is the essential motor that runs schools  often called dropout factories. There are surely other factors contributing to the school-to-prison pipeline, such  as the conditions that cause traumas outside school in the first place, but this ubiquitous dynamic is a significant one. The data are clear: 	 Half of all students who enter 9th grade with three or more suspensions on their  record will drop out of high school Balfanz, Byrnes,  Fox, 2014. 	 One out of 11 high school dropouts is currently in prison. For African Americans,  the ratio is one out of four Eley, 2009. 	 One out of 131 people in this country is currently sitting in a prison cell Public  Safety Performance Projects, 2009. 	 One out of 31 adults in this country is in jail or prison, on parole, or on probation  Public Safety Performance Projects, 2009. Students with high ACE scores are failed by ineffective, incomplete, or nonexistent behavior management techniques. These techniques accidentally encourage  negative behaviors, causing vulnerable students to repeat, explore, and heighten  their behaviors, which leads to suspensions. Suspensions often lead to expulsions or  dropping out. Dropping out often leads to prison. I believe I knew all of this at the time. Still, I continued in my ways for lack of  any other ideas. Hurting the students that I wanted to help was destroying me, not to  mention destroying them. I knew something had to change.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Approaching a Breaking Point,   and Then, a Breakthrough After having my own classrooms for two successive years, teaching 5th and 1st grades,  I knew I was reaching my physical and emotional limit for hurting kids no matter  how badly I wanted to help them. As I prepared for another year, this time at a different school with the same set of challenges, I knew one of three things was going to  happen. Either I was going to quit after a nervous breakdown, or I was going to get  fired for having a nervous breakdown in class and hurting a student, or I was going  to learn how to do my job. Since no one had helped me in the first two years of my  teaching career, I was skeptical about my chances of avoiding possibilities numbers  one or two. The next year, I began teaching at a school that had just been founded. As a  brand-new school, it had a highly advantageous student-to-teacher ratio and a school  culture that was carefully and thoughtfully curated. Even though it served a neighborhood that actually had a slightly higher rate of generational poverty than the  school in which I had served before, I was able to just barely find my footing as someone who could be successful in getting students to cooperate. Through careful trial  and error, as well as some conceptual professional development, I started to notice  and act upon new insights: students used slightly more positive behaviors when I  was able to build relationships with them, were nicer to me when I was able to share  control with them, and decreased the frequency of negative behaviors when I stopped  them from getting what they wanted using such behaviors. I started to be able to handle students better than other teachers. Still, what I was doing was sloppy and only  somewhat effective: I was having to think too much about behavior management  while I was teaching. I started to dabble in creating procedures that did the relationship building and control sharing for me, while I was teaching, and I started to create  strategies that I would later use habitually, without thinking, that would do the same.  I felt like I had the necessary foothold now to be able to someday become the teacher  I always hoped I could bethough I still had a long way to go.

Up until now, I have given you very few, if any, reasons for why you should be  reading this book. After all, at this point, all you know about me is that I was very  aware that no one had the ability to manage behaviors very well, that I wanted to 

A Dramatic Proposition     11 figure out how to do it, and that I asked a lot of questions about that while suffering  through the worst two years of my life. Here are a couple of other things to know about me that may also discourage you  from continuing to read this book: 	 I am not patient, and I have a bad temper. This may seem like a strange thing for  an author to admit in a book that is supposed to teach teachers how to be nice  to students. 	 I was not a good teacher. My lesson plans were weak. I couldnt write student  learning objectives SLOs or reading improvement monitoring plans RIMPs  to save my life, and I couldnt map out curricula. I was disorganized, forgetful,  and unable to effectively enter grades into the database on time, monitor progress, or be a good school employee in general. But here is why you should keep reading: I look at life through a certain kind of lens.  I respond to problems by thinking, This is terrible; I have to make it better. This  comes from my innate hardwiring. I was born this way. Its who I am, and it is very  annoying to be aroundor at least, thats what my wife keeps telling me. The benefit for you, the reader, is that every single day of my teaching career, I  have thought, This is terrible; I have to make it better while looking at every aspect  of my teaching. The reason I was so hopelessly bad at the aforementioned activities  was because I knew that there was no way I could even begin to teach until I could  get students to be cooperative and hard-working, let alone have the time and mental  bandwidth to be able to do the mountains of work that educators have to do. I knew,  almost instinctively, that I couldnt come close to being able to do everything I needed  to do to be a good teacher if I couldnt create a positive classroom environment  where my students could learn, I could teach, and students would consistently use  positive behaviors. With every day, no matter how successful I was, I thought, just like during the  initial dark days, This is terrible; I have to make it better. So I did. Every day, I would work at making something that would improve the  situation: effective strategies and procedures for building relationships, sharing control, and holding students accountable. And every day, I reviewed what I had made  and thought, This is terrible; I have to make it better, and so those strategies and  procedures became more tested, durable, and effective every time I used them. As a result, I became better than any teacher I had yet seen at building relationships, sharing control, and holding students accountable. I went from relying on  prayer as a behavior management tool Please, God, dont let Angela be in my class 
The Classroom Behavior Manual next year to actually requesting that all of my grades most difficult students be put  on my roster. I was asking for these kids be put in my class. Over the decade that  I used these strategies and procedures, I did not have to appeal to an administrator  for discipline one single time. Not one office referral. Not one suspension. Not one  expulsion. The school-to-prison pipeline encountered a serious disruption when it  attempted to run through Mr. Ervins classroom. As my procedures and strategies became more and more effective, and I became  more and more fluent in my use of them, I noticed something amazing: not only did  my students use positive behaviors at an incredibly high level, but they were also  learning! Both my behavioral and academic outcomes were excellent! Even though  I was and remain naturally bad at all of the elements of teaching, like writing lesson  plans and learning goals, I was able to pay more attention to them because I was no  longer drowning in a sea of negative behaviors! I now have the honor of traveling the country teaching educators these strategies and procedures. I get to hear how the use of these procedures and strategies has  saved educators careers. I get to coach teachers in their classrooms and show them  how, the more effectively they use their strategies and procedures, the fewer negative  behaviors they have. I get to save educators from having to endure experiences like  my first two years of teaching, asking but never getting the necessary means to do  my job. I get to tell them what I learned: that behavior management is impossible. It  implies that you can manage behaviors that are out of control you cant. What is  possible is behavioral leadership: the ability, through systematic use of strategy and  procedural instruction, to change negative behaviors while simultaneously managing  all behaviors. A leader creates function and oversees the management of it. A leader must be able to model the behaviors they want to see in the people  around them. Without behavioral leadership, it is difficult or impossible to act like  the person you want your students to emulate, because you will have to deal with  so many negative behaviors that you will not be calm enough to model the positive  behaviors you want your students to use. Behavioral leadership allows educators to  be the leaders that their students need them to be. This is why behavioral leadership is a foundational necessity for successful classrooms and instruction. Without behavioral leadership, you cant come close to doing  everything you need to do and being the person you need to be in order to be the most  effective educator you can be for your students. Without behavioral leadership, students wont be able to efficiently and sufficiently learn positive behaviors and responsibility. Without behavioral leadership, 

A Dramatic Proposition     13 the school-to-prison pipeline will continue unabated. Without behavioral leadership, students will be spending their days in classrooms that are not as healthy, safe,  engaged, supporting, and challenging as they could be. Without behavioral leadership, equal access to education will continue to be impossible. We will continue to use  unsophisticated and hurtful behavior management strategies that trigger students  with high ACE scores into using negative behaviors that will disrupt learning and  lead to suspensions and expulsions. Entrance into the school-to-prison pipeline will  continue to be the result. It is not enough to disrupt the school-to-prison pipeline; it must be destroyed.  It is not enough that some students have access to behavioral leadership educators.  All students in all schools deserve access to classrooms where the educators know  exactly how to build relationships, share control, and hold students accountable for  their actions and inactions without anger or haste. Educators who are trained in  behavioral leadership can create classrooms where students feel safe and loved, and  experience the healthy control they need to be able to function and learn. In these  classrooms, students can learn the behaviors and habits necessary to be successful  and happy in life. We cant control or know everything about what happens in the lives of our  students when they are not at school. We dont even know what will happen to them  after they leave us in the afternoon and before we see them again the next morning.  Therefore, we should treat all of our students as if, during that time, they were abused  or neglected. Why? Because some of them were. We should treat all students, every  day, with the care and love necessary to make sure their school days are as calm,  engaging, and educational as they possibly can be. Did you figure out the trick of behavioral leadership? While behavior management fails all kidsand fails these kids more than anyonebehavioral leadership  is not only effective with these kids; it is effective with all kids! All kids benefit from  a calm, kind teacher who builds relationships, shares control, and teaches positive  behaviors. All studentsno matter who they are, what has happened to them in their lives,  or what they experienced that morningif treated this way, every day, will feel safe  enough, cared for enough, and loved enough to be ready to learn and thrive while  they are in your classroom. All students belong. All students can succeed. The book you are holding is the  manual for how to do this. Lets get started.
2 Before You Begin Understand the why and the how of this manual. Several months after I started substitute teaching, I achieved the unthinkable: for the  first time, the 5th grade class that I had been teaching for weeks was quiet. I had done  it. I had their attention. They looked at me, their eyes wide, their attention rapt, their  bodies still, their voices silent. For 10 seconds. Then, one snicker chorused and escalated into a classroom filled with belly  laughs. Across the room, the desk I had just thrown lay in silent testament to my  behavior management skills. Oops. Everyone has a breaking point. That day, I hit mine. I can describe all the events and conditions that led up to my abrupt outburst,  but really, I had just one reason for picking up that desk, flinging it into a wall, and  proceeding to yell incoherently at an 11-year-old boy: I had no idea what I was doing. Nothing had changed since the first day that I had arrived to substitute. Nothing  worked. I was educated. I was hardheaded. I was committed. I was where I wanted  to be. But nothing worked. I was broken in. I knew the kids. I knew the school and the community. I recognized the challenging conditions that trailed them into my classroom.

Before You Begin    15 But nothing worked. I listened. I cared. I tried. I kept showing up. But nothing worked! No class I had taken, no degree I had earned, no book I had read had trained me  to elicit positive behaviors from students who had been trained to exhibit negative  behaviors long before they walked through my door. I spent the rest of that year and the next year doing the same things I had been  doingminus throwing desks. I tried everything I had been taught: I kept behavior  charts, called kids homes, sent students to the principals office, issued warnings,  posted rules, established routines, praised good behavior, and imposed punishments  for bad behavior. I experimented with other methods: I threatened and cajoled,  yelled and lectured, begged and bribed, took away lunch time and recess, and kept  kids after school. It was exhausting, debilitating, and entirely ineffective. I was not teaching.  Instead, I was simply reinforcing every negative behavior the students had already  learned. Something had to changeand that something needed to be me. Thats why I wrote this manual. Why Fast-forward about 15 years. It was my favorite time of day. I had just finished my read-aloudMichael  Buckleys The Unusual Suspects, from his Sisters Grimm series. My students, the  toughest in the building, had seamlessly begun their Silent Work procedure. The  students had transitioned using the Lock-It-In procedure, one team at a time: first the  Butterfly Marines, then the Vikings, the Fireballs, the Sharks, and finally, the Tigers.  The students immediately went to work completing their leveled reading group  assignment from the previous day. While they workedyes, workedI took a few minutes for myself. I sank into my  desk chair, rested my chin in my hand, and stared out my open window. It was one of  those rare days in May when my classroom was comfortable despite the schools lack  of air conditioning. I looked at my students. Some were still working on their assignments, while others had moved on to books of interest that they read silently while  sitting at their desks or lying on the carpet. I thought back to those first years of teaching. I remembered the anger, frustration, and helplessness I had felt. I remembered the lectures, warnings, and threats I 
The Classroom Behavior Manual had used. I thought about how such tactics had nearly destroyed me. Then, I observed  the peaceful, calm environment that I now got to enjoy every day. The kids hadnt changed. The students with whom I was working were probably  even more difficult than the student whose desk I had thrown, so many years before.  But I had changed. I knew what I was doing. Now, instead of counting down the minutes until the end of the school day like  I did during my early years in the classroom, I spent time with my students outside   school. I took them to basketball games. I had them dropped off at my house at 5  oclock in the morning when their parents couldnt arrange other transportation.  Each year, I took my class on a field trip to Ohio University, located two hours away. Now, instead of counting down the days until the end of the year, I cried every  June at the thought that I wouldnt be seeing my students again until Augustand  often, never again. On the last day of school each year, my students huddled in the  middle of our classroom with their arms around one anothers shoulders. In the  middle of the circle, I knelt on the floor and tearfully expressed what I felt about their  potential, how much I loved them, and how I would always remember them. Big,  tough kids cried with me. That day, relaxing in my desk chair, I thought about how grateful I was to have  saved my careerto have saved my soulby learning how to work with kids, no matter how difficult they were. It sounds like a Hollywood movie, but it isnt. In movies, teachers have near-magical powers whereby caring is enough. Just by caring about kids, they transform their  lives. The caring spills forth in a montage of well-written lines and heart-wrenching  scenesnone of which address a single effective way to train students to exhibit  positive behavior. The fairy godteacher somehow just reaches themby caring, by  listening, by connecting, by understanding, by standing up for them, by bending the  rules, by shaking some sense into them, by confronting their dangerous realities, by  using so-called tough love, by POOF! Hollywood magic. In real life, it doesnt matter how much you care for kids if you dont know how  to get them to use positive behaviors. It just doesnt. Its not that the tens of thousands  of teachers who quit every year dont care about kids. Its not that they dont want to  be there and do better. They just dont know what theyre doing. They cant train students to be people whom they want to be around because they havent been trained  themselves. But I had learned how to train students.

Before You Begin    17 It was a bittersweet feeling to watch my students that day. That June would be  my last June huddling in a circle in the classroom. I had resigned my position as a  teacher at Fairborn Primary School. The demands of politicians and bureaucrats  who couldnt do my job in a million years had worn me down in a way that even the  toughest of my students in those early years had not. Besides, I had a book to write. I had learned how to elicit positive behavior from even the most challenging students, and I couldI wouldteach those procedures and strategies to other teachers. Here is the exciting part: if I can do this, anyone can do it. I am not an organized  person. My lesson plans were weak. I have a temper and I am easily frazzled. But I  got my real-life Hollywood ending with my kids. If I can attain this fantastic level of  success, you can, too. Thats why you need to read this manual. How Over the past 20-plus years, I have been a teacher, principal, discipline specialist,  superintendent, and behavioral consultant. I have never been a teacher or administrator at a school where the poverty rate was lower than 60 percent. I spent the first  decade of my career in the city of Dayton, Ohio, in schools with at least a 90 percent  poverty rate. For the last 10 years of my teaching career, I requested to have the most  difficult students in my room. The poverty rate of the students in my classroom  during that time was never lower than 90 percent. For the last six years of my teaching career, I worked in one of the largest primary schools in the United States, with  nearly 450 students in each grade. During that time, I continued to request the most  difficult students. One of the years I taught 3rd grade, I had a 95 percent poverty rate  in my room, and yet, 95 percent of my students passed the Ohio Third Grade Reading  Guarantee. Those numbers are nearly unheard of, especially for a teacher like me  who isnt good at writing lesson plans, isnt tremendously organized, and cant do  curriculum mapping or write a student learning objective to save his life. How did I do it? I used specific and explicit procedures and strategies to elicit  positive behaviors from students in a calm, assertive way. These prosocial behaviors  included but were not limited to hard work, treating others with kindness, being  courteous, and using an appropriate voice level. After creating these procedures and  strategies, 99 percent of students time in my classroom was spent on task. Students  loved being in my classroom, and I loved being with my students, no matter what  kind of behaviors they came in exhibiting on the first day. For the last six years of my 
The Classroom Behavior Manual teaching career, I had students whose combined office referrals for behavioral infractions the previous year numbered in the hundreds. Yet not one time in the last decade  of my teaching career did I use an administrator for a disciplinary situationnot one  referral, suspension, or expulsion.  This manual details how I accomplished these goals. The following chapters  explicitly and systematically teach how to use specific procedures and strategies to  create a functional, prosocial classroom environment. The aim of this book is to help  schools produce healthy, successful people who work hard, treat others well, and  make the world a better place. A copious amount of research shows that to create a functional, prosocial classroom, students need quality interactions with calm yet assertive teachers who build  relationships, develop empathy, share control in healthy ways, hold students accountable through appropriate consequences, and have consistent classroom procedures.  Researchers have written extensively on this subject. They are experts at understanding why: why do students need empathy? Why are relationships important? Why do  students need a healthy amount of control? But this is not just another why book. This book is a manual. It is a how book. It contains procedures and strategies  that enable teachers to gain control of their classrooms. A strategy is a plan of action  designed to achieve a major or overall aim. Using Learning Opportunities and the  Calm Signal fall under this category. Procedures are simply an established way of  doing something. Procedures included in this book include the Lock-It-In procedure  for effective transitions, the Student Nickname procedure, and the Class Rule procedure, just to name a few. Through the implementation of these procedures and strategies, this manual  teaches how to build relationships, develop empathy, give away control in a healthy  way, and hold students accountable through appropriate consequences. Using these  tools allows students to think and work in a relaxed environment with the highest  standards of behavior, free from anger, threats, punishments, suspensions, and  expulsion, and as a consequence, teachers are able to guide their students to become  successful, prosocial children who will grow into successful, prosocial adults. The procedures and strategies taught in this book are organized into two skill  sets: building positive relationships with students and sharing control with students  in healthy ways. Building Positive Relationships with Students I had been taught that building relationships with students was a great way to  gain control in the classroom; however, I wasnt specifically taught procedures to 

Before You Begin    19 build those relationships. I decided to create these procedures myself and developed  a way to establish them as routines within the first three weeks of the school year.  After those three weeks, I never had to think about them again, because the students  themselves maintained them. The procedures and established routines allowed me to create a classroom where  my students loved to be. They knew that no one was going to hurt them. They felt like  their classroom was their turf. They knew that we were all on the same team, that we  were family. To be clear, I built relationships by using proceduresnot just by being nice.  Being nice to difficult students, by itself, is nearly worthless. Difficult kids will act out  more when you go out of your way to be nice. Challenging students usually have trust  and self-esteem issues, and they will test you by exhibiting negative behaviors to see  if you truly like them and if you are able to place limits on themsomething that they  desperately need and want. I have found that it is impossible to build relationships with 25 to 35 students in  a classroom just by winging it. That is, its impossible to build relationships just by  being nice enough in any given situation that you dont damage relationships. My difficult students had experienced too much success getting what they wanted through  argument, aggression, and manipulation for me to be able to build a positive relationship while tolerating these negative behaviors. Thats why this manual describes how to build relationships through procedures that train students to exhibit positive behaviors. Establishing these procedures   as routines creates an environment where all students feel the safety and owner  ship necessary for them to be prosocial members of their classroom who are ready   to learn. This manual also explicitly details strategies for building relationships that can  be used under specific circumstances. For example, particularly difficult students in  functional classrooms may find themselves in the middle of an emotionally positive  Bizarro Lecture when they do something particularly wonderful. Effective teachers can use Strategic Noticing to reinforce positive behaviors by noticing them see  Chapter 4, as well as Extreme Respect strategies to model the exemplary behaviors  that are expected in a functional classroom. Used cumulatively, these Relationship-Building Procedures and Strategies  are half of the necessary tools for creating a safe, loving, calm, and nurturing  environment.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Sharing Control in a Healthy Way Well-meaning teacher education professors often advise their pre-service teachers to share control with their students. This is good advice, and youll find that you  can either give control to students on your terms, or they will take it on theirs. This  is a well-researched dynamic McCombs, 2010. However, explicit and systematic  instruction as to how to do this in a classroom has been difficult to finduntil now. When I first started teaching, I had no idea how to share control, or what control  I was supposed to share, or when I was supposed to share it. So I ended up doing what  most teachers do: I hoarded the control. This is what teachers typically do when they  have a large number of difficult students provoking power struggles. With no training, and with no procedures in place, I felt that I had to hold on to as much control as  I could because I felt so out of control. Very quickly, I found myself barking orders in  a desperate attempt to gain or maintain that control: Sit down! Be quiet! Stand up!  Line up! Work harder! Pay attention! It was exhausting at the time, and it is exhausting to think about now. Every time I took control away from a challenging student, the student tried  to get it back; hence, the term power struggle. Sometimes, students would try to  regain control through overt aggression e.g., swearing at me, throwing a chair.  Sometimes, they would use passive aggression e.g., pretending not to hear me, not  turning in assignments. Either way, trying to take control away from my students  trapped me in power struggles that I was destined to losebecause you never win   a power struggle with a child. Thats a fundamental concept well come back to in  later chapters. The Control-Sharing Strategies in this manual, such as Gentle Guidance  Interventions and Delayed Learning Opportunities DLOs, are highly effective and  allow you to share control in appropriate ways. They are supported and maintained  through explicit, systematic procedures through which you elicit the positive behaviors you want by giving away the control you dont need.  This manual teaches you how to establish Control-Sharing Procedures as routines, alongside the Relationship-Building Procedures, in the first three weeks of  the school year. After that time, implementation of the procedures will require little  effort on your part because, again, the students themselves will maintain the routines. Students take ownership over a classroom environment in which they feel safe  and trusted enough to learn.

Before You Begin    21 Consequences Within Procedures Building relationships and sharing control makes it very likely that even the  most difficult students will be cooperative most of the time. However, even the  best-behaved students have bad days. When students slip up and forget to follow  the procedures, or in the first weeks, when students are more likely to deliberately  challenge the procedures, you must deliver appropriate consequences with empathy. To make it as easy as possible to be calm but assertive, consequences are woven  into the procedures themselves. These consequences within the procedures are  called Procedural Learning Opportunities or PLOs. By holding students accountable  through appropriate consequences, students will learn that, although we love them  and will grant them their fair share of control, we are in charge. Consequences for  not being cooperative and not following classroom procedures are systematically and  explicitly taught throughout this book. A Realistic Book for   Real-World Classrooms I wrote this book because it was the book that I needed but did not have when I  started teaching. I knew that my students needed to work hard, treat me well, and  treat one another well. I think I even knew that my students would never behave any   better than I did. The conundrum for me was the same problem that other teachers,  particularly those working with difficult students, face: you cannot be the teacher  you want to be if you do not know how to get your students to exhibit prosocial  behaviors in the classroom. Teachers who spend every day dealing with antisocial  behaviors cannot themselves sustain the positive behaviors that they want to model  for their students. Rather, they end up exhibiting the same negative behaviors that  they want to stop, thus perpetuating the cycle of dysfunctional, antisocial behavior. To gain students cooperation in the classroom, teachers must create an environment where prosocial, positive, and functional behaviors are consistently used  and modeled by both teachers and students. To do so, we need to understand two  facts. First, children have a strong need for quality relationships in general and with  an authority figure specifically. Second, children, like all people, have a strong need  for control and will rebel or resist when their control needs arent met. I needed a  realistic book that taught me how to use Relationship-Building and Control-Sharing  Procedures and Strategies in real-world classrooms with real-life students. So I wrote it.
The Classroom Behavior Manual The Classroom Behavior Manual Note that the title of this book does not involve the terms student behavior, behavior management, or even behavioral leadership. This manual is not primarily  about student behavior. Positive student behaviors are desired outcomes. This manual does not concentrate on outcomes; it concentrates on inputs. The inputs are the  educator behaviors: what exactly do educators do to create a prosocial classroom?  When you use the strategies and procedures as explicitly taught in this book, student  behaviors will be more positive so that educators can be calm and regulated enough  to behave in such a way that creates a high behavioral ceiling, or the behavioral  level of the classrooms teachers: students can only aspire to attain the behavioral  level of the adults around them. The procedures and strategies in this book will help  educators behave like the people they would like their students to become. This is  the manual for creating a fully functional environment where everyones behavior is  prosocial, and no ones behavior is antisocial. Only within this environment can teachers succeed. And only within this environment can students achieve and thrive. Dont Just Read This Book Please dont just read this book. Its a manual: use it. Use it to put into place procedures and strategies that allow you to be calm and assertive with even the most difficult students. Procedures: Go at the Prescribed Paceor Slower You may be tempted to try to consume this books content rapidly and implement every single procedure and strategy immediately. Dont. The best way to use  this material is to implement the procedures according to the First Three Weeks  of School schedule see page 100. Do not try to go faster than prescribed. You may,  however, need or want to go more slowly, because either you are uncomfortable following the schedule, or your school requires more academic accountability during  this time. Go at the pace with which you are comfortable. Dont openly defy your  administration just to be faithful to the suggestions in this book. Strategies: Pick and Choose In contrast to procedures, the strategies outlined in this book can be used as  needed or as opportunities arise. I recommend experimenting with one or two 

Before You Begin    23 strategies per day rather than trying to memorize all of them and deciding which  to use on the fly. As a teacher, you already juggle too much information at any given  moment. Heres my advice on how to learn and use the strategies: 1.	 Read the book. 2.	 Ignore all strategies you dont want to use. Never use them. 3.	 Write down each strategy that you like on a sticky note or sheet of paper. 4.	 For the first two weeks, before you start your school day, choose two strategies  to use. 5.	 Each day, place a note listing the days strategies on your desk or table. 6.	 After the first two weeks, start incorporating more strategies each dayor  continue to only use two per day, if thats what youre comfortable with. By the end of the first three weeks, you should have a good command of all the strategies that you want to use so that you can deploy them as needed. Again, I cannot emphasize enough that you should ignore any strategies and procedures that you dont like or that you feel dont fit your personality, teaching style,  students, or class environment. Pick the ones that feel and work best for you. Keep Doing What You Have Been Doing This may seem like a strange suggestion for a behavior manual to make. If you  have teaching experience, keep using any and all systems and techniques that you  feel are effective. Methods and processes that have worked for you in the past may  continue to work for you in the future. After all, the entire reason Im writing this  manual is because I have found methods that work. Perhaps you have, too. You may  even want to continue to use methods that dont work and you have plenty of these,  or else you would not be reading this book as a security blanket. Your stress level is  an important variable in being able to be empathetic while holding kids accountable.  As your confidence in the procedures and strategies grows, and as you see that the  consequences within the procedures are far more effective than any other system,  you will be able to abandon the less than effective methods that you have been using  in an attempt to elicit positive behaviors. The Behavior Chart: How and When to Throw It Away One of the most common ineffective means of eliciting positive behaviors is a  behavior chart. For most teachers, behavior charts fall squarely in the category of  things I do that I know do not work but that make me feel slightly less out of control. 
The Classroom Behavior Manual You can keep using this tactic, if you feel you need it, but as you learn and deploy the  procedures and strategies taught in this book, you will eventually find that you can  set it aside. For those who hold on to the behavior chart after the start of a new school year,  I offer a particularly effective way to discard it when youre ready that will support  relationship building with your students: 1.	 Wait for a moment when behavior in the room is perfect. A completely silent  moment during quiet work time, such as the Silent Work procedure see  Chapter 8, is an optimal moment. 2.	 With emotion and volume, say something like this: Team Awesome see  Class Nickname procedure, Chapter 5, Im sorry to interrupt you. Im looking  around, and I must tell you that I owe you an apology. Not one of you is causing  a problem for anyone. You are being fantastic and taking care of business. I feel  like this behavior chart that I have been using is silly. I think that its for people  who cant manage their own behavior, and I see that you can. Im so sorry that  I have been insulting your intelligence by using this thing. It is unnecessary.  You all obviously dont need it. 3.	 Choose the most difficult student who has been exhibiting the most positive  behaviors lately and continue: Dontonio, would you please rip that thing off  the wall? 4.	 Allow each student to throw away any clips or cards that you have been using.  Feel free to let them break or tear the cards, clips, or assorted doodads first. This Book Is Not Another Thing Any teacher who has been around for more than a few years has seen things e.g.,  curriculum, methods, ideologies, processes come and go. Many of us have been  around long enough to see things come, go, and come back again often with different names. Eventually, many educators myself included have stopped trying to  learn new things. Why have we stopped trying? 	 We cant possibly add another thing to what were already required to do. 	 We dont have any more room in our brains. 	 We know that if we ignore the latest thing for long enough, it will go away.

Before You Begin    25 What makes this manual different? Things take time and energy away from you.  Theyre distractions that produce few, if any, positive results. They are easily discarded and replaced. This manual is not a thing because it does not take time and  energy away from you, it does produce positive results, and it cannot be easily discarded by your administrators. For every minute you spend reading this book and using its procedures and strategies, you will get hours back by training your students to exhibit positive, prosocial  behaviors so you can teach and they can learn. I Promise Over the past two decades serving in the field of education, I have worked in and visited hundreds of schools. During that time, I have learned a universally true lesson:  there is nothing more valuable than the time and energy of an educator. Demands are  put on educators that are unfair and unrealistic. These demands make it difficult to  manage the daily business of the classroombusiness that extends well beyond the  classroom walls. I promise that this book will not be another demand. It will not make your life  more difficult. I promise that you will get back the valuable time and energy you spend reading  this book many times over. I promise that by adopting these procedures and strategies, you will expend minimal effort to train students to be hard-working, prosocial people. I promise that this book will help you experience the empowerment and joy that  come with being successful at teaching students. I promise that creating this positive classroom environment will dramatically  improve your life and the lives of your students. Lets get to it.
3 Before They Arrive Set up the classroom for optimal behavioral leadership. Many years ago, I accepted a position teaching my own 1st grade classroomtwo days  before school started. I spent 16 hours each of those days decorating and setting up a  pretty awesome-looking classroom, especially for a male teacher. Desks were lined up  just so; name tags were created; book bins and reading areas were arranged perfectly.  Colorful bulletin boards oh, what bulletin boards! were posted in both the room and  the hallway with encouraging words and room to display the quality, wonderful work  that was sure to come from my students. I had timed, to the minute, when we would be transitioning from one wellplanned activity to another. Nothing was left to chance. Every moment had been  played over and over in my mind. I knew exactly how I would take attendance. I knew  where my hallway passes and nurses passes were and, by golly, I knew how and when  to use them. I had a class roster and a bus list. Everything was in place. I was ready.  My room was ready. Then the day began. In the first hour, a kid pulled down my behavior chart while his new friends  laughed hysterically. My plans for timely and organized transitions were a joke:  several students would do what they wanted when they wanted to do it, wandering  aimlessly around the room in the meantime.

Before They Arrive    27 As the day wore on, the challenges continued to accumulate. Three boys whom I  had seated next to one another in orderly rows acted anything but orderly the entire  day. One student refused to do any work. He appeared to be taking 1st grade as an elective. One literally tried to strangle his friend during dismissal. The day was an utter  disaster. As we reached its merciful conclusion, I developed the sinking feeling that  all of my preparation was a waste of time. As my students were finally getting on the  bus, all I could think was I really thought I was prepared. Now what?! It's Not About Classroom Management As it turns out, I had successfully set up my room for proper classroom management,  at least as well as I could as an inexperienced teacher: the desks were in rows, and  things were neat, orderly, and generally appealing. I had processes, procedures, and  tools in place for the classroom's academic and administrative needs. I had even  meticulously planned for how to avoid student traffic jams, and I had done sufficient  planning to avoid general confusion in the classroom. These aspects of running the classroom are so important, but they are not the  focus of this book. There are already two fantastic books written on this subject: The  First Days of School by Harry K. Wong and The Classroom Management Book by Harry  K. Wong and Rosemary T. Wong. While this book will help with classroom management, it is about behavioral  leadership. This chapter will not show you how to manage your classroom because  the books above already have. Instead, this chapter will show you how to set up your  room to be optimally effective for changing and managing students behavior. Heres what you will learn: 	 How to place students on teams according to their academic levels and behavioral issues for optimal behavioral leadership 	 How to position the students and yourself within the classroom so that you can  properly monitor students and effectively use Gentle Guidance Interventions 	 How to explain your methods to parents and administrators This chapter is relatively short. There are no instructions on how to set up systems, charts, or forms, because this manual does not call for any of these instruments.  Rather, it shows you how to set the stage for an optimal environment in which you  can elicit positive behaviors from your students using the absolute minimum amount  of time and energy. Notice the wording: this chapter only sets the stage for that optimal environment. Subsequent chapters will teach you how to create and maintain it.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Creating Teams If you dont organize your students into teams before the year starts, you are missing a  golden opportunity for them to build ownership, teamwork, and functionality in the  classroom. Set aside some time to work on this before the start of the year. It may take  a couple of hours, but it will be time well spent that saves time later. Why teams? 	 Belonging to smaller team units compared to the larger classroom gives students a greater sense of ownership and provides for more group accountability. 	 Creating and correctly using teams allows you to more easily manage the classroom while also enabling students to more effectively self-manage. 	 Team interaction provides students more real-life opportunities for struggle  and growth more on that throughout the book. The teams you create will sit together all year long. Although the entire team can  be moved to a different location, individual students will not be moved to another  team for any reason see Chapter 5. The following is a specific process that you can apply to any grade level to create  balanced, functional teams. Whenever possible, have teams created before the first  day of school; however, for middle and high school classes, you might want to wait  until the second week. This will let you get a handle on individual students behavior  levels and give you more time to prepare, since you will have several different classes  with many students.  So what does the process for creating teams look like? 1.	 Determine the number of teams that you will have based on the total number  of students. For our purposes, I will use a roster of 25 students. I will create five  teams and assign five different academic and behavioral rankings. You want to  keep the groups smallno fewer than four students and no more than six. A  class of 24 students might have six teams of four, while a class of 26 might have  four teams of five students and one with six. 2.	 Obtain two colors of large note or index cards. I work with orange and blue.  Write the name of each female student on the first color card and the name of  each male student on the second color card. These cards are designed to make  it easier for you to access information and arrange your students; they do not  reflect gender-fluid or transgender identifications. Feel free to use any colors  you like.

Before They Arrive    29 3.	 Use whatever data you have about each students academic ability to rank your  students from A to E. Assign the five top academic performers an A, the next  five most proficient students a B, and so on. If you find that you need more  information, seek it out. It will be time well spent. This includes researching  students who are new to the district, even if all you can find are parents comments offering a general sense of past academic performance. Write academic  ranks on students cards. You might also add clarifying information on a  students academic performance. Note: Adjust the number of rankings you  assign based on the number of students on teams: A to D for teams of four students, A to F for teams of six students. 4.	 Use whatever information you have about each students behavior to rank  your students from 1 to 5. Assign the five students who have a record of exhibiting the most positive behaviors a 1. Assign the five students who have a  history of exhibiting the most negative behaviors 5. Rank the remaining  students in groups from 2 to 4 based on their general behavior history. Again,  if you need to, seek out information from former teachers and administrators.  Note: Approach parents only as a last resort, as they are often ineffective  reporters in this area. When determining a behavioral rank, consider each  students level of cooperation, treatment of other students, treatment of educators, self-treatment, willingness to work, and general attitude. Write behavioral ranks on students cards. You might also add clarifying information on a  students behavioral history. Note: Adjust the number of rankings you assign  based on the number of students on teams: 1 to 4 for teams of four students, 1  to 6 for teams of six students. 5.	 Sit in a comfortable place with a large flat surface in front of you; a kitchen  table can be ideal. Arrange your teams using your completed student cards.  Put an equal number of students or as close to an equal number as you can on  each team. Make sure that each team has a balance of academic and behavioral  ranks. For example, each of our sample teams should have at least one A, B, C,  D, and E as well as a 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. Any number of combinations is possible.  For example, one team may have A1, B3, C2, D5, E4, but another might end up  with A1, B4, C3, D2, E5. Try to balance the number of girls and boys on each  team and to do what is necessary to create diverse teams within your classroom. Consider all known factors including, but not limited to, raceethnicity,  gender identification, physical disabilities, and so on. Perfect distribution is  not as important as simply making an effort to not have homogeneous teams.
The Classroom Behavior Manual 6.	 Review your initial team plan and make any adjustments neededbefore  school starts. Some considerations before you finalize your arrangements: 	 Do not put students who have had major problems with each other in the past  on the same team. 	 Do not put the class bully on the same team as the class victim. 	 Do assign Blue-Collar Bullies and White-Collar Bullies to the same team  see sidebar. Bullies and Where to Put Them Although hybrids exist, bullies tend to come in one of two forms. Where to put  the bullies in your classroom depends on how you identify them. 	 Threatening Bully TB. This bully is your rough-and-tough give me  your lunch money type. TBs use the blunt instruments of physical  threats and violence to intimidate students that they perceive as  smaller and weaker. Oftentimes, these students are not subtle about  their bullying. 	 Sneaky Bully SB. This bully uses insults, backstabbing, and gossip to  bully other students. SBs tend to be subtler than their TB counterparts. They know how to manipulate teachers and others by presenting appropriate, prosocial behavior, so they can be more difficult to  spot. When creating teams and seating charts, keep in mind that TBs often  neutralize SBs. SBs might be weaker physically and emotionally. Particularly  among younger students, SBs are often physically intimidated by the mere  presence of TBs. An SB will usually avoid a TB as well as those students who  are friendly with the TB. In this way, friends or supporters of the TB often fall  under the TBs protective umbrella. In addition, the TB is less likely to intimidate other students when positioned to protect other students against an SB.  The TB feels a relatively healthy sense of control in this instance.

Before They Arrive    31 Positioning Students in the Classroom Once you have put your students on teams, you need to decide where they will be sitting. This involves two considerations: first, where teammates will sit relative to one  another, and second, where teams will be positioned within the room. Team Configurations You want to start by arranging students in their team configurations. This means  you need to group tables or desks together. For elementary school, desks that face  each other or tables are optimal for true teamwork as well as for holding one another  accountable. I also recommend this arrangement for older students if it fits with  your educational plan. Figures 3.1 and 3.2 show clustered teams and teams grouped  in rows. Notice that the arrangement of tables and desks creates distinct team areas,  with space separating each team from the others. Begin by arranging your team clusters or rows on paper and in your physical  space. Figure 3.1 shows team clusters using tables. You can also arrange clusters by  having individual desks face each other. Figure 3.2 shows team rows using desks. You  can also arrange rows using long tables. Figure 3.1 Team Clusters Board Reading  Table Door Carpet 3A 3A 3D 3D 2B 4B 2E 2C 4C 4C 4D 4D 3B 2A 5C 1E 1E 3C 2A 5E 4B 1A 5E 5D 1B Teacher Desk
The Classroom Behavior Manual Figure 3.2 Team Rows Seating Within and Among Teams To be optimally effective, you should also arrange seating within your teams,  keeping these parameters in mind: 	 Surround 5s with 1s and 2s. You want to sandwich 5s between 1s and 2s. However,  as you arrange the team spaces, be aware of the 5s placement with respect   to other teams. You dont want a 5 from one team backing up against a 5   from another. 	 Surround Es with As and Bs. Again, try to keep in mind the arrangement of students with regards to other teams, too. Prioritize placement by behavioral rank. 	 Place the 5 who has a history of the most severe behavior close to the area where  you will most often be during independent work time. For instance, if you are an  elementary school teacher who works with small groups during silent sustained  reading, put your most difficult 5 on a team near the spot where you will be  working with small groups. Make sure you are behind that students ear and, if  possible, positioned at the vertex of a Power V see pages 3435. Do not separate  Board Reading  Table Door 4C 1D 5A 2B 3C Teacher Desk 4E 4C 4A 2A 2B 5E 3C 1E 5B 4C 5C 2A 1B 5E 3A 2A 1D 2D 3D 3B

Before They Arrive    33 the 5 from the rest of the team or the class. Similarly, if you are a middle or high  school teacher who works at a desk or board near the front of the class, then you  probably want to place the most severe 5 close to the front of the room, but be  sure not to put all of the 5s in the front row of the class. Testing Your Configuration Once you have your teams arranged, it can be helpful to physically place students  cards on the desks or tables where students will be sitting to test your configuration.  Spend some time navigating the room as you might during different activities e.g.,  instruction, individual work, group work. This lets you visualize where problems  might occur. You might notice that you put a 4 or 5 from one team a little too close to  a 4 or 5 from another. Maybe you separated two students into different teams because  they have a history, but you put their teams right next to each other. This activity  will help you foresee problems that you might miss if you just sketch out your plan or  arrange cards on a table. If you decide to adjust your original configuration, be sure  to test it out, too! Positioning Yourself in the Classroom A Power Position PP is a place from which the teacher can see every student. There  is a specific process to find these positions. Although you are likely to move around  your classroom frequently, teachers often spend a lot of their time delivering instruction from certain optimal locations. For example, teachers of all age groups tend  to address their class while at the board at the front of the room. Those who teach  younger students may spend several hours a day at a reading table. Middle and high  school teachers likely spend time at their desks or at a projector. Whatever grade you  teach, think about the locations from which you deliver instruction at different times  of the day. Write those places down, either as a list or on your classroom diagram. Now arrange students cards on the desks or tables where they will be sitting.  Using your list or diagram, go to the places where you spend time giving instruction.  Ask yourself the following questions to determine whether these spots are PPs: 	 Can you see students while they are seated at their desks or tables? 	 Can you see students at common areas and workstations? 	 Can you see students at the pencil sharpener and the trash can? 	 Can you see students at a lab table, sink, or other special utility space?
The Classroom Behavior Manual If yes, congratulations! Your instructional spots are PPs. If an instructional spot  is not a PP, then you need to rearrange your room. Identifying Secondary Power Positions In addition to instructional PPs, you should have at least two other Secondary  Power Positions SPPs. An SPP is a place from which you can see every student when  you are not giving direct instruction. Study Figure 3.3. Notice the central locations of  the instructional PPs, and then contrast them with the peripheral SPPs, where you  could position yourself when not teaching to observe the classroom. Figure 3.3 Instructional Power Positions and Secondary Power Positions Having PPs and SPPs will optimize your effectiveness as the classrooms Friendly,  Loving Alpha FLA. An FLA is a teacher who is confident, assertive, and loving, and  who establishes themselves as the kind boss of the classroom. Setting Up Your Class to Use the Power V The best position to monitor a student is from a 45-degree angle behind the students  ear. From here, you can observe what a student is doing and where a student is looking without the student being able to see you making these observations. Reading  Table Door Board Carpet PP PP PP SPP SPP SPP

Before They Arrive    35 The students you most need to monitor are the 5s, the students with the history  of using the most negative behaviors the most often. Place your 5s in positions where  you can be behind the ears of at least two of them when youre in a PP. This positioning forms the Power V see Figure 3.4. If your classroom has two super 5s i.e.,  two students who have significantly worse behavior than everyone else, you should  seat them where you can create a Power V with them. Whenever possible, if you can  arrange students so that you can be behind three 5s ears from one PP, then you have  established an especially effective PPthe Power E see Figure 3.5. Make sure you  have arranged your classroom in a way that you can take advantage of more than one  Power V or perhaps one Power E. Figure 3.4 Power V Figure 3.5 Power E 3D 2B 4C 1A 5E 3A 2E 4C 5D 1B PP 3D 2B 4C 1A 5E 3A 2E 4C 5D 1B 4D 3B 2A 1E 5C PP
The Classroom Behavior Manual Addressing Team and Seat Changes When parents ask if their child can move seats, the short answer is There will be no  team or seat changes. No matter how well you arrange your students, difficulties between them will  arise throughout the year. Students who dont like each other will have issues; students who like each other will have issues. This is normal, healthy, and expected.  From time to time, students will become frustrated or upset, and they will want to  move. Likewise, parents might become aggravated that their student is having trouble with another student on their team. They will want you to move their student or  the other student. At some point, even you might be exasperated and think that you  can fix a problem by moving someone. Fight the urge to attempt to solve the problem  this way. Why? Because students need to figure out how to deal with different, difficult,  and otherwise disagreeable people. The price tag for doing so while still in school is  as low as it will ever be. The costs of learning to navigate social challenges go up as  students age and venture forth into the world as adults. It is better that students learn  strategies for dealing with people they dislike or with whom they have differences in  the safer environment of school, as minors, rather than later, in a less protected environment at an age when they are held to greater account for their actions. Also, as you will learn in Chapter 7, you will be monitoring students and gently  guiding them toward positive behaviors. You will also be using consequences to teach  prosocial behaviors so that students will not cause problems for others, regardless of  where they are sitting. In short, your classroom will be the safest, most well-monitored place for students to learn how to deal with difficult people. How to Respond to Concerned   and Disgruntled Parents To begin with, as you make your plans at the beginning of the school year, I  urge you not to send out a position paper on your permanent seating policy.  You want to avoid organizing your own mob of angry parents. Later, if parents  complain that its not fair that their student must sit next to the class bully, or  daydreamer, or kid who eats her snot, then you can explain that life is not fair.  Gently add that you care too much for their student to trick the student into  thinking that life is always fair and accommodating.

Before They Arrive    37 Keep in mind that no studentno personis entitled to a place in life  where they feel completely comfortable with their surroundings at all times.  Thats not how life works. Heres a sample longer answer that you can give parents who contest the  seating or team arrangement. You can modify this response for the students  themselves as well as for administrators who might be asked to intervene. I care too much for Joseph to steal this opportunity for growth from him.  For Joseph to be successful in life, he will need to deal with all kinds of people. Now is the easiest and best time to learn these hard lessons. I properly  monitor all students and will help guide Joseph through this tough time. Using Team Color-Coding During the first few weeks and throughout the year, every individual on every team  will have the opportunity to decorate and adorn their team area, bins, books, and  journals. This creates a tremendous sense of ownership among students over their  teams and their classroom. You can help set the stage for this process before the  school year begins by color-coding student workspaces, areas, and materials. How much or how little color-coding you do will depend on the age of your students, your resources, and your personal preference. I recommend using strong, solid  colors. In my classroom, I had five teams. I assigned each team a bold color: red, blue,  orange, green, or purple. I decorated with these colors wherever and however I could  before my students arrived for the first day. I bought colored bins one for materials, one for hanging folders. I used colored  tape to adorn book bins, spelling list holders, and locker numbers. I placed colored  stickers on books and journals. I prepared and handed out color-coded math journals.  Finally, in my 1st and 3rd grade classrooms, I used a carpet with matching colors for  students to sit for direct instruction. The carpet had six rectangles of each color; students could only sit on their team color. You will be amazed at how creating cohesion  in this way truly generates a feeling of belonging in the classroom! If youve followed the instructions of this chapter, you have now set yourself up  for success. If youve never made these types of preparations before, youve never  given yourself much of a chance to optimally lead behaviors. Once the students show  up, its going to get harder before it gets easier. But nowperhaps for the first time you are ready for the challenge.
Part I RelationshipBuilding Strategies Make your students fall in love with and take care of you. I was 9 years old, and I hated my life. I was a 3rd grade student in Mrs. Johnsons room. I felt as though my entire life  was school, and I hated, hated school. Suffering from what I now understand to be a  clinical level of anxiety, I experienced every day as torture from the moment I woke  up to the moment I went to sleep. I was either at school or worrying about school. I  was either working on schoolwork or dreading schoolwork. Mrs. Johnson was, by far, the meanest person I had ever encountered. She was  unforgiving of any mistakes. I worked excruciatingly slowly and still do to this day,  and she thought it would help me to work faster and harder if she barked at me to  work faster and harder. It did not. Under these conditions, being able to work diligently and effectively at school  went from difficult to impossible. Although school had been stressful the previous  year I still remember fretting about having to memorize and recite a poem called 
The Classroom Behavior Manual The Black Cat, I was considered a smart, extremely capable student, and the report  given to Mrs. Johnson by my 2nd grade teacher was glowing. When academic expectations increased dramatically in 3rd grade, however, I fell behind, and my anxiety  about my failurescompounded by Mrs. Johnsons reactions to those failures overwhelmed me. The teacher calling me a real disappointment in front of all my  classmates did not help. Even during brief moments of success, Mrs. Johnson was there to snuff out any  positive feelings that flickered within me about my class, my teacher, and myself.  Once, by the sheer accident of happening to know my 7s times tables because they  corresponded with the scoring of touchdowns and extra points in football, I had, for  the very first time, done well on a dreaded multiplication quiz. Having earned a perfect score instead of my usual F, I wanted to show my accomplishment to my family. Can I take this home and show my mom? I asked Mrs. Johnson, holding out  my perfect quiz. To this day, I remember her exact words. I remember where I was  standing and what she was wearing.  Since when are you so interested in math?! She snatched the quiz out of my  hand and ripped it up in front of me, throwing the scraps of quiz on the ground. She  then told me to pick the pieces up and throw them away. In full view of my entire  class, I cried quietly, on my knees, as I did as I was told.

I hated Mrs. Johnson for a long time. She was the reason I became a teacher: I  didnt want students to have to go through what I went through. I thought that, as a  good person who cared about kids and their well-being, I could help students, even  ones who had struggles and challenges. Of course, I found out that I was wrong. Its so easy for people to read that story  and think about how they would never do what she did. Its easy for people to say that  they would never ride students to the point where the students felt so trapped and  stressed that they hated their very existence. Not only is it easy to say, but it makes  people feel good about themselves to think that they are good, that others are bad,  and that if only more people were good like they are, then schools, communities,  and our world would be good, too. I found out the truth during my first few days of teaching. The truth is that all of  us are capable of both good and evil. The amount and kind of good or evil that we are  capable of varies depending on many factors, not the least of which is the amount of 

Part I: Relationship-Building Strategies     41 stress we are under. The truth is that teaching, even under the best of circumstances,  is stressful. Looking back now, I can see that the truth in Mrs. Johnsons class was that she  had had no training in behavior management and had taught for a very long time  without encountering students as challenging as we were. That particular year, she  had the unprecedented challenge of dealing with multiple extremely difficult students. Her understandable stress manifested itself in poor teaching, constant frustration, yelling, and some evil, horrible teacher behaviors. The fact that four students  were expelled from our class the next year bore witness to our status as a class that  tore through our school like a wrecking ball. Without the support of specific and explicitly taught strategies for staying calm  and encouraging positive behaviors when dealing with difficult students, the job of  a teacher becomes impossible to do effectively. Traditional behavior management  makes these behaviors worse, compounding the problem. When teachers attempt to  do the impossible, in a high-stress situation, without the knowledge of strategies and  procedures to make behaviors better instead of worse, they become capable of doing  great evil, as Mrs. Johnson did. And as I did. Staying calm is the result of the effective use of a specific strategy. You will learn  it in this section of the book. Encouraging positive behaviors is a strategy, and you  will learn how to do that, too. Being able to bond with students and guide them to act  the way you want them to act is not something that results from simply being a good  person. You have to master the following specific strategies in order to build the relationships you need so that you can act like the teacher you want to be.
4 Relationship-Building  Strategies The Calm Signal Particularly honest educators, when learning these behavioral leadership strategies,  often say something like All of these strategies for building relationships and sharing control are well and good, but what if Im not calm enough to use them? What if,  instead of modeling positive behaviors or using Gentle Guidance Interventions see  Chapter 9, I get too mad too quickly and just yell at kids before I can remember to do  these positive things? The first and most important answer to this absolutely excellent and essential  question is that educators must create, train themselves to use, and then use a Calm  Signal in order to separate a stressful stimulus students negative behaviors from  their response. The Calm Signal acts as a pause button: the teacher will breathe,   say the response, and remain in a thinking state in order to calmly react with helpful, positive strategies instead of a negative response like yelling or tearing up an A   math quiz. That is the reason the Calm Signal is the first strategy taught in this book:  without it, many educators will have trouble using the other strategies taught subsequently. While the techniques in Chapters 4 and 5 are set into place in the first three  to six weeks, and then more or less run themselves as part of a set plan, teachers  need to be in the right state of mind to be able to remember and then actually use the 

Relationship-Building Strategies    43 strategies. Notice that within these procedures, I use my own Calm Signal as a placeholder; feel free to use mine, or create your own and plug it in. The Calm Signal is a Pavlovian cue to the brain of the teacher and the brain of  the student, indicating it is time to be calm, to relax, and to think. Over time, the use  of the Calm Signal can keep both teachers and students in their prefrontal cortex,  where they are still able to think. The expert educator will use the Calm Signal almost  constantly in the beginning of the year in an effort to remain calm and encourage  students to remain calm as well. The Bad Kid Cycle and How to Stop It Students who consistently use negative behaviors to get what they want use negative behaviors as a matter of habit. This bad habit usually starts at home: children  notice that when they use a negative behavior perhaps arguing or screaming about  not getting a wanted toy, they may get the tangible thing that they want the toy.  Of course, when this scenario repeats, the child may create a bad habit of negative  behavior because they consistently get the desired thing. Additionally, if the adult does not give the child the toy, but they do get angry,  they are also giving the child what they want: the feeling that they can control an  adult. Many children would rather have that feeling of control than a toy. Parents will only rarely react to this shifting power dynamic by consistently giving in to demands of their small children giving the toy. What does often happen is  that, as children see their negative behaviors becoming more and more successful at  getting more and more control over their parents emotions, they start using more  and worse negative behaviors to get even more control, creating a power struggle that  reinforces the childs negative behavior as long as the parent continues to get angry.  This is the Bad Kid Cycle. Unfortunately for teachers, this cycle continues when the child begins school.  The student has developed a habit of getting what they want think toy or control  of an adult. Predictably, they attempt to continue the Bad Kid Cycle at school.  Thats where educators come in. For the sake of the teacher, the school, and the student, the educator must stop  these students from continuing the Bad Kid Cycle. This is done by not giving in and  not getting angry. Of course, telling a teacher not to get angry in response to an out-of-control classroom would be worse than worthless advice. Any teacher with a functional limbic  system trying to grin and bear an onslaught of negative behaviors will eventually  become very angry indeed. Furthermore, human beings cannot effectively train 
The Classroom Behavior Manual themselves to not do something in this case, to not get angry. Brains dont work like  that. The human brain needs to be trained to do things, not to not do them. This strategy is what you actually do to break the Bad Kid Cycle.  Choose a Calm Signal You will need to choose or create a sound, word, or very short phrase that you  will use as your Calm Signal. Create or choose carefully; if you use it correctly, you  will be saying this phrase thousands of times per year until the end of your career. Choose a Calm Signal that sounds like something you would say or is something  you already say. Here is a list of suggestions: Oh, man. Oh, boy. Yikes. Yeesh. Ugh. Huh. Oh. Whoa. Blerg. The sound of a  slow exhale To create your own, follow these guidelines: 	 Pick a Calm Signal that you cannot make sound sarcastic, no matter how hard  you try. Really? and Seriously? are not acceptable. If you find yourself to be  the kind of person who can make any words sarcastic, choose or create a sound  instead of a word. 	 Your Calm Signal should be no more than three short words long. 	 Your Calm Signal must be something that wont annoy you if you have to say it  100 times in a daybecause some days, you might. Once you have picked a signal that works for you, you are ready to begin your Calm  Signal training. Train Yourself to Use the Calm Signal at Home If you sleep in the same bed with someone, alert them to the fact that you are  going to do the following: as you are falling asleep, inhale deeply. On the exhale, say  your Calm Signal. Say it calmly, softly, and slowly. See why you had to warn your  significant other? Do this until you are asleep. Do it every night for two weeks. Even  if you cant quite fall asleep while doing this routine, it will file your Calm Signal in  a part of your brain where it will be easier to retrieve than if you never did this at all.

Relationship-Building Strategies    45 During these two weeks, when you are calm perhaps doing things around your  house or while reading a book, inhale, then exhale saying your Calm Signal, just like  you did in bed. Continue to use your Calm Signal when some small thing doesnt go  your way: you cant find your car keys, you get put on hold by your health care provider, or you realize you forgot to pay a bill. Train Yourself to Use the Calm Signal at School During or after these initial two weeks, start using your Calm Signal at school  when the kids arent there yet. Optimally, you could use it while preparing for the  first day. Just like at home, when something doesnt go your way your class list isnt  in your mailbox, youre running late to a meeting, or the copier is broken again, use  your Calm Signal before reacting in any other way. Practice using your pause button  over and over and over again. Next, use it when your students are in the room. Dont wait until things get  rough! Start by using your Calm Signal when something mildly annoying happens:  you didnt make enough copies, you realize that you taught the wrong lesson, you  sent the wrong students to reading groups. Then, when a student uses an annoying  behavior that may have previously caused you to react with something not appropriate, not helpful, and not in this manual, inhale and use your Calm Signal. Later, you  will learn to follow up with one of the Gentle Guidance Interventions GGIs; Chapter  9 or Delayed Learning Opportunities DLOs; Chapter 11, which will be accessible  because you have a working pause button that allows you to remain calm enough to  do positive things! Notice that the use of a Calm Signal is responsive: it is prompted by some type of  potential stress. Most commonly, this will be a negative behavior from a student. The  rest of the Relationship-Building Strategiesthe Argument Shield, Strategic Noticing,  Modeling, and Bondingare preventive. They will prevent negative behaviors so   that the use of the Calm Signal and subsequent interventions will be less necessary.  When used cumulatively, each strategy makes the other strategies more effective! The Argument Shield  A student may become frustrated when a teacher uses the Calm Signal and remains  calm and relaxed throughout its use. After all, if the student is trying to gain control  of the teachers emotions through negative behavior, the teachers lack of agitation  can be annoying, and therefore the Calm Signal may actually increase some students  frustration in the short term. The most common method that students may use to 
The Classroom Behavior Manual attempt to gain or regain control is to try to argue with the adult. While a student  trying to argue with a teacher may be triggered by the use of the Calm Signal, the  Argument Shield strategy can be used whenever a student attempts to argue. It will  be 100 percent effective in stopping you from being controlled by a students attempt   to argue. Savvy students know, at least subconsciously, why they can win every argument  with a teacher: students dont have to win the argument logically. They only have to  control the emotions and the time of the teacher. Therefore, the goal of the Argument  Shield is to train the students not to argue by giving away the least amount of control  over your time and emotions as possible. Doing this involves a simple, twoto threeline script, the first of which is the use of your personal Calm Signal, which you have  already selected. The key is to use exactly this script and to never deviate from it if a  student is attempting to argue. Say these lines lightly, quickly, and without stopping  instruction or whatever you are doing. Only use the final question if the argument  attempts continue after the second line: Student tries to argue Teacher: Calm Signal Student tries to argue Teacher: I dont argue. Student tries to argue Teacher: . . . And what did I say? Repeat the last question as long as the student continues to argue, until you  decide to delay a Learning Opportunity, when and if necessary. Each of these three lines has a specific purpose:  	 The Calm Signal stops the teacher from becoming angry and giving the student  their desired control, while at the same time it does not exacerbate the problem  with extra words andor emotion.  	 Saying, I dont argue, simply sets the limit.  	 . . . And what did I say? uses the power of questions to make the student think  instead of making a demand. Simply repeating the limit will likely engender  more resistance. By using this simple strategy and never deviating from it, the teacher shows the  student that they will not get what they want through argument, and they will learn,  with each argument attempt, not to argue.  If a student becomes so disruptive that thinking and teaching become impossible, the teacher simply uses their DLO script see pages 227229 and gives the  Learning Opportunity later.

Relationship-Building Strategies    47 Remember, it takes at least two people to have an argument. If you use this strategy, you are guaranteed to never be one of those people! Strategic Noticing Human beings repeat behaviors that are noticed. Noticing a students behavior makes  them more likely to repeat that behavior. This is true of both positive and negative  behaviors. Not only are noticed behaviors repeated, but they are often explored and  heightened; students who see that a behavior elicited attention are likely to experiment with using that same behavior in a slightly different or enhanced way. The 11th grade student who is noticed saying thank you by the principal will be  more likely not only to say thank you to a teacher later that day, but also to explore  using similar polite behaviors, such as saying please when asking the lunch server  for extra mashed potatoes. The student will also be more likely to heighten these  polite behaviors by calling a teacher maam or even writing an unsolicited thankyou email. Conversely, a 1st grade student who is noticed poking a classmate under the table  is more likely to do it again. Furthermore, the student will be more likely to explore  similar behaviors in the violence genre, perhaps pushing another student in line.  The student is also more likely to heighten the level of violence; perhaps being noticed  will lead the student to experiment with punching another student in the face. Educators need to systematically notice positive behaviors in order to encourage  them, while simultaneously ignoring when possible or giving minimal attention  to negative behaviors. Unfortunately, in nearly all schools, negative behaviors are  noticed more than positive behaviors. This is why behaviors tend to get worse in  every classroom every year, from fall to spring. It is why the worst-behaved students  in any school are often the oldest students: they have had negative behaviors noticed  for the longest amount of time, so they use the most negative behaviors. Teachers are  accidentally and systematically training kids to be worse every day by noticing negative behaviors but not positive behaviors. In practice, many of us fail to pay attention to positive behaviors because, by definition, those behaviors do not cause a problem, so they do not need to be addressed.  The result is that nearly all teachers ignore most positive behaviors while encouraging negative behaviors. This dynamic causes more dysfunction than any other factor  in education. Without flipping this dynamicwithout systematically practicing  the Strategic Noticing of positive behaviors and minimizing the attention given to  negative behaviorsthe average student behaviors will get worse month by month  and year by year.
The Classroom Behavior Manual The Good Kid Cycle and How to Perpetuate It The Good Kid Cycle works exactly like the Bad Kid Cycle. Some of the students in your classroom have found, through experience, that they get the things that  they want through using positive behaviors such as being polite and pleasant, solving  problems without violence, and working hard. They have learned that they get good  grades, special privileges, and academic and athletic success through using positive  behaviors. They have also learned, often through considerable experience, that they  get loads of attention when they use positive behaviors. That attention, as well as the  positive trappings of using positive behavior, helps students develop a habit of positive, prosocial, good behaviors. This is the Good Kid Cycle. The adults in the lives of these students have done you a great service: they have  set you up for success by training the students to use positive behaviors. Still, in order  to perpetuate the Good Kid Cycle, we must consciously and systematically use  Strategic Noticing to reinforce the positive behaviors that these prosocial students  are using to get what they want. Every teacher who has ever worked with difficult students has felt the angst that comes from realizing that they have been giving attention  to negative behaviors from antisocial students all day and more or less ignoring the  prosocial students. Strategic Noticing solves this dynamic. Flipping the Bad Kid Cycle By engaging your Calm Signal and not getting angry, you break the Bad Kids  habit of using negative behavior to get what they want. This is essential, but it is only  half of the equation. By merely not giving the student what they wanted no tangible  thing and no anger, you have stopped the negative behavior from being functional. Now, you must systematically reinforce positive behaviors. You should systematically give properly communicated attention to all of your  students by noticing them only when they are using positive behaviors! Keep in mind  that none of this means that kids who have been conditioned to use negative behaviors will just cease and desist using negative behaviors right away. After all, those  behaviors have been getting them what they want for a long time! But when you  notice the positive behaviors of their classmates, you are providing a simple instruction booklet for how to get attention in your classroom. They will receive this instruction booklet on the first day that you start using these strategies, and sometime after  that, they will use it. The way you perpetuate the Good Kid Cycle will be the exact same way that you  flip the Bad Kid Cycle, and you will do both simultaneously and without having to 

Relationship-Building Strategies    49 think about which one you are doing! It will be fantastically simple and will be the  number one tool in eliciting positive behaviors that you will ever use. The How To use Strategic Noticing in response to positive behaviors, simply say the  following: I noticed enter positive behavior here. Thats it. Theres nothing else. If there is anything else, you did it wrong. The list of positive behaviors that you can notice is literally endless. Here are  some that you can use in your classroom: I noticed that you are listening. I noticed that you are working hard. I noticed that you treat people well. I noticed that you play fair. I noticed that you sat down and got right to work. I noticed that you waited patiently for me. I noticed that you waited silently in line. I noticed that you washed your hands thoroughly. I noticed that you are silent. I noticed that you all are silent. I noticed that you all are staying to the right of the hallway. I noticed that you all are working cooperatively. I noticed that you raised your hand. You can also notice when students accomplish things academically. I noticed that you indented your paragraph. I noticed that you balanced the equation before solving for x. I noticed that you followed through when passing the ball. I noticed that you all are using the word wall to spell your words  correctly. Praise Is Not Effective Enough Note that the strategy involved noticing, not praise. Praise can be somewhat  effective with healthy students. It will not be effective with difficult students. Even  so, somewhat effective is not good enough. Somewhat effective means that the  teacher has to do too much thinking and that the strategy only works sometimes with  some students.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Many difficult students have self-esteem issues and trust issues. If you say, You  are great! those students will say to themselves, No, Im not! What are you up to  and what do you want from me? They will often use even more negative behaviors  in order to get you to stop praising them. Why? Praise involves a value judgment.  You are great means I have judged you to be great. Difficult students hate value  judgments. Fight the urge to notice and then praise: I noticed that you are working hard . . . and thats great! Praise isnt effective enough to be included in this manual. Stick to Strategic Noticing. Liking What Students Do Is Not Effective Enough Many untrained teachers, particularly teachers of younger students, will say  aloud that they like certain behaviors: I like the way Tyreke is sitting. This may be  somewhat effective with easier, younger kids, but it will backfire horribly with everyone else. Heres why: difficult kids dont want you to like what they do, and they  really dont want you to like what they do in front of their friends! Again, somewhat  effective strategies are not good enough to be included in this manual. Dont like  what students donotice what they do. A Behavior Management Paradigm Shift Before reading this manual, most teachers will have some semblance of the  following philosophy about teaching and behavior management: When everything is  going well with behavior, I will teach. When things go poorly, I will react to those behaviors, stop them, and then go back to teaching. As we have discussed, this paradigm leads  to ignoring positive behaviors, encouraging negative behaviors, failing to perpetuate  the Good Kid Cycle, and reinforcing the Bad Kid Cycle. Instead, with Strategic Noticing being our primary means of preventing negative behaviors, our new philosophy is the following: I will immediately notice positive  behaviors before I teach and while I am teaching, over and over again. This will prevent  a vast majority of negative behaviors. When things go poorly, I will gently guide students  back to using positive behaviors with minimal attention. If that doesnt work, I will use  other strategies learned from this book. Instead of reacting to and reinforcing negative behaviors, effective teachers  systematically put a vast majority of their energy toward prevention. Ashley Owen,  a 3rd grade teacher and behavioral leadership coach, created a very effective rule of  thumb that we now call the 70-20-10 Rule: 70 percent of all energy and time you put  toward behavioral leadership should go toward the use of Strategic Noticing, while 20 

Relationship-Building Strategies    51 percent should go toward Gentle Guidance Interventions and only 10 percent to the  use of Delayed and Procedural Learning Opportunities described in the latter section  of this book. While implementing Strategic Noticing is incredibly simple, remembering to  do it often enough is more challenging. However, prioritizing this technique will  improve your life more than any other change that you could possibly make to your  teaching. All teachers should use Strategic Noticing every 90 seconds, all day long. Another  way to put it: for every 30 minutes you are with students, you need to notice 20 times. A common reactionone that you are probably having right nowis that  Strategic Noticing will take too much time. It wont. Strategic Noticing takes no more  than three seconds. Over the course of any half-hour period, 20 instances of Strategic  Noticing will take no more than 60 seconds. Remember that noticing positive behaviors frequently will prevent a vast majority of negative behaviors that take days,  sometimes weeks or even months, away from your instructional time every year. Strategic Noticing is a preventive strategy. Putting time and energy toward prevention is more effective than putting energy toward responsive action. Keep in mind  that the procedures already outlined also act as preventive measures. The cumulative  effect of implementing Relationship-Building and Control-Sharing Procedures is that  you will unleash a tidal wave of negative behavior prevention every single day without even thinking about it! Accountability: How to Make Sure   You Notice Every 90 Seconds Again, this is the hard part. Nothing prompts you to do Strategic Noticing: you  need to do it even when all is well. Therefore, you may need some help from someone  else to make sure your Strategic Noticing frequency is high enough for optimal negative behavior prevention. Ideally, your school will hire a Behavioral Leadership Classroom coach to help  you with this and the use of every other procedure and strategy in this book. If not,  you can simply ask another person to tally the number of times you use Strategic  Noticing. That person does not need to have any training other than you telling them  to tally how many times you say I noticed that you  without following it up  with praise. Of course, schools are busy places, so anyone helping wont have a lot of  time. But if they can spare five minutes, that can be enough to spot-check you to make  sure you are noticing enough. Here are your frequency goals for optimal prevention,  depending upon the amount of time being observed:
The Classroom Behavior Manual 	 30 minutes: 20 Strategic Noticings 	 20 minutes: 14 Strategic Noticings 	 10 minutes: 7 Strategic Noticings 	 5 minutes: 4 Strategic Noticings 	 One 50-minute period high or middle school: 34 Strategic Noticings These numbers denote the minimum amount of Strategic Noticing necessary.  Having someone holding you accountable will allow you to better remember to keep  up your frequency in order to prevent negative behaviors. Only by thoughtfully  attending to Strategic Noticing can you be successful in this area. Hints for Optimal Strategic Noticing Bombard your students with Strategic Noticing in the first five minutes of the  day and the first five minutes after lunch or recess. There are two reasons for this.  First, it is easier to remember to use the technique immediately after a break from  students and for just five minutes, especially when you are just starting the practice.  Second, overwhelming students with Strategic Noticing when they enter the classroom for the first time in the morning and in the afternoon reminds them about what  kind of behaviors positive ones get attention in your classroom. This is especially  important for students who get attention for negative behaviors at home or during  lunch or recess. Noticing in this way sets the tone of a classroom. Middle and high school teachers can concentrate on getting 20 Strategic   Noticings done in the first 10 minutes of every class period, for all of the reasons  above. This is especially important for students coming from classes that have teachers at the helm who have not had Behavioral Leadership Classroom training or have  not read this book. This is not to say that you should stop noticing after doing 20  Strategic Noticings in the first 10 minutes. Note that in a 50-minute period, you will  still have to notice 14 more times for minimally sufficient frequency. It is helpful to use the Strategic Noticing Strategy in age-appropriate ways. For all  age groups, preK12, public group noticing e.g., I noticed that you all are working  very hard is always effective. As students get older, starting around 5th grade, you may want to start experimenting with private noticings. This kind of Strategic Noticing involves using a  soft voice or whisper, or noticing when no other students are present. However, you  should consider the needs or your particular students. Many tough, even difficult  high school students never get tired of being publicly noticed for their positive behaviors. Just experiment. Keep in mind that many students will remark on how odd it 

Relationship-Building Strategies    53 is that you are doing so much noticing, even when you move from public to private  statements, but students pointing out the noticing does not constitute a reason to  stop. If a student reacts to a Noticing with SO?! simply respond with I just happened to notice while walking away. Strategic Noticing Will Change You When you dont consciously focus on noticing positive behaviorsstudents  walking, working, and being kindyou will often focus on negative behaviors. When  you focus on negative behaviors and notice them more, you can perpetuate even more  negative behaviors. It creates a downward spiral that destroys teachers by turning  formerly positive people into negative people who encourage more and more negative  behaviors throughout their careers. Conversely, if you continually make a conscious effort to notice positive behaviors, especially if you do so hundreds of times per day, it will not only make positive  behaviors more and more common throughout the rest of your career, it will make  you more positive. We become what we continually focus on. Preventive Movement As a teacher, you should move around the room as much as possible. Preventive  Movement PM involves walking around the classroom even when all is well. This  should happen as much as possible. Once you begin to use Strategic Noticing as a  matter of habit, and once you are able to use the other strategies and procedures in  this manual, you will become a powerful force for constantly reinforcing positive  behavior while gently guiding students back to using positive behaviors if they start  experimenting with negative behaviors. Moving throughout the room enables that  force to seem ubiquitous to students. You want your students to feel as though that  force is everywhere! For times when it is difficult to implement Preventive Movement, you can engage  in one of two specialized forms of Preventive Movement: Preventive Sweeps and  Preventive Charges. Preventive Sweep A Preventive Sweep can be useful for a high school math teacher tethered to a  projector or a 2nd grade teacher located behind a reading table teaching small groups.  In either case, find short breaks in the instruction to wander around the room for 
The Classroom Behavior Manual proximity to your students. You can even stop briefly near an individual student who  might be on your radar, whether or not you notice that student experimenting with  a negative behavior. Preventive Charge Use a Preventive Charge not only to forestall negative behaviors but to have a little extra fun. While most Preventive Movement involves slow, calm walking around  the room, this strategy is done with all of the running speed you can muster. With  no warning and for seemingly no reason, try sprinting from wherever you are in the  room to a Power Position and teaching with greatly increased volume and emotion.  This works best when you find yourself having to be at the board or anchored in one  position and you feel like you are behind on your Preventive Movement. Your antics  will surely prevent negative behaviors, as well as refocus anyone whose attention may  have been wandering. Of course, combining Strategic Noticing with Preventive Movement is essential.  Moving around the room is the cornerstone of effective behavioral leadership, and  stopping and putting your hand on a students shoulder or chair can make for supercharged, highly effective noticing. Teachers who neglect the use of these strategies  cannot be optimally effective. Modeling Establish a High Behavioral Ceiling The Behavioral Ceiling is the concept that your students will never behave any  better than you do. You set the Behavioral Ceiling with your own personal conduct.  The behaviors that you model should be the exemplary behaviors that you want your  students to use. If you want students to be polite, you must be polite. If you want your  students to be peaceful, you must be peaceful. This advice, by itself, is not very useful. In fact, the three modeling strategies  that follow are not very effective by themselves. The truth is that if a teacher does  not know how to use the procedures and strategies contained in this manual, there  will be so many negative behaviors present in the classroom that it will be very difficult to act like a person you would want your students to emulate. Without ensuring  that they are able to employ the strategies and procedures, admonishing teachers to  behave well is a useless, insulting, and frustrating demand. For some of your students, you may be one of many positive role models in their  lives: they have parents, relatives, and coaches who model positive behaviors for 

Relationship-Building Strategies    55 them. For others, you may be the first adult they have ever encountered who behaves  in the way you would like them to behave. These students have no chance of using  excellent behavior if you arent modeling it for them. One cannot aspire to be what  one has never seen. Extreme Respect Respectthe concept that people should treat others the way that they would  like to be treatedis the cornerstone of positive, prosocial human conduct. When  respect is present, families, communities, and societies can be healthy. When it is  absent, these same institutions crumble. One of your many jobs as a teacher is to concentrate on modeling respect as thoroughly as possible so that your students will be  given a sterling example of how a respectful person behaves. To be clear, when working with difficult students, it is, for most people, impossible to be perfectly respectful unless you use the procedures and other strategies.  Extreme Respect is only one of the many pieces of the puzzle, but it is essential. Even  when using most or all of the other pieces, implementing this strategy is a challenge  simply because teaching is very, very difficult! There are three different ways to use Extreme Respect: 	 Extreme Respect ESPNs. The first and easiest way to model Extreme Respect is to  practice it while doing ESPN Greetings and ESPN Goodbyes further explained  in Chapter 5. These are the least demanding circumstances to use the Extreme  Respect method. First of all, first thing in the morning, no students have  pushed any of your buttons! You have yet to make any of the 1,500 educational  decisions required of you every day. You only need to do one thing at a time:  greet students. In short, when you are ESPN Greeting students at your door, you  are still in your right mind! Similarly, when you are giving ESPN Goodbyes, you  know that you no longer have to see students anymore that day, which could,  potentially, be a very happy time for you, especially early in the year before your  students have been effectively trained to use positive behaviors that dont drive  you crazy! With these advantageous logistics in mind, make sure you bask in, and take  advantage of, these relatively low-stress moments as the optimal time to model  Extreme Respect. Take the time to concentrate on your ESPN: make real eye  contact; give a real smile; use authentic, FLA physical contact; and say their name  and eventually their nickname. Take time with both the Goodbye and the  Greeting to interact with students while perhaps using a more formal register. 
The Classroom Behavior Manual 	 Using sir and maam. The second way to show Extreme Respect is to call  students sir and maam, instead of demanding that students call us these  words. Model the use of these culturally acknowledged words of respect  every day. Again, the easiest times to do this are when you are using the ESPN  Greeting and Goodbye procedures. Calling students sir and maam is especially important for the time  before you have given students their nicknames further detailed in Chapter 5.  In fact, before I gave students nicknames, whenever possible, I only called students sir or maam. These words simultaneously model manners and build  relationshipsand addressed the needs of students for whom the use of their  real names hurt relationships. 	 Extreme Manners. From the moment students arrive to the moment that they  leave, you want to be the Shining Light of Manners. Take a moment to think  of the most polite and well-mannered person you have ever met. Try to be that  person. Again, this might involve a more formal register than your students or  even you are used to. When students are speaking, look them directly in the  eye and smile, nodding your head when appropriate. The following words and  phrases should be used as much as possible: Please. Thank you. Would you mind doing me a favor? It is great to see you! I am so honored to have you in this class. My friend, I am so ready for this day! I am glad to have you here today. I look forward to seeing you tomorrow. You make our class a better place to be. Take care of yourself tonight. Be careful going to the game tonight. Pardon me. After you, sir maam. All of these examples are appropriate for all grade levels. Do not shy away from  the use of these phrases because they may be different in tone and register compared  with what your students hear in their homes and communities. That is, in actuality,  part of the point: you are purposely using these expressions in order to model an  extremely respectful way of communicating.

Relationship-Building Strategies    57 Again, using Extreme Manners during the ESPN Greeting and ESPN Goodbye  procedures is incredibly important and also exceptionally easy. It creates a gateway  that gives each student the cue that they are entering and leaving a place where the  level of respect is at an incredibly high plateauone that they may or may not have  experienced in the past, and one that they may or may not be experiencing at home. Act Like a Butler You want your students to take care of their responsibilities. The best, most effective, and easiest way to do this is for you to model taking care of your responsibilities  by creating a safe, functional learning environment in which you deliver excellent,  organized instruction. In this way and in no other way you are employed to serve  your students. Do that. Be excellent. Be organized. Have everything at right angles.  Make sure your tech is set up in advance. Have your read-aloud in the right place.  Think about how a butler is in charge of making sure that everything is just so. Be  fastidiousin full view of your students. Again, some of your students will have seen this level of responsibility from  adults, but some of your students may not have. Setting such an example could be  transformational for these students. When you have failed to live up to your responsibilitieswhen things are not  just soact like a butler who has spilled the tea, or forgotten to put out the cookies, or  failed to clean the hardwood floors: apologize profusely. Apologize if your technology  doesnt work. Apologize if you cant find your read-aloud. Apologize for accidentally  leaving windows open and making students in the back of the room cold. Apologize  for not having enough copies, and apologize for teaching something the wrong way.  This says to your students that you respect them and want to serve them by instructing them, and that you take these responsibilities seriously. Apologize Apologizing to students is critical to building relationships with them. It models  respect, shows your students that you care, and demonstrates that you are strong  enough to ask for forgiveness. Finally, apologizing models the use of an apology so  that students will eventually use this important life skill themselves! Besides apologizing for failing to live up to your responsibilities of creating and  maintaining a functional learning environment, there are other great opportunities  to apologize to your students: 	 When something outside your control causes a problem. This models the berresponsibility of highly successful people and is an opportunity to model taking 
The Classroom Behavior Manual responsibility for more than the casual observer would deem to truly be your  responsibility. It says to your students I love you, I care for you, I am in charge  of making sure you have an opportunity to have an excellent school experience,  and the buck stops with me. A grade-level trip being unexpectedly cancelled,  a school pizza party being postponed, and even an unexpected power outage  are all good reasons to apologize to your students. This is the level of responsibility that excellent leaders take for their companies CEOs, cities mayors,  or schools principals. Perhaps your modeling will lead some of your students  to assume this level of responsibility in their lives when they become a CEO,  mayor, or principal. 	 When another adult is unkind. If another teacher or adult is unkind to your students, your silence will be interpreted as tacit approval. This is not acceptable.  You are under no obligation to support a teacher who walks into your class and  yells at your students or to remain silent when a recess monitor belittles your  student. Besides taking any other steps necessary to defend your student, it is  imperative that you apologize if and when these things happen. Many of the  reasons for this kind of apology are the same as above, but an additional one is  that your students will understand that you care about them and their feelings  and that you feel responsible for making them feel safe when they are at school. 	 When you cause a problem. Remember the rules for the classroom? You are not  allowed to cause a problem, just as your students are not allowed to cause a problem. When you do, just like your students, you need to solve it. For instance,  if you accidentally bump into a student as you are doing your Preventive  Movement, saying you are sorry and making sure the student is all right models  both apologizing and solving the problem that you caused. If you accidentally  have a student do the wrong math problems, apologizing profusely and personally erasing the erroneous work will go a very long way to model responsibility,  care, and problem solving, thus building your relationship with the student. Bonding These Bonding strategies will lead students to fall in love with you, supercharge the  effectiveness of the Modeling strategies, and make them remember you forever. Go Out of Your Way for Your Class Without Conditions I still remember the first thing I did right in my teaching career. Unfortunately  for me and my students, it didnt occur until six months into my first year of 

Relationship-Building Strategies    59 teaching. Our staff had organized a potluck  for lunch. Someone had brought in some  absolutely amazing chicken wings, and by the end of our lunchtime, there were still  perhaps 60 wings left. I stopped a fellow teacher from throwing them in the garbage,  which would have been a crime against humanity. I took the wings to my classroom,  along with plates and napkins. When my 5th grade students came back from recess,  I offered them a chicken wing snack. I still remember the silence and stunned looks  on every one of the students faces. What did we do? Jacquata asked, wondering  what this was a reward for. I just smiled this was rare and said that they didnt do  anything and that I got these wings, that they were delicious, and that I just thought  that they might want some wings. My students, still stunned, suspiciously and slowly formed a line, picked up some  wings, napkins, and plates, and sat down to eat their wings in a mild state of shock.  Most of the students even said, Thank you. This was perhaps the first time those  words had been spoken in that classroom by them or by me! When you can, you should do things for your students. Never do them as a  reward. Never do them with conditions. Just do them because you like to. The simpler and easier to do, the better, as you have so little time. Here are some things you  can do to go out of your way for your students, with parental consent, if necessary: 	 Get a giant bag of candy and give the candy to your students. 	 Buy pizza for your students for lunch. 	 Set up a waffle bar for your homeroom. 	 Set up an ice cream bar for your last period class. 	 Hold class outside. 	 Host video game parties at lunchtime. 	 Take students down the street to an ice cream shop and buy them ice cream. Again, none of these things should be done as a reward, and they should be done  for everyone, without conditions. Going out of your way for your students builds  relationships; reward parties only for those who are cooperative with teachers can  destroy them. The only exception to withholding these events from students is when not taking part in them is part of a logical DLO. A student who has been acting dangerously  should not go to an ice cream shop. A student who has been running out of the room  during instruction should not be allowed to attend class outside with everyone else.  When cases like this occur, notify the students and make alternative plans. However,  you should never tell a student that they need to behave if they want to have the  reward partyfun thing. For more on logical DLOs, see Chapter 11.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Go Out of Your Way for Your Individual   Students Without Conditions Do things for your students that relate to what they need or want. Go out of your  way to do things and purchase things for your students. Again, this should never be  a reward for behavior; you should never say something like Dont interrupt me all  week, and Ill get you a comic book. You can say, however, I heard you talking about  how you like The Incredible Hulk, so I got you this comic book. Here are a few other ways to go out of your way for individual students: 	 Check out books from the library the student would like. 	 Help the student register for an outside-of-school activity with parental  consent. 	 Go online to research an interest or concern of the student and share what   you found. Most difficult students have had very few adults do nice things for them for no  other reason than to be nice. This can include parents and relatives as well as teachers in schools where tangible rewards are often dangled in front of students reward  partiesdances or prizes from the treasure chest. The fewer times in a childs life   that adults have been nice to them for no reason, the more effective these strategies  will be. Authentically Finding Common Ground   and Sharing Your Life Authentically It is a well-worn and conventionally accepted practice to try to find common  ground with your students as a means of building relationships. This can be effective  when done authentically, but it can backfire when done in a contrived way. Trying to connect with students by finding common ground should only be  attempted when there truly is common ground. Students have an amazing ability to  sniff out a teacher who pretends to have a mutual interest with them. If you do not  like Cardi B, dont pretend that you do. They will know, and your pretense will cause  damage to your relationship. If you do not actually like basketball, or the L.A. Lakers,  or ballet, or shopping, or Instagram, dont try to fake it. The honest reality is that if you are a 65-year-old middle-class woman who was  raised on a farm in Minnesota, you may not have a lot in common with a 9-year-old  boy born in Mexico and living in inner-city Houston. The good news in this situation  is that you can still share your own life authentically, and this can be more effective,  easier, and sometimes more rewarding even than finding common ground. Sharing 

Relationship-Building Strategies    61 how you were raised can be endlessly fascinating to students, especially if it is different from how they are growing up. It will greatly increase students ability to see you  as a person with feelings, hopes, and dreams if they know more about who you were  as a child, who your parents are or were, and what type of lifestyle you had as a child. Who you are now is also important to share. Sharing the area in which you live,  how you live, and with whom you live allows students to relate to you as a human and  not just a teacher. Bringing in pictures, talking about their families, and, as much as  possible, talking about your family and even having your family visit with your students are all authentic ways of building relationships. Allow Yourself to Be Silly Being able to be silly in front of other people takes and demonstrates strength. It  is an FLA Friendly, Loving Alpha move. Students want to bond with FLAs. It makes  them feel safe and fulfills a control need to know that they are protected by and  friendly with an FLA. This is an alpha strategy. In addition, the older students are, the  more effective being silly in front of them becomes, because middle and high school  students often do everything they can to not look silly in front of their peers. These  students tend to see intentionally looking silly in front of people as a monumental  feat, and they respect it. Incorporate silliness into your lesson plans. Plan out a time where you know you  will be goofy. Many of the procedures that follow already include times to do this in  a scripted way the Nickname Ceremony in Chapter 5 or Shake It Out in Chapter 8,  for example. Look for opportunities throughout the day to be weird. When middle  and high school students roll their eyes they will, that means its working. Make  it weirder! The goal is not for students to think that you are cool; it is to make them  realize that you are the FLA. You are not their friend; you are their weird boss who  loves them. Allow Yourself to Not Know Things One of the hardest parts of being a child is that children barely know anything  yet. So many unknowns make the world a scary place. Admitting that you dont know  things shows your students that everyone is, more or less, in the same boat: everyone  has plenty of things to learn. Handling not knowing things correctly is so important.  Heres how to do it in a helpful, realistic way that builds relationships with students,  models for students how to have a growth mindset, and allows for optimal student  growth. This can be done whether discussing something within a lesson or something wholly nonacademic.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Step 1: Admit ignorance. Dont do this immediately. First model the behavior  by pausing and thinking, perhaps with a confused look. Then say the magic words:  I dont know. Step 2: Ask someone in the class for an answer. Do not skip this step. It gives  you the opportunity to let your students know that you respect their intelligence  level. You can ask the entire class if they know the answer. Or you can show specific  students that you respect their superior knowledge on a subject by asking them the  question instead of or before asking the entire class. Step 3: Go find the answer. If it is an academic unknown and there is time  to do so, model finding the answers to problems by using whatever resources are  appropriate or convenient. Whenever possible, use the academic resources available in the form of textbooks, glossaries, and so on, but also feel free to simply use  the internet. The lesson is in the doing: not knowing things is fine; just go find   the answer! Listening Telling teachers who work in a chaotic classroom environment to calmly and  thoughtfully listen when students are talking is perhaps the most ignorant, useless,  tone-deaf advice that someone can give a teacher. As all teachers who have been in  this situation know, this kind of listening is impossible when chaos is happening all  around you. That is why the use of this skill when working with difficult students is  really only possible in the context of using the procedures and other strategies contained in this book. Once you are using them and have cured most or all of the chaos,  then you can listen in such a way that will help build relationships. It doesnt work the  other way around; you cant build relationships with students quickly and strongly  enough and thereby get order just by listening to them. While this may seem obvious, some of your students will never have been listened to in this way by anyone, or at least not by an authority figure. Students who are  only listened to by friends in this way will only listen to their friends. Think about the  friends of your most difficult students. Doesnt it seem important for your students to  be listened to by someone besides their friends? This is how to listen to your students effectively, whether they are coming to you  for advice or asking an academic question.  1.	 Look at your student. Take your eyes off the computer screen or teachers edition textbook and make eye contact with your student.

Relationship-Building Strategies    63 2.	 Use your Calm Signal to calm you and your student down enough to be in an  optimal state of mind. 3.	 Listen without interrupting. 4.	 Pause before responding. If you dont have time in the moment, let them know that they deserve more  attention than you can give in the moment, make a note, and make an appointment  to talk to them later. This listening strategy shows your students that you care about  them and about what they have to say, and that you are truly there for them. Physical Contact When and how you have physical contact with your students may be dictated by  school policy, personal comfort, the needs of individual students, and a host of other  issues, and should be done within the parameters set by your administrators and at  your own risk. Nevertheless, safe physical contact with students is an essential element of bonding with them. The minimal essential amount of physical contact with  students has already been woven into the fabric of your classroom if you are using the  ESPN Greeting and Goodbye procedures Chapter 5. As a teacher, I very often would  have physical contact with students as a means of encouragement, of celebration, and  to show calm. A pat on the back can be great when a student is working but needs some encouragement to persist at something that is difficult. A hand on the shoulder while leaning into the student may help get a student over an emotional hump, perhaps when  working on something that is a bit dry e.g., a test prep exercise, a vocabulary quiz.  For younger students, leaning on them while waiting at the head of the line or even  resting your arm on top of a students head can both build relationships and communicate calm alpha-ness. Giving Your Time Outside School In addition to going out of your way at school, going out of your way for your students  outside school hours has a profoundly positive bonding effect with students. Taking  time for students when we are not contractually obligated to shows them that we  want to be around them even when we dont have to. The problem, of course, is how  to do this while living our own lives. The answer is to use your time outside school to 
The Classroom Behavior Manual maximum effect by building strong relationships efficiently in short bursts of time.  Here is how: 	 Do home visits before school starts for 3 to 10 of your most difficult students. The  moment you pet your students dog, you will immediately have a better relationship with your students parents. People often hold their first impression  of others forever. A parents positive first impression of their childs teacher  as an actual human being in their home may become permanent. There are  other environmental and biological issues at play here as well. Many parents,  particularly parents of difficult students, had bad experiences in school, and  schools make them horribly uncomfortable or even scared. To have your first  interaction with a parent under these conditions is a recipe for disaster. It is far  better to have your first interaction with parents in their home, where they are  usually more comfortable. The only goal of this home visit is to have a healthy interaction with the  family. Do not bring any paperwork or materials of any kind. For many families,  someone holding papers at their door will appear to be an unwanted bill collector. Besides, bringing materials makes you look like someone with an agenda.  This will erode trust. The goal here is to build trust. No materials, no agenda. Do not call in advance or arrange a meeting. It is not worth the time and  effort necessary to coordinate a meeting and meeting time, especially when  some families will go through great lengths to avoid interacting with you. You  also dont want to set too formal a tone for the casual interaction youre trying  to set up. Do not enter your students home or request to do so unless invited. As we  all can attest, homes are not always visitor ready. Be ready for a conversation  on the porch or in the hallway. Just have a conversation. Get to know the family. Pet a dog. Remark about  a cat. Just be a person. Be safe. Take a friend with you, if that feels appropriate.  If you feel uncomfortable in any situation, politely excuse yourself and leave  immediately. 	 Make five positive calls home each week for three weeks. A vast majority of these  calls should be to the homes of your most difficult students. The goal is to  build relationships with these students and their families. Invariably, parents  of difficult children have dealt with negative calls from school for years, in the  case of students above kindergarten or 1st grade. Positive calls home may help  flip the script. Students from these families have learned to get attention not 

Relationship-Building Strategies    65 only from their teachers but also from their families through negative behaviors. A positive call home gives the family an opportunity to give attention to  a report of positive behaviors. In turn, this gives students a tasteperhaps for  the first timeof what happens in life when they use positive behaviors, which  increases the likelihood that they might continue to use those behaviors. When you make these calls, have something specific and positive to share  about the child. Make it authentic and real. If it is in any way true, remark that  you like their child. Keep in mind that many of these families have been through  and continue to go through a world of worry, hurt, and pain because of their   childs behavior. They might be tremendously anxious, angry, or defensive  about their child. I tend to mention actions that the student took that were positive that  relate to something that I like about them. Here are some things I have called  parents about: Hi, Mr. Jacobs. This is Mr. Ervin. Im calling about Derrick. I wanted to  let you know that he had a fantastic first day in improv class with me.  He learned and followed the rules of improv right out of the gate, and the  other kids followed suit. His display of leadership as an 8th grader in a  class with students in 5th through 8th grade really helped me out today! Hi, Mrs. Allen. This is Mr. Ervin. Im calling about Tyrell. He had an  awesome day. I really noticed how the other kids respect him and follow  his lead. I think that even though they would follow him no matter what  he does, he has been setting a really positive example by following rules  and being kind to other students. Im glad I get to have him in my fourth  period class. Hello, Ms. Stremanos. Its Mr. Ervin. Im calling about Jenae. Shes hilarious. You must get a kick out of her every day. You probably know, but  she gave her introductory speech about herself, and she was so funny  and very confident in front of the group. I wanted to let you know how  much I appreciate the fact that even though she has this amazing sense of  humor, she never tries to cut up when its not appropriate, and she waits  for the right times to be funny. I just really like her and appreciate her for  that. Youve got to be very proud of her. Hello, Mr. Boykins. Its Mr. Ervin, Brians teacher. I wanted to tell you  that I saw your kid playing football on the playground today. Wow! Now 
The Classroom Behavior Manual I understand what I had heard about him. Hes just an amazing athlete.  I wanted to let you know that I really appreciate the way he carries himself, and I know you have a lot to do with that. I know that hes not a big  fan of school, but I want to work with you guys on getting him what he  needs in bite-sized pieces so he can avoid getting frustrated, and so we  can get him to do well enough to stay eligible for sports. He has such athletic and leadership gifts that he could become an amazingly successful  person, and I want to help with that. Perhaps just for fun, or perhaps because I am a bit mischievous at heart, I always  like to pause immediately after saying who I am and that I am calling about their  child. Very often, I will get some form of OK, what did he do now? or worse. Then I  can tell them that I am calling for a completely positive reason. I have found that this  sometimes breaks a kind of spell. It seems to allow the parent to reassess their child  and think that perhaps things might be different this year, that perhaps their child  isnt incorrigible, that perhaps there is hope. If a student, particularly an extremely difficult student, does something positive,  dont wait to call home. You or another teacher or an administrator may have to  deliver some bad news about their child at some point, so try to have the good call  before you or someone else is forced to have the bad one. After the first three weeks, make a point to make a positive call to a students  home every week. Dont forget: schedule time to make the call and put it on the calendar. If a student does something you want to call home about, do so as soon as it is  convenient and ignore your scheduled time, but make sure you take the time to make  that call every week. 	 Attend two sporting events per season. Showing up at sporting events so that  students know that you care is an old idea. It isnt necessary to show up to every  game; you can make efficient use of your time by going to two sporting events  per season during the year: two in spring, two in winter, and two in fall. Take  summer off. If you are lucky enough that multiple students are on the same team this  is more common with older students, this becomes very efficient. There might  be cheerleaders involved as well. Bring as many of your own friends and family  as possible. Be loud and conspicuous. Reinforce positive behaviors that you see  from your students by loudly affirming them. Grit, determination, and toughness can be enthusiastically reinforced. Have your friends and family do the  same. Tell the cheering section the names of students that you are there to see,  and have them use their names when cheering. If your student has a nickname 

Relationship-Building Strategies    67 and is comfortable with you using it in this context, you can yell that name ask  about this before game time. Make it very clear that you care about the outcome  of the game or match. Make sure everyone on and off the field of play notices  that you are there. 	 Eat lunch with your students at least one time per week until February. Showing  your students that you want to spend time with them even when you dont have  to is invaluable. Do so at least once a week, making sure to take time for yourself  and that you have enough time to make your copies, set up your lessons, and so  on. Of course, secondary teachers usually have schedules that only allow them  to eat with certain lunch periods. Still, word will travel that you are a teacher  who likes spending free time with students, and this can go a long way toward  building relationships with all of your students, not just the ones you can   eat with. Keep in mind that you can take just five minutes to be with your students and then go do what you need to do during the rest of the lunch period.  Relationship building can be done during this time, and lunch monitors generally appreciate teachers being with students in the cafeteria. However, this  time should never be spent cleaning up after students or opening packages and  containers. This time is for relaxing with students. 	 Sit on a parked bus with a student at least once per month. After you have used  the ESPN Goodbye procedure to usher bus students from classrooms, hop onto  a bus. Greet the confusion of the bus driver with a smile and sit with one of  your students for a few minutes. Talk about anything. This may be a chance to  do some private individual Strategic Noticing or just to shoot the breeze. It is,  again, just showing students that you want to be around them even when you  are not being paid to do so. Older students may act like they are annoyed or confused by your presence, but that is irrelevant. 
Part II Relationship-Building   Procedures Make your students fall in love with and   take care of their classroom. Someone had tricked me into becoming a principal. Having been hired as a teacher four years prior, I was now the head of a school  with a 98 percent poverty rate. One morning, as I was monitoring our students at  breakfast in our Commons area, a group of 2nd graders stood to go to their classroom. At the back of the line, three students each jumped on one foot while kicking  one anothers feet playfully. To get their attention over the low rumble of the other  students, I raised my voice just slightly and asked the rhetorical, one-word question:  Guys? I then used the Confused Eye Intervention see Chapter 9: eyes convey a perplexed look; head tilts; hands face the ceiling. This move says, You are so smart and  great; why are you doing this? One of the kickers, Travis, had just joined our school. This was his first day. I  had met him the previous month when he registered and had greeted him at the door 
The Classroom Behavior Manual earlier that morning. I had had no other interaction with him. Travis got one last kick  in before muttering something under his breath and slowly joining the line. The second Rockette, Ronika, had been in my 1st grade class the year before. I  had looked her in the eye, smiled, shaken her hand or hugged her, and said her name  hundreds of times. Her class team had been the Bulldogs. I had given her a personal  nickname: Sparkles. She was an excellent writer, and I had told her so emphatically.  We had built a fantastic relationship the year before. Ronika immediately stopped  kicking and looked as if a tragedy had occurred as she walked quickly to the line. The third culprit was Jason. Jason had also been in my class the prior year. I had  built a strong relationship with him the same way I had with Ronika. In fact, just two  months before the start of the school year, he had been the ring bearer in my wedding. We were buds. After my tiny intervention, the blood drained out of Jasons face,  and he rushed to get into line as well. Travis looked at Jason like he was crazy. Ten minutes later, Jasons teacher called my office and requested that I come to  her room. When I walked through her door, I saw Jason in the corner, sitting on the  floor crying as hard as I have ever seen a child cry. Believe it or not, Jason was a tough  kid. But there he was, losing it in a puddle of tears on the first day of 2nd grade. To be  clear, I had not yelled. I had just said, Guys? as loudly as was necessary for the trio of  kickers to hear me. Yet here we were. I ended up taking Jason to my office and giving  him a cot where he could lie down. I felt terrible that I had upset Jason so profoundly.  It was not my intention. With that one intervention, I elicited three totally different results, related to the  depths of my relationships with the students. Most people do not take care of things they do not feel ownership over. Students  must feel ownership of their classrooms in order to take care of that space, one  another, and you, the teacher. Students relationships with their teachers are inexorably linked with their relationships to their classrooms. A student who feels like a  visitor in a classroom is less likely to cherish and take care of that space and the people in it than the student who feels like a citizen of the classroom. Just as any society  depends, in part, on its environment to thrive, so too does your classroom. To build  strong, effective, positive relationships, you need a class environment that fosters a  shared sense of ownership. So how can you guide students to develop that sense of  ownership so they will build positive relationships with you and with one another? Every student who comes through your door has a unique set of expectations,  quirks, interests, and goals. Some of those goals will be antithetical to your own. You,  as the teacher, have a task to do: your job description says that you must teach all of 

Part II: Relationship-Building Procedures     71 those students. The fine print between the lines demands a great deal more of you,  because your students must first be open to learning. In your classroom, you cant just  make it up as you go. You must lay the groundwork for your classs society by creating  an environment in which students are open to and able to learn whatever you have  to teach. With all of the other responsibilities you have as a teacher, you cant do this  on the fly. Teachers cannot instill a sense of ownership in their students or build effective  relationships with them simply by taking advantage of momentary opportunities  when or if they arise. This is particularly true with challenging or difficult students,  which includes those who come into the class with antisocial goals. Teachers are far  too busy to conjure up relationship-building magic on the spot, and students know  how to exploit busyness. Chapter 5 explicitly teaches Relationship-Building Procedures that can be woven  into the fabric of the classroom. These procedures provide a structure through which  students develop ownership and build relationships every day. You should introduce  them in the first three weeks, and then use them with the students every single  day. As the procedures become part of the classroom, students will begin to feel like  part of the classroom, too. Moreover, the procedures are designed to put students  in charge of their own behavior, which in turn, helps them feel in charge of their  classroom and reduces the time and energy required of you. Students come to see the  classroom as their classroomnot a classroom owned by the teacher to which they  have been arbitrarily assigned. And when students feel ownership of their classroom,  it is easier for you to teach.
5 Relationship-Building  Procedures ESPN Greeting ESPN is an acronym that stands for four things that you, the teacher, must do with  every single student who walks into your room every single day: make eye contact,  smile, engage in physical contact, and use the students name. As a principal, I used the ESPN Greeting procedure with every student who  walked through the front door of my school. I consider it to be the single most impor tant Relationship-Building Procedure and behavioral intervention known to humankind. Humans are hardwired to want and need this interaction from others, and they  are hardwired to bond, often permanently, with those who share it with them. The  systematic use of this procedure alone will significantly improve the culture of your  classroom or school. The more difficult and dysfunctional the student population,  the more significant the change will be. If you do nothing else, do this. The Procedure 1.	 Initiate meaningful eye contact. Human beings have a biological need to connect with other human beings. There is no better way to do so than by looking  students in the eye. It is a sign of respect, kindness, and affection. In addition,  when an educator initiates meaningful eye contact, it signifies appropriate  dominance. This is the first building block in creating an effective, healthy  studenteducator relationship, with the teacher as the Friendly, Loving Alpha 

Relationship-Building Procedures    73 FLA. Students know that FLAs love them, will take care of them, and are in  charge. 2.	 Offer a genuine smile. A smile sets the tone for the day and lets each student  know that they are welcome and liked. A smile also lets everyone know that  the FLA is calm, assertive, in control, and ready to go. 3.	 Initiate friendly, safe physical contact. Again, students have a biological need  for appropriate physical contact. This is a wonderful opportunity to model a  proper handshakefirm, respectful, welcoming, and genuine. This kind of  handshake establishes the adult as the FLA while forging a connection with  the student. The teacher should hold each handshake until done greeting the  child, which includes the greeting itself e.g., Good morning!, the students  name, and time permitting, some personalized small talk e.g., How was  your game last night?. 4.	 Use each students name. Most people love to hear their names. Saying a students name or, even better, nickname see the Student Nicknames procedure  personalizes the greeting. It lets the student know that you arent just going  through the motions. This is particularly important for your most at-risk  students, who tend to have trust issues, usually for very good reasons. In  addition, those students who are most at risk might have developed a negative  association with their name being used by an adult e.g., teacher, parent, or  principal. For these students, their name is often said in anger as part of a  punitive power struggle, and the use of their name by an adult might trigger  them to flight, fight, or freeze. As an educator, you have a wonderful opportunity to change this association. With all students, but especially with at-risk  ones, putting positive emotion behind their name can be a game-changer. Use  each students name throughout the day, too. Pause in the hallway to call out a  greeting to another student. Youll be amazed at the difference it makes. Additional Considerations Combining meaningful eye contact, a genuine smile, safe physical contact, and  the students name begins the relationship-building process and establishes appropriate dominance. It is always possible to execute the ESPN Greeting. If you think  you dont have time to make this happen, then you need to adjust something in your  routine or schedule. The most important thing you can do each day, for each class, is  to be ready to give this greeting to every single student. To make sure that you are ready, consider and troubleshoot the following logistical concerns:
The Classroom Behavior Manual 	 Preparation. Of course, teachers must already be 100 percent prepared before  students arrive. You cant arrange materials and use the ESPN Greeting with  students at the same time. Part of this preparation should include a fast start  activity that students can do independently when they arrive while you continue to greet students. 	 Where to stand. You should position yourself outside the classroom to greet the  first student. Walk briskly toward the first arrival, deliver your ESPN Greeting,  and accompany the student toward the empty classroom. As students begin to  populate the room, stand with one shoulder blade in the room and one outside  of the room to monitor both the hallway and the classroom. 	 How to stand. Do not attempt to get down on the students level. For those of  you who are vertically challenged or teaching in middle or high school, this may  be a moot point, but you should stand the same way that you would stand to  meet a colleague. You and the child are not equals. The aforementioned exceptions notwithstanding, you are bigger, stronger, and wiser than your students.  Dont suggest otherwise with your body language. 	 When to sitstart teaching. At some point, you must leave the door and begin  to engage in other duties, like taking attendance or teaching!. For teachers  of younger students, signing agendas and checking homework might also be  necessary. Some classrooms, particularly in secondary schools, might require  that teaching begin at the bell. Once you have begun these activities, you must  make sure that students come to you for the ESPN Greeting from wherever they  are in the classroom. Yes, for middle and high school teachers, this includes  coming to you for an ESPN Greeting while you are instructing, even if the student is late. Dont deal with tardy issues right away. Just greet the student and  deal with tardy issues at a time that is convenient for you see Delayed Learning  Opportunities in Chapter 11. 	 Abbreviated physical contact for secondary students. If you have 40 students coming into your room seven or eight times a day, a firm handshake for each student  might not be practical. A fist bump, high five, or pat on the back might be easier.  For first period generally, homeroom or advisory, students should be arriving  at a slower pace. This is a great time for a handshake. If the entire school adopts  the ESPN Greeting, each student will still learn and benefit from this firm,  respectful, welcoming, and genuine handshake. 	 Handshaking protocol. It is important to both model proper technique and use  the handshake to establish yourself as an FLA. You want to make contact with  the webbing between the students thumb and forefinger and the same webbing 

Relationship-Building Procedures    75 on your hand. Be the first to grip and apply pressure. This will allow you to control the grip of the handshake, establishing friendly, loving dominance. Apply  enough pressure to be firm, but dont overdo it and injure your studentsits  an assertion of dominance, not a power struggle! Teachers should teach this  protocol once during the first week of school. To ensure that you dont lose  face if the student walks by without shaking your hand, hold your hand just  six to eight inches away from your midsection when greeting your students.  Whenever possible, partially block the doorway so that students cant just walk  by you. That way you can at least offer the greeting. If a student squeezes too  hard, simply say, Ouch! Too hard! If the student does not relent or continues  to use this negative behavior, use these words as well as your personalized script  for getting to later to deliver a Delayed Learning Opportunity see Chapter 11. 	 Encouragement without force. Initiate eye contact and physical contact, but  dont force them. You can offer a greeting and use each students name without  compelling eye contact and physical contact. Students might be reticent to give  proper eye contact or physical contact at first. Hold your position and offer.  Encourage the eye contact by subtly moving your eyes toward the students  field of vision, but do not aggressively follow their eyes, and never do so while  blocking the students path. As always, smile. For shier students, not squaring  your shoulders and sometimes briefly slumping over to make yourself appear  smaller can also be helpful. Likewise, dont force the handshake. Remember,  you will have 180 chances to modify the behavior of students avoiding contact,  so theres no hurry. Class Nickname It is difficult to give your students ownership of their classroom while constantly  referring to the class as your class. No matter the age of your students, you will sometimes need to refer to the group as a whole. When you do so, you can either build ownership by using a name that the students chose or take away ownership by referring  to them as Mr. Johnsons Class. I suggest the former. The Procedure On the first day of school, ask your students whose class they are in. Most will  probably say, Yours. Older students might respond with an eye roll and a yawn.  Younger students might not pay attention or care about the verbiage. Nevertheless,  it is important to let them know that this is actually their classroom and that you 
The Classroom Behavior Manual are only there to facilitate learning. They will be the ones who manage and lead   the room. After you tell students that the room is theirs, act on it. Explain that to call the  class Your Names Room doesnt make any sense, so you are going to give them  the chance to name themselves. Inform them that they will be voting to determine a  name for the class, then follow these steps: 1.	 Brainstorm names. Adjourn to team deskstables which you created in  Chapter 3. Have each team discuss and debate names for the class. Often,  especially with older students, this degenerates into What would be funny inappropriate for our teacher to call us all year? Thats fine, for now.  Encourage all students to offer ideas but dont force the issue. Allow teams  around five minutes to discuss. 2.	 Identify potential names. Regroup as a class. Call on each student to offer one  name. Students who dont want to suggest a name can pass their nomination  to another student of their choice. This is strategic. Students who have low  control needs will almost always pass to kids who have higher control needs,  such as the class clowns who like to be funny. They often get many nominations passed to them and tend to come up with the best names. In turn, the  class is likely to choose one of these names, thereby giving this highcontrol  need student a feeling of tremendous ownership each time the name is used  for the rest of the year. Write potential names on the board. If any names are  totally inappropriate in your view, you can reject them, but accept borderline nicknames for now. A borderline nickname is one that you feel slightly  uncomfortable with; let your students know that if one of the borderline  names is voted through, then you will need to get permission from the principal to use that name. Often, these names will be sports teams, sayings, and  with older students, somewhat inappropriate slang terms often taken from  rap songs, Saturday Night Live, and so on. 3.	 Take a vote. Allow students to vote on their favorite names. Give each student  two votes. Call out each name and take a show of hands. The top vote getter  is the class name for the year. In the case of a tie, hold a runoff vote using just  the tied names. 4.	 Address borderline names. In the event a borderline name wins the vote, let  your giggling students know that you will have to go to your administrator and  ask if the name is acceptable. If you are too uncomfortable with the name to ask  your administrator about it, then the name should not have been considered  in the first place. If the administrator approves the name, great! Proceed. If the 

Relationship-Building Procedures    77 administrator nixes the name but lets you keep your job, you get to go back  and tell your students that even though you were cool enough to ask your boss  about a name youre barely allowed to say in school, it got rejected. This, in and  of itself, is a great way to build a relationship with your class. Repeat the vote  using all other potential names. If another borderline name is picked, repeat  the process. The best-case scenario is that your students send you back to your  administrator several times. Each time you go to your administrator, you show  your students that you will go out of your way for them. It can be a fun bonding  experience for you to keep coming back empty-handed. When you or your  principal tire of this whichever comes first, you can just come back to your  classroom and tell your students that the principal isnt as hip as you are and  that you need to give up on the borderline names. Then, erase any questionable names and vote on the remaining ones. No matter what happens, you are   giving your students ownership of their room and building positive relationships with them. 5.	 Use the name. Once you have an approved name, congratulations! Your  students, especially the most difficult ones, might start thinking differently  about this year and their class than they have about previous years and other  classes; they may think, Maybe this year will be different or Maybe this is  my classroom. Have students make a large banner or sign or several with  the class nickname for display in doorways and other prominent places in the  classroom. From the moment that the name is decided upon, only refer to  your class by their chosen name. Team Nicknames By the first day of school, you have carefully divided your class into teams and your  students have voted for a Class Nickname. Now have your students work with their  teams to choose a Team Nickname. You should introduce the procedure for creating  Team Nicknames with the Control-Sharing Procedure Real-World Workshop see  Chapter 8. However, it is not necessary for you or your students to understand all the  ins and outs of the procedure on the first day of school. Again, for our hypothetical  classroom, we will assume 25 students, with five teams of five students. The Procedure 1.	 Prepare. Create a Nows and Laters Board to use during the procedure.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Nows Unanimously decide on a team nickname Laters Create team tags Read ? 2.	 Introduce teams and colors. Let students know that they are permanently  assigned to their teams and their seats. Point out that each team has been  assigned a color and that many of their materials have been color-coded  accordingly. 3.	 Introduce the Team Nicknames concept. Explain that each team will select  a team nickname. Tell students that their nicknames can be any appropriate  name that is not the same as the class name or the school mascot. If needed,  apply the same borderline appropriate name practices that you used when  choosing the class name. Let students know that when their team has agreed  on a name, it will be their moniker for the entire year. Add that teams must  reach a unanimous decision. 4.	 Point out the Nows and Laters Board. Explain how the board works: first,  students must complete the items under Nows; then, they can move onto  the items under Laters. Point out that, in this case, they have one item listed  under Nows. That means, they must choose a team name. Then, they can  move on to their Laters. Emphasize that students must complete the Nows  before they can do the Laters. However, when ready, they can choose which  Laters they want to do during Real-World Workshop. They do not need to do  all the Laters listed; these are options. Note: The question mark in the figure  represents a Mystery Later; more on this below. 5.	 Let teams work. Allow teams to take as much time as needed to choose a  name. Completion of this task will be the responsibility of each team, not the  teacher. Unanimously decide on a team nickname will remain as a Now  activity until each team has chosen a name or the school year endswhichever happens first. Do not warn or lecture students about the importance of  getting done with picking a name. This initial team activity is important in  establishing that students bear the responsibility for getting their work done. 6.	 Greet new teams. When a team agrees unanimously, greet them by their  nickname and remind them that they are done with their Nows, so they can  move on to their Laters. In this case, students can either read a book or make  a team tag. Were not ready for the Mystery Later yet. Hang in there. Team 

Relationship-Building Procedures    79 tags can be made however you would like, but make sure you have materials  e.g., colored sentence strip paper for each team color ready for students to  use. Encourage each team to incorporate their team nickname and team color  in their tags, and allow students to make as many tags as they would like, working cooperatively. How and when tags are used is entirely up to the teacher.  They can be attached to the team desks or table; put on team bins, shelves, and  lockers; or hung above team areas. Using team tags helps build students sense  of ownership and helps team members start building relationships with one  another. 7.	 Allow the procedure to motivate struggling teams. Some teams will have a  harder time working together and agreeing on names than others. They will  need more motivation. Please note that motivation does not mean warnings, threats, or reminders. Instead, when you feel that your students have  had ample time to come up with a team nickname, reveal your Mystery Later.  Erase the question mark and write something appealing like recess, relax  outside, or play in gym, depending on whats feasible given the weather, the  school, and the schedule. At this point, relocate your students outside or wherever the fun activity will take place. Teams who have completed their Now  can enjoy themselves or just take a break. Teams who have not yet unanimously chosen a nickname must sit together, where they will either succeed  or fail at agreeing upon a nickname. Either way, their success or failure is their  problemnot yours. If you have more than one adult in your room, teams  that are still working can stay in the classroom with the adult. You are likely to  see more motivation from students to finish their Now once the Mystery Later  is revealed. When these teams have unanimously agreed on their nickname,  allow them to join the fun. 8.	 Hold firm. If a team is unable to agree on a team nickname before the class  must move on to other work, keep that Now on the board the next time you  have a Real-World Workshop see sidebar. That team will still need to complete that Now in addition to the other Nows that will be assigned at that  time. Tying in the Real-World Workshop This chapter is dedicated to Relationship-Building Procedures; however,  keep in mind that you will also be introducing and using Control-Sharing 
The Classroom Behavior Manual Procedures on the first day of school and throughout the first three weeks. In  fact, the method you used to choose team names is one of those procedures:  Real-World Workshop. Youll learn more about this in Chapter 8. Feel free to  skip to page 146 if you would like to understand the rationale and details of this   procedure now. The Team Nickname procedure serves as a good vehicle for teaching RealWorld Workshop because every workshop will use a Nows and Laters Board. As  one or more teams is likely to have trouble agreeing on a name, students will  learn several facts of life about their classroom through this opening activity: 	 A students problems are not the teachers problems. 	 Conflicts among students create problems that must be solved by the  students. 	 Getting work done is the students problem, not the teachers. 	 Consequences can befall entire teams or the entire class at any time,  without warning. 	 When students finish their work, they get to do things that are more  fun than work. Student Nicknames Class Nickname? Check. Team Nicknames? Check. That brings us to Student  Nicknames. Whenever we go out of our way to give attention to a student in a positive  way, it boosts their feeling of classroom ownership and enhances their relationship  with their teacher. Giving a special nickname to a student shows that the teacher has  taken the time to think of a good, meaningful name. It shows that the teacher likes the  student. The chances of students liking the teacher go up considerably when students  feel that the teacher likes them. In addition, many studentsespecially those who demonstrate negative   behaviorshave a negative association with their own names. This results from  other adults in their lives using their names in a negative way. Consider how often  students who are consistently in trouble must hear their name yelled while being  corrected or punished. Students who have had traumatic experiences can even go  into fight, flight, or freeze mode just by hearing an adult say their name! Some students might associate their names with negative thoughts, feelings, and emotions,  which means that a teacher can damage the relationship just by saying their names. Using a nickname enables the teacher to circumvent and even counter these  dynamics. Just as some students might equate bad behavior with their name, they 

Relationship-Building Procedures    81 might equate a new nickname with a new, better-behaved self. In addition, every  time you call students by their nicknames, it improves your relationship with them  and increases their feelings of ownership of the classroom and school. The Procedure To maximize the relationship-building and ownership process, you should give  nicknames in a fun, meaningful way that treats the nickname as an honor. Choosing  nicknames and bestowing them on students with a special ceremony are accomplished through specific procedures. 1.	 Try to give one student a nickname before the end of your first week,  even if it is an abbreviated week. Why? Nicknames and ceremonies are fun,  students love them, and they set a positive tone in your classroom. 2.	 Whenever possible, do a Nickname Ceremony at the end of the day on the  last day of the school week for elementary students and at the end of your  class period with your older students on the last day of the week. This  may cause students to think, as they are leaving for the weekend, That was  awesome! I cant wait to come back here Monday! Wait, what am I saying?! 3.	 Give the first nickname to the student for whom a nickname first pops  into your head. Nicknames should come naturally. You shouldnt force them,  and you dont need to first choose a student who has behavior issues just to  build a relationship quickly. In fact, you should avoid giving the most difficult  students nicknames first. There are two reasons for this. First, some students  might think that you are giving preferential treatment to students who exhibit  negative behaviors, and this may encourage students to exhibit those behaviors. Second, the tough students to whom you are giving the nicknames may  get wise to what you are doing and see this as a manipulation, which will  increase their resentment. However, you should try to nickname your more  difficult students within the first few months. Also, if you have students with  the same real name, you might want to pick one of them as an early nickname  recipient in order to decrease name confusion in the classroom. 4.	 Choose an appropriate nickname that does not embarrass the student.  You want to select a name that is specific to the student, but it doesnt have to  be the most original, unique, awesome nickname ever. The process should not  add stress to you or your students. Keep in mind that you can use humor. The  best nicknames lightheartedly refer to something that is notable about that  student.
The Classroom Behavior Manual 5.	 Approach the student for their approval. The easiest way to make sure a  student likes a nickname is to ask the student! Do this before the ceremony. If  a student doesnt like the name or appears doubtful or uncertain, let them  know that you wont use the name and you need more time to think of a better name. You can go on to other students while you are contemplating a new  nickname for that student, but dont wait too long no more than a month or  so before getting back to the student with a new nickname. Alternatively, you can work cooperatively with each student on a nickname, or  do both. Choose it yourself when you have a strong feeling about a nickname, or work  with the student when you need some help or when you think a particularly clever  student may come up with a better nickname than you would. A Student by Any Other Name . . . Over the years, I have taught or served as principal to thousands of young people. These are just a few nicknames that I have bestowed along the way. Each  one was approved by the student: 	 Red for a boy withyou got itred hair 	 Princess Giggles for one particularly bubbly girl 	 Big Bear and Little Bear for two best friends who were both  rather cuddly-looking: one big, one more diminutive 	 Flash for a student who was super-fast and on the football team 	 Flips for a gymnast 	 Hoops for a basketball player The Nickname Ceremony Once you have picked a nickname and received approval, you are ready to hold  your first Nickname Ceremony. Nickname Ceremonies should occur at the end  of a school day during your Afternoon Meeting see Chapter 8 for more about the  Afternoon Meeting procedure. As soon as you have finished the rest of the Afternoon  Meeting, you can begin the Nickname Ceremony. Tailor your Nickname Ceremony to your own sense of fun, humor, and comfort  level with silliness. Ive outlined some general guidelines below, followed by a walkthrough of one of my ceremonies. You can adopt my methods, but it will be more fun  to create your own using the guidelines.

Relationship-Building Procedures    83 The Nickname Ceremony will become a class ritual. As such, it must be something strange, unusual, and, above all, fun. You should make the ceremony an odd,  theatrical experience in which you look at least a little silly. For example, it should  include some type of faux emotion e.g., yelling, jumping around with excitement  as well as some special costume or prop. This inspires students to look forward to  the ceremony. Looking silly actually helps teachers appear more dominant, because  students respect people who put themselves out there. Being strong enough to purposely let yourself look foolish will help elevate you to FLA status. Whatever process you adopt, make sure that you use the same one every time.  This allows the ceremony to become a ritual, a repeated rite of passage that adds predictability and consistency to the lives of students who may not have either at home. How my Nickname Ceremony works: 1.	 Before the Afternoon Meeting, I make sure the nickname recipient not only  approves the nickname but also knows the ceremony is happening. I tell the  student that when I announce the nickname, the student should ask, Why? 2.	 At the end of the Afternoon Meeting, I have the person who led the meeting or the Comfort Keeperturn off the lights see Chapter 6. I ask the team of  the day to pull down the blinds or close the curtains, making sure that enough  light comes from the hallway or through the window that everyone can see. 3.	 I pull out my Boogada, Boogada hat a straw hat with flowers and staff  a piece of an old bulletin board, and stand before the students, who are  seated on the carpet. I silently stare them down for a few seconds, then say,  Students first and last name, come forward. 4.	 When the student stands, I crouch down and stare at the student for a  moment. Then, I slam the staff into the ground near the students feet and  loudly proclaim these words: Boogada, boogada, boogada! 5.	 I pause for effect, then declare, Ladies and gentlemen, I present to you students first and last name. Boogada, boogada, boogada! I punctuate each  boogada by knocking the end of the staff on the ground. 6.	 I continue: Students first name, from now on, your the class name nickname shall be . . . students new nickname! The nicknamed student asks,  Why? Then, I reach into my pocket, pull out confetti shredded paper, and  throw it toward the top of the students head. I demand, WHY NOT?! 7.	 I allow laughter to subside, then conclude: Ladies and gentlemen, I now present to you . . . students nickname!
The Classroom Behavior Manual 8.	 We use the Class Applause procedure, which you will learn later in this chapter, to conclude the ceremony. Remember: Keep It Silly, Keep It Strange My way is just one way to perform the Nickname Ceremony. I encourage you to  adopt your own creative approach. Just remember to include these four elements: 	 Make it strange and entertaining. 	 Incorporate faux emotion the louder the better and props or costumes. 	 Make yourself look at least a little silly. 	 Use the same structure every time. I mean it. For Secondary Grades: Set It Up Properly   and Get Out of the Way While Monitoring Secondary students love to create their own ceremony for this procedure and will  very much look forward to it if, while planning and performing it, they both feel emotionally safe and are given appropriate in this case, a lot of control. All you must do  with secondary students is privately get approval from an individual student on the  nickname, as described above, and monitor students as they create and implement  the ritual that they will use for the rest of the year. Use previously described procedures for borderline appropriate ritual suggestions. The ritual may be something  intricately silly, or it may be something basic and boring. It doesnt matter what it  isit just matters that it is theirs. Have the students be the ones to perform the ceremony with each other, using  nicknames created by the teacher and approved by the student. Allow any sharing of  the performance of the ritual that is in line with your sense of fairness. You can have  a class clown lead the ritual every time or have teams of the day perform it. This can  depend on how your students want to divide these responsibilities. Monitor the ceremony planning and performances to make sure students are not  being hurtful or mean. Use Delayed Learning Opportunities if and when appropriate  see Chapter 11. As much as possible, stay out of this procedure! This is an excellent  chance to sit at your desk with your feet up. Note that for secondary school, if multiple or all teachers are creating student  nicknames, some intraclass communication is in order. Often, homeroom classes will  produce nicknames this is optimal if these rooms do not teach academic content,  or the last class will produce the names. For intermediate grades that switch rooms 

Relationship-Building Procedures    85 and teachers at lunch, one teacher can create nicknames for one class, and another  teacher can create nicknames for the other. After the Ceremony From that day onward, use only the students nickname. Do not use the students  real name. Once a student has a nickname, you will strengthen your relationship with  that student every time you say their name! The day after the ceremony, give the newly christened student blank adhesive  nametags. Explain that the student now has a personal Later see Chapter 8:  they can write the nickname on the tags, decorate them, and place them wherever  you indicate. In my room, the nametags go on a students locker and workbook bin.   For younger students, you might want to place the tags after the student has completed them. Additional Considerations Teachers should keep in mind these additional guidelines: 	 Allow students to write their nicknames on their work, with a few exceptions.  During standardized testing, you must remind students to put their real names  on high-stakes tests, as the test grader will not know who Princess Giggles  is. At the pre-K, kindergarten, and 1st grade levels, permit students to write  their nicknames on their work only after they have mastered writing their real  names. This serves as a great incentive for younger students to learn to spell and  write their names. 	 Do not spend time trying to get administrators or specials teachers to learn students  nicknames. They have enough to worry about. As the only adult who knows all  your students nicknames, you will further secure your status as a Friendly,  Loving Alpha. 	 Begin and continue the ceremony only when everyone is quiet to a level of your  satisfaction I prefer silent. To get students to the desired level, you can use the  procedures for giving activity choices at the end of Afternoon Meeting see page  173, and list Nickname Ceremony as one of the choices.  	 Conduct ceremonies at the end of the day elementary and at the end of the class  period secondary. Dont feel like a ceremony must be held the day that you  decide on a nickname. If you end up short on time e.g., perhaps a fire drill or  other event disrupted the schedule, or you just got behind, or students are not 
The Classroom Behavior Manual able to get ready in time, then apologize to the nickname candidate and let them  know that you will perform the ceremony as soon as you can. 	 Make sure that everyone has a nickname by the end of January for schools with a  traditional calendar, but dont do too many ceremonies too quickly. The longer a  student waits to get a nickname, the more the student will appreciate it once it  is given! Dont hold ceremonies for multiple students at the same timeunless  they have complementary nicknames like Big Bear and Little Bear. 	 Never use the giving of a nickname as a reward or the withholding of a nickname  as a threat or a punishment. This will damage rather than strengthen your  relationships. 	 When you get a new student in the middle of the year, dont choose a nickname right  away. This allows new students to feel like real members of the class once they  receive a nickname instead of feeling like they are just getting a nickname by  default. If students question why a new student has not yet received a nickname,  simply let them know that you have not yet gotten to know the new student well  enough to pick an awesome nickname. Class Applause Teachers of all grades often struggle to get their students to applaud and show appreciation for the work or presentations of their fellow classmates. One way to solve  that problem, while also allowing students to build ownership of their classroom,  is to create a new and different way to applaud in your classroom. Giving students  ownership of the way they express appreciation makes it more likely that they will  show appreciation. In turn, the more appreciation shown by your students, the more  positive your class environment will become. In addition, the students least likely to show appreciation through applause generally are the ones most likely to applaud in an alternative way chosen by the class.  These more challenging students also tend to be better at coming up with funny ways  of showing appreciation. If the class adopts a method of applause suggested by a more  challenging student, that student will likely lead the charge to use the applause all  year long rather than rolling their eyes while listlessly slapping their hands together. The Procedure 1.	 Introduce the concept. During a Morning Meeting see Chapter 8 for  younger students and at the end of a class period for older students, inform 

Relationship-Building Procedures    87 them that you are bored with the normal way of applauding. Tell students that  you are giving them an opportunity to create their own type of applause. 2.	 Explain the guidelines not more than once: 	 The Class Applause must involve a physical motion like clapping does. 	 The Class Applause must involve a sound produced verbally or manually. 	 The Class Applause must be appropriate for school. 3.	 Schedule a vote. Let younger students know that you will lead a vote for the  new applause after the Afternoon Meeting that day. Tell older students that  their vote will take place at the end of class the next school day. Encourage students to talk about possible ideas with one another when they have a chance,  such as during lunch or at recess. 4.	 Collect nominations. At the end of the Afternoon Meeting, tell younger  students that you will give them a chance to create their Class Applause when  they are all seated silently. Call on each student to nominate an applause. Ask  for the name of the applause method, explaining that students will be able to  demonstrate the method in a moment, and write the name on the board. As  with previous nomination procedures, allow students to donate their nomination to another student. For older students, follow the same procedure, but let  them nominate regular clapping as a method, if they choose. 5.	 Go through the list. Call on each student to demonstrate the proposed  applause. Take a vote after all demonstrations have been made, allowing  everyone to vote once. With older students, you might let them design and  lead the voting process.  6.	 Celebrate the choosing of the Class Applause with the Class Applause!  Regarding older students and clapping: Some middle and high school students  might think that a special method of applause is beneath them, because they are the  Most Mature People in the Universe. These same students are almost always the ones  whom you would otherwise need to cajole to applaud in the traditional way. If you let  them nominate and even choose traditional applause over more creative methods,  then they will be more likely to actually use traditional applause throughout the year  because they had some control over the matter. Whether younger or older, by creating their own applause, students are creating  their own positive, supportive learning environment.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Sample Class Applause: Elementary One of my 3rd grade classes named themselves the Bobcats. For their Class  Applause, they chose to pose their hands like claws and yell, Bobcats! Bobcats!  Bobcats! Each time they yelled the team name, they jabbed their claws into  the air. As time went on, their applause evolved to extend their claws toward  the person being Bobcatted. Sample Class Applause: Secondary Secondary students tend to go in one of two directions: totally ridiculous  as a means of protesting how utterly stupid this ritual is, or very boring as a  means of protesting how utterly stupid this ritual is. It doesnt matter how they  feel or what they choose; it just matters that they make a choice so that they  own the ritual. I have seen classes choose to make crazy monkey noises ridiculous, and I have seen classes choose traditional applause boring. Either way,  they ended up feeling more ownership of the room. Class Handshake This procedure works much like Class Applause in terms of when and how the class  decides on a method. As with Class Applause, you can permit students to run the procedure with appropriate guidance. The Procedure 1.	 Introduce the concept. Tell students that today they will have the chance to  come up with a Class Handshake. 2.	 Explain these guidelines once: 	 For elementary students, the Class Handshake must take three seconds or  less. For middle and high school students who change classes multiple times  per day, it must take one second or less. 	 Everyone must be physically able to do the Class Handshake, or it should  include modifications for students with physical challenges. This encourages  students to be mindful and inclusive. 	 The Class Handshake must be appropriate for school.

Relationship-Building Procedures    89 3.	 Follow a similar voting procedure as used for the Class Applause. Remind  students to discuss their ideas with one another as they are able. 4.	 After the vote, encourage everyone to celebrate by practicing the handshake with a team member. The Class Handshake is a good opportunity to come up with an abbreviated form  of safe physical contact. You can use this contact with each student entering and leaving your classroom every day. Some classes choose a fist bump, forearm tap, or high  five. Classes can add a verbal element, as well. The process of voting and choosing the physical contact reinforces students  sense of ownership and helps you build your relationship with them. This applies  even to the too cool for school students who roll their eyes and look bored while not  voting. If students have the opportunity to vote and decline it, its OK. The reason for  these procedures is to offer control and ownership, not for students to accept them. Class Rules Making rules for students behavior prior to their arrival is a mistake. There is no  action more alienating for students than walking into a room on the first day of  school and seeing a list of rules already posted. Human history shows us that people  rebel against rules imposed on them without their input or consent. It also shows that  the most harmonious and happy societies are those in which the governed create and  agree to their own rules by a democratic process. Students, like all citizens, require  control and freedom, as well as a right to due process when the fairness of the rule or  its application is in question. To instill a sense of ownership and build a positive relationship with students,  teachers must allow them to create their own rules. Otherwise, students and teacher  will be locked in ongoing power struggles. Again, you should never post rules before  students arrive on the first day. Instead, wait for students to get there, then invite  them to make the rules. Heres how. The Procedure 1.	 Get started right away. On the first day of school, in the first two hours of  instruction, get students started on creating their own Class Rules. This should  take 15 to 25 minutes. While you can provide developmentally appropriate  breaks, its best to do this all in one sitting.
The Classroom Behavior Manual 2.	 Cede ownership of the rules. Remind your students that as the teacher, you  are only in the room to teach, not to own the room. Emphasize that they are  in their classroom. Ask them to find where in the room the rules are posted.  When students realize that rules are not posted anywhere in the room, ask,  Why do you think that is? Explain that because the classroom is theirs, they  must make the rules for themselves. 3.	 Invite students to suggest rules for the class and write them on the board.  Point out that these rules are just suggestions for now, and they wont automatically become class rules just because theyre on the board. Accept all appropriate suggestions. For this procedure, appropriate means that the rule doesnt  involve inappropriate language or suggestions that are purposely mean,  unsafe, or hurtful. Students can, however, nominate bad rules that would lead  to chaos. In other words, Scream as loudly as you want at all times can go on  the board; Dont sit next to Tayla because she ing stinks cannot.  See Figure 5.1 for an illustration of what the process might look like as you engage  your students in refining their list.  Figure 5.1 Suggested, Combined, and Acceptable Class Rules Suggestions Combined Rules Acceptable Rules Be nonviolent with hands. Be nonviolent with feet. Be kind. Be safe. Keep balls in lockers. Use nice words. Walk. Treat people how you want  to be treated. Listen to the teacher. Listen to one another. Be helpful. You can throw balls. Yell as loud as you want. Work hard. Be respectful. You can throw balls. Yell as loud as you want. Work hard. Be respectful. Work hard.

Relationship-Building Procedures    91 4.	 Reword suggested rules to use affirmative language. Be sure to explain  to students what you are doing Lets just state that in the affirmative. For  example: 	 Revise Dont hit people to Be nonviolent with your hands. 	 Revise Dont talk while others are talking to Stay quiet while others are  talking. 5.	 Allow enough time that each student can each make two to three suggestions. In addition, refrain from limiting the number of suggestions that one  student may propose. The students who keep adding rules are likely the ones  who need the most control. By letting them suggest numerous rules, you are  giving them that control. 6.	 When students run out of suggestions, review your list. 7.	 Express sincere appreciation for having so many wonderful rules. Then  express dismay that there are too many rules. Ask students if any of the rules  can be combined. There are no human students in existence who need to be  convinced that there are too many rules and that they should get rid of most of  them. If they have trouble suggesting a combination, model an example: 	 Listen to the teacher and Listen to each other can be combined as Listen  when people are talking. Any rule beginning with Listen can eventually be  combined simply to Listen. 	 Be nonviolent with your hands and Be nonviolent with your body can be  combined as Be kind and Be safe. These can further be combined as Be  respectful. See Figure 5.1. 8.	 As you combine rules, be sure to explain your reasoning. If a student suggests a combination, ask the student to share the reason. You want to make  sure that the students who suggested a rule understand why it is being combined with another rule so that they dont feel alienated by the process. Erasing   specific rules and replacing them with general rules lets students see the  process by which they are creating a fair way to govern their classroom. Its  democracy in action! 9.	 Address rules that will not serve the class well. You are likely to get  some of these, especially with older students. Do not reject a rule unless it is  inappropriate or malicious. Suggesting rules like You can throw balls or   Yell as loudly as you want is a way for students to test the procedures   authenticityand yours. It is important to pass these tests, so let the suggested  rules stand until this point. Then, pick a positive rule that contradicts as many 
The Classroom Behavior Manual unacceptable rules as possible. In nearly every case, one positive rule e.g., Be  respectful in Figure 5.1 contradicts all the unacceptable rules. Next, point to  the positive rule and ask, Who thinks this is a good rule? Do not ask if it is  the best rule, just if it is good. Count the votes. 	 In most rooms, a majority of students will like the positive rule, especially  if the teacher has been building relationships from Open House until this  moment on the first day. Announce that since everyoneor most students agree that the positive rule e.g., Be respectful is a good rule, then the class  must reject the unacceptable rules because they violate that rule. For example, you might say, Students cant throw things or be as loud as they want and  be respectful at the same time. 	 If you get lucky and too many students vote against the positive rule, then it  is your turn to exercise some control. This is OK, because you have been and  will be giving enormous amounts of control away as a matter of routine procedure. You can simply say that for any social group or society to work, people  must be respectful. At that point, erase the unacceptable rules. 10.	 Review your revisedand much shorterlist of rules. Once you have  rejected inappropriate rules, combined redundant rules, and worked out  acceptable rules, the list should look something like the third column in Figure  5.2. Marvel that the class was able to combine and delete so many rules. Point  out that there are only two rules left!  Note: Work hard might not be on your list. It doesnt matter if it is or  not; see the sidebar for more on that. However, Be respectful, Be nice, or  Be kind should be the other or only rule. Why? Because these three rules  basically mean the same thing, and each is an authentic, pure distillation of  any set of rules for human interaction. It is the essence of the Golden Rule  as well as the U.S. Bill of Rights, the Declaration of the Rights of Man in the  Citizen in France, English common law, and every democratic legal code on  Earth. In other words, when people get together to make rules for human  behavior, the purest essence of what they come up with is to be nice, kind, and  respectful. 11.	 Flesh out the final list. After marveling a moment, express that you still see a  problem with the Class Rules. Explain that if the class keeps the list as it is, then  you might be tempted to do something that you dont like to do: lecture. Be  respectful is really annoying to hear and to say! you might exclaim ruefully.  Do your parents ever nag you about being respectful? Mine did, and I really  didnt enjoy it. Request that students change the rule to read something like 

Relationship-Building Procedures    93 You have the freedom to do anything you want that does not cause a problem  or You can do you whatever you feel like doing unless it causes a problem.  Tell students that with a rule like that, you wont be tempted to lecture them.  Students, especially difficult ones, should like this rule more than most rules  imposed on them in the past. The same can probably not be said for Be nice,  Be kind, and Be respectful. Theyve probably heardand been lectured about these simple phrases many times. In addition, the fact that they cocreated the rule makes it inherently more palatable. 12.	 Congratulate the class on coming up with a fine set of rules! Work Hard? As noted, work hard does not need to be a rule. If the class doesnt come up  with it, thats fine. If they want to get rid of it, thats OK, too. The teacher can   also remove it, claiming that it might be used to lecture students. That can be a  good idea with especially tough students. Teachers should never tell students to work, because they cant make them  work. Instead, the Real-World Workshop procedure see Chapter 8 teaches  students to realize that their life improves when they work hard. Students learn  the benefit of working hard, so theres no need to try to make them work hard.  Note: the procedure does the teachingnot the teacher. If a class does keep  Work hard as a rule and a student isnt working hard, the teacher can ask,  What is our rule about working? Other than that, an effective teacher never  tries to make a student work. 	 If you are like most teachers, you just had a thought akin to Thats  ridiculous. That wont work. If I dont lecture kids about hard work  and its benefits, theyll all become lazy! You will just have to trust me  on this point until you begin to implement the Real-World Workshop  procedure. To hold you over until then, know this: every single one of  the hundreds of students who have used the Real-World Workshop in  my classroom became extremely hard workers without me spending  any time trying to lecture them into working. Does ThisThat Cause a Problem? You are free to do whatever you want as long as it doesnt cause a problem. This rule is nice because its one rule. Its easy to remember and easy to apply.  Still, students will test it, and you want them to. Most wont realize right away just 
The Classroom Behavior Manual how much it covers. This rule closes loopholes that more specific rules leave open,  and you can apply it to any situation. Rather than coming up with new rules for  unique situations assemblies, field trips, field day, you can use this rule. Plus, youre  training students for life. Think about it: the rule encourages students to learn to consider the consequences before they act. Before doing something, they may ask themselves, Does  this cause a problem? If they did not ask themselves this, or if they answer incorrectly and do something that causes a problem, just smile and ask, Does that cause a  problem? Most likely, the student will realize that it does and stop. Well get to what  to do when the student continues the behavior shortly. When a student exhibits a dubious behavior, and its unclear whether it causes a  problem, you should still ask, Does that cause a problem? The student might offer  opinions, in which case you can respond, Im not sure. Lets all figure it out later.  Lets look at an example of this situation. The bus riders in a class walk in line to the buses at the end of the day. One student decides to stop and get a drink at the water fountain. The teacher asks, Does  that cause a problem? The student says that it doesnt. The teacher says, OK, Im  not sure. Lets all figure it out later. The next day, during the Morning or Afternoon  Meeting, the teacher describes the situation and asks, Does a student stopping to get  a drink in this instance cause a problem? The teacher then manages the discussion,  inviting all students to share their opinions, listening to them, and asking targeted  questions. Through the discussion, the teacher guides students to realize that, in this  situation, stopping to get a drink does cause a problem. Why? Because students are  walking in a line. When one student stops, the rest of the line stops or gets jumbled.  The student stopping causes a problem because it inconveniences, confuses, or delays  others. Therefore, stopping for a drink before going to the buses is no longer allowed  under the Class Rules. Due Process The Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution reads, in part, No person shall  . . . be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law. The phrase  due process means that people have a right to not be punished arbitrarily. They  have a right to make their case and be heard. This principle dates back long before the  Constitution; it has its roots in the Magna Carta of 1215, and even in ancient Athens,  the birthplace of much democratic thought. Due process is a fundamental principle of democratic governance, and students,  the citizens of your classroom, have a right to expect it, too. Therefore, immediately 

Relationship-Building Procedures    95 after your class has established your Class Rules, tell students something like the  following: If you do cause a problem, and cant or wont solve it, then I must do  something about it. I might accidently do something that is not fair or  say that I am going to do something that is not fair. If you think that I am  doing something unfair, then I want you to whisper this to me: I dont  know about that. Could we talk about this later? We will then talk about  it later when it is convenient for me. This does not let students off the hook. It just means that you and the student  will have a private conversation about the matter later. At that time, you should listen without talking. When the student is done talking, consider the students point  of view. If you realize that you were wrong in your assessment of the situation, you  can change you mind and pursue a new, fairer course of action. If you are not sure  what is the best course of action in light of new facts or this new perspective, you can  thank the student and let them know that you need to think about it and will get back  to them. Then you can do more thinking or investigating, whatever the situation  requires. If you dont need this time, you can skip this step. After this delayor right  away, if you dont need itask to offer your perspective on the matter. The original  decision can be upheld or changed. Either way, the student received a fair hearing. As  a result, you and the student both feel better about the situation, and your relationship is improved. Class Pledge The Class Pledge procedure should follow the Class Rules procedure. Thats because  you will not be posting the Class Rules agreed on by the students and the teacher.  Rather, you will guide your students to write a class constitution. First, teach or  review the concept of a constitution in an age-appropriate manner use trade books  on the topic if appropriate. After discussing the concept of a constitution as a guiding  rule or law, lead students in another Real-World Workshop to turn their rules into a  class constitution, which will, in turn, become the Class Pledge. The Procedure 1.	 Reformat the agreed-upon rules. Rewrite the Class Rules in a format similar to that of the U.S. Constitution We, class name may do . . . This will  serve as a rough draft of the class constitution.
The Classroom Behavior Manual 2.	 Display the draft in a prominent location. This will now be referred to as the  Class Constitution. 3.	 Consider how to share control over the Class Pledge. Before moving on  with the rest of the procedure, determine how much control you are willing  to share with students regarding how they say the Class Pledge. What they say  or recite is the class constitution; how they say it is what defines the pledge.  You should decide ahead of time what elements of performing the pledge your  students can decide. Options include whether they sit or stand while saying  the pledge, what pose they take, and how they finish it. Keep in mind the age  of your students, and keep it easy and safefinishing the pledge with a roundhouse kick is probably a bad idea. 4.	 Designate constitution work as Later activities. Prepare for the next   Real-World Workshop by listing Write class constitution and Sign class constitution as Laters. Have poster paper and multiple colors of markers set out.  When students have finished with their Nows, they can write the class constitution on poster paper and sign the document. Encourage them to use their   best handwriting. 5.	 Display the constitution. Prominently display the class constitution at the  front of the classroom, where it will be the focal point of the Class Pledge. 6.	 Determine the format for the Class Pledge. Explain to students that they  have written out their class constitution, and now they must decide how to say  the constitution as their Class Pledge. Tell students what aspects of performing  the pledge they will be deciding. 	 Begin by conducting a vote on whether students should sit or stand while  saying the pledge. If developmentally appropriate, allow a student who is  being attentive at the time of this ritual to conduct and tally the vote. The  majority rules. 	 Tell students that they will next suggest and vote on a pose or other physical  act that students can do as they say the Class Pledge. Remind students that  people stand and hold their right hand over their heart when reciting the  Pledge of Allegiance. Explain the guidelines for any suggested pose: it must  not cause a problem, and it cannot be putting your hand over your heart.  Notice that we no longer have to remind kids about the pose being safe and  appropriate for school; now we only have to say that the pose must not cause  a problem. Remind students that they can punctuate the end of the pledge  with a sound, movement, or both simultaneously.

Relationship-Building Procedures    97 	 Call on each student to nominate a pose or movement. Again, allow students  to donate their nominations if they choose. Hold a second vote in which  students vote for their favorites. Students may vote either once or twice.  Whichever posemovement gets the most votes wins. In the case of a tie, erase  all nominations besides the top vote-getters, and vote again. As before, you  might want to let an attentive student lead and tally the vote. By this point,  middle and high school teachers should have next to nothing to do with   this process. 7.	 Celebrate your students work by practicing the Class Pledge together!  Let students know that you will now be reciting your Class Pledge immediately  after the Pledge of Allegiance each morning for the rest of the year. Sample Class Pledges Most class constitutions should read like the examples above. How students  say the words of a class constitution is what makes it the Class Pledge. Here are  some past Class Pledge pose and movement winners from my students: 	 Holding hands 	 Saluting, hand to forehead 	 Covering one eye as if reading an eye chart 	 Putting a hand on the shoulder of a neighboring student 	 Holding up both hands in a cat attack pose this one came from the  Bobcats class; at the end of the pledge, each student swiped down with  their claws and exclaimed, Rawr! ESPN Goodbye Just as every student should get an ESPN Greeting when they enter their school and  classroom, they should get the same treatment when they leave their classroom and or school. Recall that ESPN stands for meaningful eye contact, genuine smile, safe  physical contact, and the students name. The Procedure How you deliver the ESPN Goodbye depends on the departure processes and  logistics specific to your class and school. Before the start of the school year, spend  some time thinking about the best way to ensure that you can deliver an ESPN 
The Classroom Behavior Manual Goodbye to each student when they leave the classroom or the school. You can modify  the suggested procedures below to fit your circumstances. 1.	 Call for them to line up as you walk toward the door. 2.	 Stand at the door. Situate yourself with one shoulder blade in and one  shoulder blade out of the room. Make sure you can see all students from this  position. 3.	 When all car riders and walkers are waiting at the door to leave, give each  student in line an ESPN Goodbye as they depart. Make eye contact, smile,  offer safe physical contact, and use their name or nickname. 4.	 While giving the ESPN Goodbye, take the time to offer words of encouragement, wish them luck at a game that night, and so on. Take as much  time as you can before they must leave. Not only does taking time with each  student help build relationships, but it also creates space between each student. This reduces the likelihood that students will exhibit negative behaviors  while leaving the building. For bus riders who walk out to a parking lot where the buses are waiting: 1.	 If possible, walk students to the buses, even if it is not required of you.  This has several positive effects for your students and your school: 	 It shows your students that you want to spend more time with them. 	 It shows that you care about their safety. 	 It creates a much safer school, hallway, and bus lot. 	 It encourages other teachers to do the same with their students. 2.	 Put your students in bus order. This means line them up in the order in  which the buses either come or are stationed in the lot. As buses pull up or as  you walk by each bus, give each student an ESPN Goodbye. You may not be  able to chat much, but try to send each student off with an encouraging word. If walkers and car riders are dismissed after bus riders, you can reverse the order  in which you do things. Line up bussers to receive the ESPN Goodbye as they leave  your room, and then walk out the walkers and car riders. The ESPN Goodbye procedure should be used for all students, preK12. For many  teachers, it may feel awkward using the procedure with older students. Middle and  high school students will invariably balk at being walked to buses or a car lot by a  teacher. Their opinions on the matter are irrelevant; students at this age will act like  their teachers are crazy andor stupid andor uncool no matter what their teachers do. How they act is therefore not an indication of whether they like what their 

Relationship-Building Procedures    99 teachers are doing or whether what their teachers are doing is effective. The use of  the ESPN Goodbye procedure helps you build relationships with students and keep  students safe, and it is an essential part of creating a functional, positive classroom.

Relationship-Building Procedures allow teachers the opportunity to establish  and manage the machinery necessary to build optimal relationships with students,  no matter how difficult those students are. Establishing these procedures allows the  relationships to be built as a matter of routine, instead of having to find new and  novel ways of building relationships on the fly while you are trying to teach. The  next chapter will outline exactly how to establish and manage procedures for sharing  control of the classroom in a healthy way and on your terms, so that students are less  likely to take control on their terms.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Figure 5.2 First Three Weeks of School Schedule 1st Nickname Ceremony Hire Someone 2nd Nickname Ceremony Hire Someone 3rd Nickname Ceremony Hire Someone 5 10 15 Hire Prompter Hire Prompter 4 9 14 Hire Alarm Clock Hire Alarm Clock 3 8 13 Class Constitution  Hire Prompter Hire Prompter 2 7 12 ESPN GreetingGoodbye Class Nickname  Team Nickname  Morning Meeting Lock-It-In Real-World Workshop Silent Sustained Reading ESPN GreetingGoodbye Class Handshake Procedure ESPN GreetingGoodbye Class Applause Procedure 1 6 11
Part III Control-Sharing   Procedures Give students control on your terms so   they dont take it on theirs. I had been warned about Juriah. I had received his student card with its requisite behavioral and academic information. He disrupted constantly. He would refuse to do anything he didnt feel like  doing at any given time. The card indicated that the fact that both of Juriahs parents  were in prison was no excuse for his behavior. The teacher included a complaint  that she had sent him to the Intervention Assistance Team, feeling that his inability  to do work or follow directions was due to a severe learning disability. Subsequent  assessments of Juriah revealed no such disability. I was in my 13th year working with extremely difficult kids, and I had requested  that Juriah, identified as one of the toughest students in the school, be put in my  room.
The Classroom Behavior Manual While teachers were busy working in their rooms two weeks before the first day  of school, I asked Juriahs former teacher about him. It was amazing how quickly her  pale face turned bright red. It reminded me of my frustrations that I had with students  during my pre-strategy, pre-procedure days. She angrily ranted about her frustrations with him, saying how wrong and ridiculous the results of Juriahs assessment  were. She suggested that Juriah did not actually belong in school at all: his behaviors  were just too extreme and his IQ, regardless of the psychologists assessment, was too  low for him to attend a regular public school. She called Juriah retarded. Two weeks later, I met Juriah. Kids who terrorize classrooms have a certain  look in their eyes on the first day of class: like a lion overlooking the savannah full of  gazelles. These kids often use the first day to assess their new classroom situation and  decide how they can best do the worst damage. Juriah had that look in his eyes: he  had devoured his kindergarten, 1st grade, and 2nd grade teachers. He was sizing me  up to see if I was going to be another gazelle that would soon bite the dust. Immediately upon his arrival in my classroom, I met him with an enthusiastic  ESPN Greeting. Juriah began to understand immediately that I was not a gazelle: I  was the alpha lion. I intensely focused on the Relationship-Building Strategies and  Procedures detailed in Chapters 4 and 5, giving him a feeling of ownership over his  classroom and affection for me. Very quickly, Juriah began to actually like me. He  later told me that I was the first adult besides his grandmother that he ever liked. And yet, the Relationship-Building Procedures and Strategies would not have  been enough to get Juriah to be a cooperative, prosocial member of our small society.  As I suspected from the beginning, and as I confirmed later, Juriah had been abused  and neglected throughout his life. He had been threatened and hit. He had been left  alone in his home for days. These are just the horrors that I was able to find out about  through a home visit and a cursory investigation. Surely, there were worse stories. Because of these experiences, Juriah had become a highcontrol need child  HCNC. Because Juriah felt almost constantly out of control due to the beatings and  neglect, he saw threats even when there werent any, and he continually attempted to  get control of any situation and of every person he came across. His brain was always  telling him, Grab all of the control you can right now! We dont know when well get  any more! During Juriahs life at school, his intense need for control manifested itself in  predictable acting out: refusing to be cooperative, being disruptive. At school, he was  able to get the control that he didnt have in any other area of his life. The RelationshipBuilding Procedures and Strategies would allow Juriah to feel less threatened and give  him some ownership, and thereby some control, of his environment. But they would 

Part III: Control-Sharing Procedures     103 not give Juriah enough control that he wouldnt seek more control in unhealthy ways  the only ways he knew how. The only way Juriah was going to use prosocial behaviors was if he was systematically given plenty of healthy control through the use of Control-Sharing Strategies  and the establishment of Control-Sharing Procedures. Starting on that very first day, I gave Juriah control on my terms so that he  wouldnt try to take it on his terms. He and his classmates taught the first 30 minutes  of every school day. The students were given control of transitions from one activity  to another. Students led the hallway line. He and other students followed a procedure  for deciding upon voice level for worktime, and the students themselves would tell  the class when it was time to clean up or be quiet. In addition, I almost never told students, especially HCNCs like Juriah, to stop  using negative behaviors. Instead, I would use small interventions to gently guide  them toward positive behaviors. When I would fail at successfully guiding Juriah,  I would calmly use consequences at some point later, when he and I were neither  stressed nor busy. I also gave Juriah a job on the second day of school. It was one of the many jobs I  gave to my students. I told Juriah that he was in charge of telling students it was time  to throw away their breakfast we ate breakfast in our rooms. At 8:04, and no later,  he was to say, Three big bites, three big sips, you know what to do. Later, the class  came up with another verbal prompt for him to say: Blip, blop see Chapter 6. I told  him that he could have that job as long as he always did it right and never forgot. I told  him that if I ever looked up at the clock and it read 8:05 before he had given the class  our prompt, he would be fired, just like in real life, where if you do your job poorly,  you lose it. How do you think Juriahs newfound employment as a breakfast prompter  went? After all, his 2nd grade teacher thought that he was so stupid and terrible at  following directions that he didnt belong in our school. Juriah did that job to perfection every single day for 176 days in a row: a record  for any student for any job before or since. He forgot to do it on the second-to-last day  of school, and he was fired, with sadness and empathy. He was allowed to make a new  hire per the procedure described in Chapter 6. Why was such a student able to be so successful? The reason was that Juriah was  actually smart, but more important, he was an HCNC. Highcontrol need children  will do anything to get, have, and keep control. This is why traditional means of dealing with HCNCs backfire. When we tell HCNCs what to do Listen, Be quiet, Line  up, Stop touching him, we make it less likely that they will do any of these things, 
The Classroom Behavior Manual because just giving these instructions puts the HCNC into fight-or-flight mode. They  immediately feel a loss of control and become determined to get it back. However, if we give an HCNC the opportunity to gain control, the student will do  whatever works to get that control. In this case, Juriah had such a need for control  that he did what no one in his life thought was possible: he acted responsibly. In fact,  he acted more responsibly with his job than anyone else! The reality was that Juriah did not have a learning disability, and our school was  exactly where he belonged. He just needednot wanted, but neededa huge amount  of control. No other teacher had given him what he needed. He spent nearly every  moment of his school career, up to the moment I shook his hand on the first day of  3rd grade, trying to get his control needs met in unhealthy ways. This is not to say that I gave Juriah any of the control that I wanted. I did no such  thing. In fact, I was incredibly strict with Juriah, as I was with the other students in  the class, and I only gave them the control that I didnt need anyway, using procedures  and strategies that allowed me to have more time and energy to do my job. Juriah, the student who was supposed to be incorrigible and stupid, thrived in  my room. He had a lot of learning to do, and he tested limits, as HCNCs do. By the  time he was fired on that 177th day of class, he had been given enough control and  limits that he was able to take the disappointment, hire his best friend for the last two  days of breakfast prompting, and move on. Juriahs former teacher had told me how glad she was to see Juriah go on the last  day of school the previous year. My last day with him was quite different. On my last  day with Juriah, I could not bear to let him go. He was leaving for another school, and  I feared I would never see him again. I walked him to his bus, as I did every day. We  gave each other a hug, which, being big, tough men, we had never done before. I told  him that I loved him, and then he said the last words that he would ever say to me: I  love you, Mr. Ervin.

Control-Sharing Procedures allow you to keep the control that you do need by  giving away the control that you dont need. The control you need is determined by  one factor: what you feel like you need. If any of the following procedures makes you  cringe because you dont want to give that specific kind of control away, dont use it.  All of the procedures and strategies in this book are designed to train students to use  positive, prosocial behaviors with a minimal use of your energy and time. They are 

Part III: Control-Sharing Procedures     105 meant to lower your stress level, not to increase it. Just remember that the more control we give away, the more we can keep for ourselves. The parts of the procedures that give away control are preventive: they allow  the teacher to systematically give away control in a healthy way. In addition, there  is a reactive element: they also include Procedural Learning Opportunities PLOs.  These are consequences woven into the procedures themselves. A teacher, especially  a teacher of difficult students, cannot simply ask children to follow a procedure and  then hope and pray that they are cooperative. To this end, behavioral leadership procedures always give students two choices: 1.	 The student can be cooperative or 2.	 The student can learn a lesson about how to use positive behaviors or be  responsible. Teachers can be calm when students are always faced with these two  choices. Of course, when students are cooperative, it is easier to be calm, and  it is easier to be calm when students are learning to be prosocial people by  becoming better at using positive behaviors or becoming more responsible  when they experiment with using antisocial behaviors. It is the third choice  that we do not allow: 3.	 The student can get what they want by using antisocial behaviors. It is very difficult, if not impossible, to watch students use antisocial  behaviors to get what they want, since we know that this will destroy our  classrooms and lead to tremendous suffering for the student in both the short  and long terms. This section details procedures for guiding students to choose between  the first two choices while giving away the control that you dont need, keeping the control that you do, and systematically applying consequences when  students are not cooperative.
6 Student Job   Procedures Giving students jobs in the classroom has substantial benefits. When done correctly,  charging students with specific classroom tasks can teach them important life lessons  and responsibility. Many teachers create a job chart whereby the names of students  are rotated every month, week, or day, and the students do whichever job their name  is next to on the job chart. Unfortunately, this takes far too much time and energy,  and teaches students unhealthy, unrealistic lessons about responsibility and employment. I suggest that any teacher using a job chart throw it out and recommend to  preservice teachers that they never start using one.  Instead, I recommend applying the Student Job Procedures detailed in this chapter. The pros and cons can be summed up simply. Reasons not to use job charts: 	 Making job charts takes time and energy. 	 Job charts take time and energy to maintain. 	 Taking time and energy to make and maintain job charts tells the teacher and  the students that maintenance of the classroom is the teachers job, not the  students. 	 Job charts feel insulting and childish to older students because they are. 	 Arbitrarily forcing students to do jobs that they do not want could create a needless power struggle.

Student Job Procedures     107 	 Arbitrarily forcing students to do jobs that they do not want does not teach any  real-world lessons, since forced labor does not occur in a free society. 	 Job charts teach students that everyone is entitled to a job, no matter how well  they do that job. 	 Job charts teach students that it is someone elses place to seek them out and  give them a job. Benefits to implementing Student Job Procedures: 	 There is no chart to make or maintain. 	 Using Student Job Procedures takes little or no time or energy. 	 The lack of a teacher-imposed chart or system sends the implicit message that  the maintenance of the classroom is the job of the students. 	 Students learn that it is easier to get jobs if people like you. 	 Students learn that people are not entitled to a job. 	 Students learn that people get to keep their jobs if they do them well. 	 Students learn that if people do their jobs poorly, they will be fired. Student Jobs: Hiring, Training,   and Firing Guidelines Hiring Procedure Student Job Procedures require you only to hire the first job holder for each job,  minimizing teacher effort and maximizing student responsibility and ownership.  Hire that first student at random. Do not hire difficult students first. Do not hire easy  students first. Do not use the threat of not hiring a student to try to change behaviors.  All students have the right to an opportunity to have a job, though they do not have  the right to keep that job. They also do not have a right to do every job. When you hire a child for a job, simply hire them. Dont lecture them about the  jobs importance or the importance of employment in general. Simply say something  to the effect of the following: I have a special job for you. It is yours if you want it, and it will help  our classroom. You can have it as long as you do the job perfectly. If  you forget to do it or do it poorly, I will fire you. Your job will be to  . Are you interested?
The Classroom Behavior Manual Training Procedure After you model how to do an individual job for all of your students, teach the  first student who is hired to do that job how to do it once. After that, you are off the  hook for teaching how to do the job. Previous job holders can train new employees, so  you only teach one student one time for each job. Training children more than once  is inefficient, and it tricks students into thinking doing a job well is someone elses  problem. Also, students learn faster and more effectively through failure in this case,  being fired. Once you hire a student for any job, do not help, remind, or prompt them in any  way. If they do their job perfectly, they get to keep their job for the rest of the year. If  they fail to do their job perfectly, they are fired, and they get to hire the next person  to take the job. Getting fired is effective failure, especially when done in tandem with  a Calm Signal see Chapter 4 for details. Firing Procedures When a student fails at remembering to do their job, or they dont do their job  properly, fire them. No warnings, no reteaching, no threats. They are simply fired,  but in a specific way. First, you need to use your Calm Signal. Here is a simple script: Oh, man. Youre fired. You can hire someone to do the job, or I can. Your  choice. Students can choose any student who has never held that job. They can pick their  best friend, and they can opt to not pick their enemies. This allows students to learn  the lesson that if you are nice, its easier to get a job. Students can also decline having  a job. Again, we dont live in a world where forced labor is legal, so there is no need to  prepare our students for this type of world by making kids do jobs. It is possible that a student could do a job perfectly and have that job all year.  This would be incredibly rare, but it should be allowed to happen. That child is doing  a service to the rest of the class by modeling an incredible amount of responsibility.  Other students will be able to see that this level of responsibility is possible and that it  gets people good things in the form of employment and status. Having looked at the guidelines around initiating and terminating student   jobs, lets examine jobs in which students can contribute to the management of their  own classroom.

Student Job Procedures     109 Student Prompter How often do you have to prompt students to do things in school? Students in K12  schools are told what to do hundreds of times per day. Every time a person is told what  to do, they feel at least some loss of control. The cumulative effect of being bossed  around every day, over and over again, is that students will do whatever it takes to get  their feeling of control back. This is especially true for HCNCs. Students who have experienced trauma can  be triggered simply by being told what to do, especially in the form of repeated  imperatives. HCNCs become determined to get the control back on their terms,  possibly through overtly aggressive, passively aggressive, or passive-resistant behaviors. Much of this can be avoided by using interventions instead of making demands   see Chapter 9. Another way to avoid taking away control from students and, in fact, give them  more control is to have the students themselves prompt each other to do things. This  includes students prompting each other to clean up after morning activities, before  lunch, and at the end of the day. Students can also be in charge of prompting the  class to be quiet. Finally, they can prompt the teacher when it is time for students to  leave the room for special education services, occupational therapy, physical therapy,  scheduled trips to the nurse, or Title I Reading services.  As with all procedures, the job of Student Prompter is designed to make your life  as a teacher significantly easier. You no longer need to keep your eyes on the clock:  students are now responsible for this. It isnt reasonable for teachers to have to think  about the individual schedules of 2535 students every day. Using these procedures  will leave you with more time and mental energy to do your job. These are simply prompts to begin the process of preparing to transition. This is  not having students transition from one thing to the next. For each category of Student Prompter, begin the year by using the prompt yourself, all the while only taking the control that you need. Then pass the responsibility  to your students following the directions below. Modify the directions or script  slightly, depending on which prompting routine you are introducing. Directions Model the use of whichever prompt you choose for as many days as you feel is  developmentally appropriate. During Morning Meeting this would take place at  the beginning of homeroom period for middle and high school on the fourth day of  school for example, let your students know that you dont like to boss kids around,  and for four days you have had to by prompting them to transition from morning 
The Classroom Behavior Manual workcleanup, for lunchcleanup, for the end of the dayget quiet. Let them know  that you will be hiring a student to prompt the rest of the class to insert prompting  procedure here every day. At some point during that day or period, hire a student  according to the Hiring Procedure detailed above. Make sure that the student knows  what time to use the prompt. Let them know that they will be fired if you notice that  it is even one second past the time when they were supposed to prompt the class.  Then manage them according to Training Procedures and fire them according to  Firing Procedures. Only tell students how to do the job one time per year, even for prekindergartners.  Reminders and lectures about hurrying and transitioning better and faster make it  less likely that students will hurry and transition better and faster. Instead, prompt  students with interventions and use consequences when students are not cooperative and interventions have failed to effectively guide individual students to desired  behaviors see Chapter 9. Students will know what to do with the help of the interventions. More importantly, they will figure things out by seeing what their peers are  doing. You can differentiate for younger students or for students with cognitive issues  simply by using more interventions. This is preferable to repeating directions and  warning students, which takes more time and encourages negative behaviors. When  and if an entire class struggles with effectively transitioning to a prompt, implement  a wholesale Class Procedural Learning Opportunity see Chapter 7. Morning Cleanup Prompter procedures. A teacher has so much to do every  morning. Not having to tell students to clean up is one less thing to think about, gives  control to your class at the beginning of school every day, and reminds every student  every day that their classroom is truly theirs. Whether your class is a high school  homeroom, a half-day kindergarten classroom, a 3rd grade classroom where everyone eats free breakfast in the room, or a 5th grade class who stays together throughout the morning for language arts, every classroom has a beginning of the day, so all  teachers can use this prompt. On the first day of school, prompt students when it is time to transition from  whatever activity they are doing as they arrive eating breakfast or doing a quickstart activity, for example to whatever activity is next. Students should always have  an activity to do during arrival. The following teacher prompts take the minimal  amount of control from students while still prompting them to stop an activity. There  are different prompts depending on the age of the students and the activity being  stopped, as well as the activity being started. Notice that these prompts include two  assumptions necessary for optimal student cooperation: the assumption of intelligence, and the assumption of cooperation.

Student Job Procedures     111 	 For elementary breakfast with morning work to Morning Meeting see   Chapter 8: Three big bites, three big sips. You know what to do. 	 For elementary morning work without breakfast to Morning Meeting: Its  8:30. You know what to do. 	 For middle and high school homeroom: Its 8:30. Whats next? After modeling the Morning Cleanup Prompter job for an appropriate number of  days, hire a student to take on the responsibility. Lunchtime Prompter procedures. It is very important for students to understand that it is not the job of the teacher to get students ready to go to lunch; that is the  job of the students themselves. Never tell a student to clean up or get ready, because  you cant control this, and it makes it less likely that HCNCs will get ready. Instead,  use one of the following prompts. 	 Elementary: I will dismiss teams that are seated silently at quiet, clean tables. 	 Middle schoolhigh school: I dismiss teams to lunch who are silent, clean, and  seated. If you have a different expectation you dont care if students are quiet or at clean  desks, for example, you can change the promptfor example, I dismiss teams who  are seated. You can create your own prompt, as long as you are not telling students  what to do. Make sure that your own lunch is available in your classroom. Immediately after  giving the prompt, start eating your lunch while comfortably seated at your desk.  During these first days of school, make sure your lunch is especially appealing: sub  sandwiches, delicious fast food, and so on. Large fountain drinks are helpful. Looking  at your computer or phone as you eat makes it even more effective. Simply say your  prompt once and start enjoying your meal. Your actions communicate to students,  Your lunch starts when you use the expected behaviors, but whatever you choose,  my lunch starts right now. After modeling the Lunchtime Prompter job for an appropriate number of days,  hire a student to take on the responsibility. Do this either during Morning Meeting  elementary or at the beginning of the period before lunch middlehigh school.  So that it makes sense, and so that the student gets ownership of the process, have  them change the I in the prompt to we e.g., We will dismiss teams who are  seated, or name them directly in the prompt e.g., Devin will dismiss teams who  are seated.
The Classroom Behavior Manual End of Day Prompter. Whether you are a prekindergarten teacher or an  Advanced Placement English teacher, the end of the school day can be hectic. Not  having to remember to tell students that the academic day is over and not having to  worry about antisocial behaviors during this time can be the difference between feeling like you had a successful day or an unsuccessful one. All students, preK12, should take part in Afternoon Meeting see Chapter 8 at  the end of the day. For students who retrieve their backpacks and get mail, homework, and so on before Afternoon Meeting, use the following prompt: 	 I will dismiss teams whose tables are clean and whose things are ready to go. Students who will get their things on their way out the door after Afternoon  Meeting merely need to be quiet and have everything put away. In this case, use the  following prompt: 	 I will begin Afternoon Meeting when everyone is seated quietly, or, Devin  will begin Afternoon Meeting when everyone is seated quietly. After modeling the End of Day Prompter job for an appropriate number of days,  hire a student to take on the responsibility. Do this either during Morning Meeting  elementary or at the beginning of the last period of the day middlehigh school. So  that it makes sense, and so that the student gets ownership of the process, have them  change the I in the prompt to we e.g., We will begin Afternoon Meeting when  everyone is seated quietly. If you find yourself running behind and need a few extra minutes to finish  assessing a small group, for example, simply tell your student prompter to wait until  slightly later just for that day. For example: Big Sal, could you wait until 3:02 instead  of 3:00 to prompt us to clean up, please? Prompt for Quiet procedure. This procedure is designed to be used when students will be transitioning to another activity but will remain in place. If students are  going to transition to another location after the prompt, use the Lock-It-In procedure  in Chapter 7. Trying to get students to be quiet is one of the most common problems in schools.  Teachers often have nightmares about their futile efforts to make their students be  quiet so they can teach. Using this procedure means you will no longer need to struggle to have silent students and will enjoy more pleasant dreams. Telling students to be quiet is a common mistake. You cannot make students be  quiet, and when told to be quiet, difficult students will often endeavor to prove that  point. Instead of telling students to be quiet, you can tell them when you will go on 

Student Job Procedures     113 to the next activity or lesson when they are quiet, and then use consequences for  classes or students who are not quiet. 	 I will begin when everyone is seated quietly. If certain materials are required for the upcoming activity or assignment, the  prompt can be altered accordingly: 	 I will begin when everyone is seated quietly with their math books turned to  page 32. To calmly encourage cooperation, you can do as many interventions as you wish,  with an emphasis on moving closer to students who are standing or talking see  Chapter 9. Keep in mind that the number of interventions that you wish to use could  be zero. If students continue to engage in antisocial behaviors, enact the appropriate  consequence procedure, depending on the number of students still using antisocial  behaviors after you use the Prompt for Quiet see the description of Procedural  Learning Opportunities below. After modeling the Prompt for Quiet job for an appropriate number of days, hire  a student to take on the responsibility. So that it makes sense, and so that the student  gets ownership of the process, have them change the I in the prompt to we e.g.,  We will begin when everyone is seated quietly. Remember, the prompt for cleanup is prompted by the clock, and the prompt  for silence is prompted by the teacher. The prompt for silence can be given by the  teacher, especially when in a hurry, or it can be given by a student. That student can  be a hired prompter, or any students can be prompted at any time by the teacher. If  there is no prompter hired, only students who are using prosocial behaviors should  be prompted. Fun, easy ways to prompt both hired and temporary prompters include throwing a safe, soft, non-bouncy object at students whom you want to give the silence  prompt. Have the student always put the object back in a predetermined place. If a  hired prompter forgets, they are fired. If a temporary prompter forgets, dont use  them again. Student-Created Prompts Whenever it is convenient for you, you can allow students to create, nominate,  and vote for the format of their prompts. You can have the same prompt for all  of your cleanuptransition prep prompts Morning Cleanup, Lunchtime, End of  Day, etc., or you can have a different one for each. Your students can also create 
The Classroom Behavior Manual a prompt for silence. Make sure to make the silence prompt different than any  of the cleanuptransition prep prompts, or confusion will ensue. Use the same  procedure for nomination and voting as you did for Class Handshake or Class  Applause. Students may choose any number of silly sounds or phrases: Shana-na! Bleep-blorp! and Shebang! would all be acceptable. What If They Never Get Quiet?  Procedural Learning Opportunities Since many students have been trained by parents and teachers that when adults say  things that they dont really mean them, they have learned to ignore prompts for  quiet. Through Class Procedural Learning Opportunities PLOs, Small-Group PLOs,  and Individual PLOs, those students will learn one of the most valuable lessons you  can teach them: that when authority figures say things and set limits, there will be  consequences for testing those limits. Whether children learn this can be a matter  of life or death, and successfully teaching this concept to students may be the most  important thing that you do in your lifetime. When five or more students continue to be disruptive after a Prompt for Quiet  and a period of waiting and, if you wish, after a few interventions have been used,  it is time to implement a Class PLO. If the number of students still engaging in the  antisocial behavior of talking after the prompt is less than five but more than one,  skip to a Small-Group PLO. If only one student continues to talk post-prompt, be  disappointed that more students wont learn this valuable lesson, and continue to an  Individual PLO. Procedural Learning Opportunities are not punishments. They are opportunities  for students to learn how to master being an effective part of the school community.  In this way, they are similar to Delayed Learning Opportunities see Chapter 9, which  offer the same benefit. PLOs are consequences that are woven into the fabric of procedures that allow students to learn how to be effective within the parameters of the  specific procedure. If you have already hired a student for a prompting job, give the student the  choice to participate in PLO practice sessions, but do not require it. Many students,  especially HCNCs, will enjoy being a part of student consequences, and it is a fantastic means of giving those students a tremendous amount of control on your terms.  Make sure, however, that they are merely giving the prompt, not trying to manage  the behaviors of their fellow students. To the extent that it is appropriate, student 

Student Job Procedures     115 prompters can express frustration with classmates inability to be silent to a prompt.  If the student prompter deals with this frustration inappropriately, they should be  fired. A Word on Group Consequences When a classroom is in a state of general disarray because of widespread use  of antisocial behaviors, many teachers make the mistake of trying to use  retail discipline: providing each individual with specific, tailor-made consequences. Sometimes, though, wholesale discipline is necessary when retail  discipline becomes too difficult to administer and causes more chaos than   it alleviates. The logical group consequences described here teach a valuable lesson to  the entire class. They show everyone that peoples actions affect other people,  especially people on the same team. If a basketball player doesnt play defense,  does it affect the entire team? If a person in an office doesnt pull their weight on  a project, does the entire business suffer? If a parent is arrested for driving under  the influence, does the entire familys life become more difficult? Of course,  the answer to these questions is Yes. School, then, should prepare students   by teaching these lessons today instead of waiting for our students to learn  them as adults, when the amount of suffering involved for them, their coworkers, their teams, and their families will be significantly higher, and possibly  more dangerous. You may have noticed that there were no consequences for students who  did not clean up and prepare to transition at a reasonable pace the definition  of a reasonable pace is entirely up to you. This is because the Behavioral  Leadership Classroom is set up so that the natural andor logical consequences  for doing things lackadaisically will befall students either during the prompts  PLO if students are not changing locations or during the Lock-It-In procedure  and PLO for students who are changing locations. PLO for Prompt to Quiet Failure When you have used the Prompt to Quiet procedure and performed as many  interventions as you feel like, and five or more students are still engaging in an undesired behavior usually, talking, you can say the following: Oh, man, class nickname. I will be doing something about this later.  Dont let it ruin your day.
The Classroom Behavior Manual You can then either begin the PLO right then and there, or move on with the lesson  with the students still using antisocial behaviors. They will learn not tolater. PLOs during instructional time. If you choose to, you can go through the PLO  steps immediately. Very often, teachers will begin PLOs during instructional time  because of how many students are exhibiting antisocial behaviors talking, standing, or not cleaning up, for example. Implementing the Class PLO can usually get  the number of students still using antisocial behaviors down below five so you can  administer a Small-Group PLO later. If you wish to get back to teaching before your  class can successfully practice responding to the prompt as a whole, delay the consequence and resume practice at a noninstructional time. PLOs during noninstructional time. The other option is to administer this PLO  during a noninstructional time. Possible noninstructional times for PLOs include  before school, recess, lunch never withhold food, after school, weekends, during  a noninstructional school event, or during a behavioral Now see page 158. Class  PLOs can also be done during the Real-World Workshop procedure see Chapter 8  if and when all students have completed their Nows. If using one of these times for  consequences creates a burden that you dont want to endure you feel that Saturdays  need to be a time for rest, or the use of this time does not fit into your or your administrations value structure you feel that kids should always be allowed to run around  at recess, dont use that time to give consequences. For students older than 5 without  cognitive disabilities, you can wait days before giving a PLO; for students over 8, you  can wait weeks. For kindergartners, you can wait until the next day. For students  with cognitive disabilities, use your best professional judgment. Remember, delaying  a PLO for even 15 minutes still gives you the benefits of delaying a consequence. Be in  no rush to find a time that is convenient for you. PLOs as Practice Sessions Procedural Learning Opportunities are essentially practice sessions for procedures that students havent yet mastered. When collecting and herding students to  participate in this practice session, whether its your whole class or a small group,  keep a smile on your face. You can use a prop, like a cup of coffee or a snack. These  nonwork activities and your smile will give students the implicit message that you  are not worried about the PLO, that this situation is not a problem for you, and that  it might be a problem for them. You will be able to be calm because this and all other  Delayed and Procedural Learning Opportunities always give students two choices,  and two choices only:

Student Job Procedures     117 1.	 The students will be cooperative in this case, practice being quiet to a  prompt or 2.	 The students will learn a valuable lesson about being cooperative next time. Say the following one time:  We will begin practicing when everyone is seated, and everyone is silent. While smiling, use interventions see Chapter 9 or wait silently for as many seconds  as feels comfortable for you if any students are not seated quietly. If the group or  entire class is cooperative, move on to the Class and Small-Group PLO script below. If  there is even one student not being cooperative once you decide that you would like  to move on, say the following:  Oh, man. Looks like you all need to practice an extra time. You will then add to the amount of practice sessions the class chooses. Move on  immediately to the Class and Small-Group PLO script. Class and Small-Group PLO Script Oh, man, class nickname. It looks like you all are struggling with being  quiet when it is time to listen. No worries. Im not mad at you. When you  struggle with something, you need to practice doing it until you are an  expert. So now Im going to give you the chance to practice and become  an expert. If you can become an expert today, thats fine. Otherwise, you  will be coming in to practice this every  for the rest of the year  until you become an expert. Thats fine too. I am going to give you all a chance to talk to each other. You dont  have to, though. Then I will give the Prompt to Quiet or the student hired  for the Prompt to Quiet job will give the prompt. If you all are completely  quiet once you hear the prompt, that will count as a successful practice.  This is team practice. In order for a practice attempt to be successful,  everyone must be perfectly silent the second I am done giving the prompt.  Tell me, how many times do you need to practice, five times or six times? Have students vote. If they are cooperative and choose a number, accept it as the  number of times they will have to practice. If they refuse, or chaos ensues when the  question is asked, pick the greater number for them. If the class was not able to be  quiet when prompted for the practice session, let them know that you will be adding  an extra practice session.
The Classroom Behavior Manual The preceding example includes an appropriate choice of times for 3rd grade or  above. For preK and kindergarten, one or two practices is appropriate. For 1st and 2nd  grade, three or four practices is best. Now begin the practice session. Say the following: I may try to trick you by saying my prompt very quickly or very quietly.  OK, you all can talk now if you want. You can wait however long you wantusually between 5 and 30 secondsbefore you  say the prompt. Start with a louder, slower prompt, and make the prompt quieter and  faster as you go on. If you are using a hired student prompter, you can coach them on   this as well. Mentally prepare yourself. If you are used to hoping and praying that students  are cooperative, shift your paradigm. Remember that uncooperative students, by  definition, need to learn that being cooperative can get them what they want: in  their respective pasts, being uncooperative has been more effective in this endeavor.  Be happy that you are about to successfully teach uncooperative students that being  uncooperative will not get them what they want. They will not be able to create  chaos, they will not be able to feel the freedom of doing whatever they want without  consequences, they will not be able to control the emotions of an adult, and they will  not get approval from their peers. In short, start hoping that students are uncooperative so that they can learn to be cooperative. It can be helpful to be involved with another activity when monitoring practicing the Prompt for Quiet procedure. Checking your phone, grading papers, or working on your computer shows students that this session may be a challenge for them,  but it is not a challenge for you. When Classes and Small Groups Are Successful Do not spend a lot of time and energy praising successful practice attempts.  Simply say the following: Thats one successful practice.  more to go. Feel free to talk. Repeat this after every successful practice. The number of successful practice   sessions needed to reach the goal needs to be cumulative. It should not be that number of successful practices in a row. Once the class has completed their practices, say  the following: Are you all experts at being quiet when its time to listen? If anyone says No, have them stay in their seat. Have them go through an  Individual PLO for the Prompt for Quiet procedure once the other students have gone. 

Student Job Procedures     119 If multiple students say No, have them do a Small-Group PLO once the other students are gone. Allow all other students to go to whatever noninstructional activity  they were missing. Feel free to use an ESPN Goodbye on their way out. When Classes and Small Groups Are Unsuccessful  When a class is not unanimously silent to the prompt during the PLO, use your  Calm Signal. Then say the following: Thats an unsuccessful practice attempt. No worries. You can try again.  Feel free to talk. Repeat each time students are unsuccessful. When students have a successful  practice, follow the instructions for when they are successful, above. If the same students continually fail to practice successfully, allow them to fail until they have been  successful at frustrating a significant number of the cooperative students. This allows  the uncooperative students to learn that being uncooperative will no longer get them  positive regard from a majority of their peers. It is highly likely that the number of  students who are not cooperative will be lower than the number of students who were  uncooperative when the practice session began. Once the cooperative students are significantly frustrated with the uncooperative students, say the following: Oh, man. It looks like almost all of you are experts at being quiet when  you are supposed to listen. Chris, Jaquata, Ashley, and Brandy, are you  all experts? If they answer Yes, give them an ESPN Goodbye as they adjourn to whatever  noninstructional activity they have been missing. Dismiss groups of students in the  same way. Use student nicknames if they have them. If students say that they are not  experts, tell them to have a seat. The students who remain have shown, through their actions or by their own  admission, that they are not yet experts at being quiet to a prompt. If more than one  student remains, use this procedure again. If only one student remains, have the student practice using an Individual PLO. Individual PLO When you have given your prompt and only one student is still using an undesired behavior e.g., talking, you can say the following: Oh, man. I will help you do some learning later. Dont let it ruin your day.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Just as in the procedure explained above, you will give this consequence during a  noninstructional time. Bring the student into the room in the same manner: calmly,  while smiling and doing some other leisurely activity. Individual PLO Script The Individual PLO script varies only slightly from the one for the whole class or  small group. Say the following with sadness and empathy: Oh, man. It looks like you are struggling with being quiet when it is time  to listen. No worries. Im not mad at you. When you struggle with something, you need to practice doing it until you are an expert. So now Im  going to give you the chance to practice and become an expert. If you can  become an expert today, thats fine. Otherwise, you will be coming in to  practice this every  for the rest of the year until you become an  expert. Thats fine, too. I am going to give you the chance to talk. Just pretend that there are  other people here. You dont have to, though. Then I will give the prompt.  If you are completely quiet once I am done saying the prompt, that will  count as a successful practice. How many times do you need to practice,  seven times or nine times? If the student chooses a number, accept it as the number of times he or she will have  to practice. If the student refuses, pick the greater number for the student. OK, nine times it is. The preceding example includes an appropriate choice of times for 3rd grade or  above. For preK and kindergarten, one or two practices is appropriate. For 1st and 2nd  grade, three or four practices is best. Now you can begin the practice session. Say the following: Now, I may try to trick you by saying my prompt very quickly or very  quietly. OK, you can talk now if you want. You can wait however long you want tousually between 5 and 30 seconds before you say the prompt. Vary the amount of time before you give the prompt. Start  with a louder, slower prompt, and make the prompt quieter and faster as you go on.  Mentally prepare yourself for the possibility that the student will be uncooperative,  as those practices have gotten them what they wanted in the past. Embrace the opportunity for them to learn the opposite.

Student Job Procedures     121 When Individuals Are Successful Do not spend a lot of time and energy praising successful practice attempts.  Simply say the following: Thats one successful practice.  more to go. Feel free to talk. Repeat this after every successful practice. The number of successful practice sessions needed to reach the goal needs to be cumulative. It should not be that number of  successful practices in a row. Once the student has completed the number of practices  chosen or assigned, say the following: Are you an expert at being quiet when its time to listen? If the student says No, have him or her take a seat and start the entire procedure  over, this time giving two choices for the number of practices sessions that are higher  than the original choices. When Individuals Are Unsuccessful  When a student is unsuccessful at being silent to the prompt, use your Calm  Signal. Then say the following: Thats an unsuccessful practice attempt. No worries. You can try again.  Feel free to talk. Repeat each time the student is unsuccessful. When a student has a successful practice, follow the instructions for when they are successful, above. Human Alarm Clocks In most preK12th grade classrooms, students may be required to leave at scheduled  times for a multitude of reasons: Title I Reading, speech, gifted, special intervention,  occupational therapy, physical therapy, and going to the nurse for daily medication  or treatment. Remembering when to send students to the many corners of the school  universe at various times per day is difficult, if not impossible. Besides the extra,  significant, and unnecessary mental strain of remembering multiple schedules every  day, there are three other significant problems with keeping tabs on these schedules  and dismissing students every day: 	 It gives students the false impression that the maintenance of their lives, health,  and education is the job of the adults around them. It isnt. 	 It forces the teacher into telling students to do things, which takes away a feeling of control from students.
The Classroom Behavior Manual 	 It isnt any fun. Using Human Alarm Clocks solves all of these problems. It teaches kids that their  schedules, health, and well-being are their responsibility; it keeps you from bossing  around your students; and it is a fun and funny way to share control of the classroom  with students. The fun quality encourages students to remember their appointments. It helps even more due to the general rule of thumb that students who have  scheduled appointments throughout the day have higher control needs than those  who dont. The Conversation The initial conversation for the Human Alarm Clocks procedure can happen  with all students with scheduled appointments, with different groups, or with individual students. Talk to students who leave the room at any scheduled interval about  the fact that everyone in the class needs to keep track of their own schedules: teachers  are responsible for their schedules, and students are responsible for theirs. Let students know that you will not be reminding them to leave to go to an  appointment. Instead, after being told one time per year what time they are to leave  and where they are to go, they will be remembering that it is time for an appointment  by looking at the clock. It will then be their job to notify you in any way they would  like with a sound and some kind of movement. Alternatively, you can give them a  notification method, but it should be something fun and at least slightly silly. In any  case, make sure they know that they are allowed to interrupt you, no matter what you  are doing, when it is time. Tell them that whether you are teaching the entire class,  helping one student, or talking to your principal, they are responsible for walking  directly in front of you and performing their notification sound and motion. Besides  all of the aforementioned benefits of using Human Alarm Clocks, students brazenly  walking directly in front of you and doing something distinctive with sound and  motion makes it nearly impossible for you to think they are out of their seats for no  reason or in line to get work checked.  You should have a method that you use to shut off the Human Alarm Clocks.  This interaction ensures you always know when a student is leaving the room so they  dont quietly use their notification strategy and slip out without you noticing. For  example, I would always tap the tops of my students heads when they came to me  with a notification, as if I was turning off my morning alarm clock. Some teachers do  a fist bump, high five, or forearm tap. While you can allow students to come up with their own individual notification  strategies, and this may be best practice in terms of giving away an optimal amount of 

Student Job Procedures     123 healthy control, I never did. It was calming for me to have everyone going to a certain  destination doing the same notification strategy. This way, I would have constant  reminders about where the students were going. Also, if a student went to more than  one place throughout the week e.g., occupational therapy at 10:15 on Tuesdays and  Title I every day at 2:00, it was just one extra reminder of where that student was  going and sometimes, frankly, what day it was. In my classroom, students going to Title I Reading would approach me and put  their hands on top of their heads with the tips of their five fingers touching their  scalps and make the following noise, mimicking the obnoxious sounds of an old  alarm clockMAH-MAH-MAH-MAH!until I turned them off and they made  a beeline out the door. Kids going to special ed pullout would cross their arms in  front of themselves, lean back, and give a high-pitched MEEP-MEEP-MEEP-MEEP!  before I tapped their crossed arms. Any students who had a scheduled appointment  to see the nurse would grab their forearm as if it were broken and say OUCH-OUCHOUCH-OUCH! until I tapped their injured arm this completely horrified new students and guests to my room. I would have students going to occupational therapy or  physical therapy hop on one foot and say WHIP-POOR-WILLWHIP-POOR-WILL WHIP-POOR-WILL! I would dismiss them by tapping them on the back. Dont try  to make sense of that one. Students going to get speech services would stand directly  in front of me, make a mini-megaphone with their hands, put the megaphone to their  mouths, and then, mimicking a foghorn, say, SPEEE-EEECH! Imagine how much control this gave these students! Imagine how much fun it  was, especially when there were visitors to the room. In these circumstances, it was  wonderful to watch students approach me, looking at our visitors with a Waitll  they get a load of this! look on their faces. I still remember the giggles after they got  turned off. This is yet another way that our classroom felt less like a classroom and  more like a clubhouse where we learned things. For middle and high school students, its usually a good idea for them to come up  with their own signals. Often these students, the Most Mature People in the World,  would rather not do anything as attention-grabbing as the aforementioned ideas, so  allow them to propose anything as long as it is appropriate and involves a verbal notification from the student and a physical confirmation from the teacher. It may be as  innocuous as the student walking up to the teacher and saying, Going to OT, with a  fist bump then given to the student by the teacher. For preK, kindergarten, and 1st grade students and for students with special  needs, telling time and remembering to keep track of time may be an unrealistic  expectation. While you can err on the side of having too high expectations, you 
The Classroom Behavior Manual should also use technology to scaffold learning these skills. While it is important  that the students take responsibility for their own schedules, remember that your  requirements should be developmentally appropriate. Some tips for scaffolding can  include making sure preKkindergarten1st grade classrooms have both analog and  digital clocks visible for all students which is probably a good idea whether or not you  use this procedure. Make digital clocks available for students who need them at their  desks. Provide desktop personal alarms, set by the students, perhaps with the help of  a teacher, turned on every day by the students themselves. What If They Forget? As previously stated, students using these notification strategies are more likely  to remember their appointments. Also, keep in mind that many students going to  appointments go with other students. This is often true of students going to gifted,  special ed, or Title I Reading sessions. One student or more can remind others that it  is time for an appointment, and they will all congregate and do a group alarm clock. Even when using the Human Alarm Clocks procedure, students will sometimes  forget to be aware of the clock. Just as with other jobs, we fire the student using the  same, simple script we always use when firing students: Oh, man. Youre fired. You can hire someone to do the job, or I can. Your  choice. Then, the new hire will become the fired students alarm. The new hire will adopt  the fired students notification strategy and, instead of going to the teacher, she will  use the alarm on the fired student. At that point, the fired student will know to go   to the teacher, get the dismissal signal tap on the head, arm, etc. The student can  then leave. For instance, at 10:15 every day, a 6th grade student may walk over to a fired  student, grab his forearm with his hand and say, OUCH-OUCH-OUCH-OUCH!  The person going to the nurse would then walk to the teacher, the teacher would  tap his outstretched arm, and he would go to the nurse. Or, at 2:00 every Tuesday, a  high school senior might go up to another student and say, Dude. Go to OT. That  OT-bound student would just walk up to his teacher, stick out a fist, get a fist bump,  and leave the room for his therapy session. Do not underestimate how powerful the Human Alarm Clocks procedure can  be. Students love being in charge of themselves, and after being hired, students love  being in charge of other students. Once a student forgets and loses control over their  own alarm clock, and either the student or you hire a new one, at some point you can  let the first student know that you will be watching them throughout each school 

Student Job Procedures     125 day. If you notice that they have become more responsible during other parts of the  day by fulfilling their duties as a student and as a classmate by turning in work, being  kind to others, etc., you may ask them if they would like to become their own alarm  clock once again. This will supercharge the Strategic Noticing of I notice that you are  being responsible. In my classroom, students were able to earn back their own alarm  clock job after several weeks, a month, several months, or not at all. Getting the Alarm Clock Job Back If Human Alarm Clocks can get their job back, why cant other students get  their classroom jobs back after being fired? We allow students to get these jobs back because, unlike other classroom  jobs, Human Alarm Clocks jobs require students to only be responsible for  themselves. Each time a student is fired and rehired, it teaches that student an  important lesson about being responsible for yourself. Comfort Keeper One student in your classroom should oversee all the duties that involve keeping  the classroom a comfortable place to live and learn. Adjustments need to be made  throughout a typical day to maintain an optimal classroom environment, and  these adjustments cannot be made by the teacher. The class Comfort Keeper will be  prompted by either the teacher or by various situations to close the classroom door  when another class or the hallway gets too loud, to open or close a window to regulate  the classroom temperature, or to keep the classroom dry when a storm moves in. The  Comfort Keeper is in charge of turning lights on and off. You may even choose for the  Comfort Keeper to be in charge of running any and all technology, air conditioning,  fans, and heat. All of this is, of course, at your discretion. Attendance Keeper As every school administrative assistant I ever worked with before I developed this  procedure will tell you, I always had a serious problem with remembering to take  attendance. A serious problem. To this day, I still feel badly about the levels of complete and total exasperation I created in the hearts of those hard-working secretaries.
The Classroom Behavior Manual When and if it is appropriate, and if it is acceptable to your administration, you  should have an Attendance Keeper on staff in your classroom. Doing the job correctly,  and thus keeping the job, involves remembering to take attendance, taking it with 100  percent accuracy, and, if necessary, walking the attendance report to the office. Class GreeterExecutive Assistant One of the best ways to delegate important authority to your students is by hiring a  Class GreeterExecutive Assistant. This student will be in charge of greeting visitors  to the classroom and often answering questions for the guests. Younger students tend  to merely greet visitors using the script below. The older and more mature students  are, the more they should assume the role of an Executive Assistant: taking messages,  grading, collecting work, and managing any number of tasks. Most high school students can do the job of a student teacher and should be allowed to do all appropriate  tasks that can be done by a student. Especially with older students, use your best professional judgment in hiring and  managing this job. Only hire students who can realistically do what you ask of them  and proficiently complete their own schoolwork. Do not stop these students from  doing enriching activities just so they can assist you. If you do give this job to a student  who is not as academically inclined, you should pull back on the job expectations so  that the student is being enriched academically while also being able to gain the sense  of efficacy that this job can afford. It is important to note that, even in preK, this is not a cutesy, figurehead job  that is merely designed for visitors to think, Oh, how adorable! when a 4-year-old  greets them. On the contrary, this job is designed to give you more time to teach while  affording you the status that you deserve. Teachers are the most important people in  any school or school district, and they should be treated as such. No one, including  principals, superintendents, mayors, governors, or presidents of the United States  should be allowed to walk into your classroom and interrupt your instruction. You  and what you are doing are too important for that. Your Class GreeterExecutive  Assistant will be trained not only to greet visitors to the classroom with a script,  but also to answer questions and help the visitor in any ways possible, according to   their developmental level. You are the executive of the classroom; the students are  the managers.

Student Job Procedures     127 Hiring and Training One major difference between this job and all others is that it requires students  who wish to have the job to rehearse and then audition for it. For kindergartners and  1st graders, I suggest sending a letter home to parents that looks something like this: Dear Parents, As you know, part of being a Behavioral Leadership  Classroom is that we allow students to help manage their own  classroom as a way to create a more functional and efficient  learning environment and so that students feel more ownership  of their classroom. One way they do that is to be hired by me to  do certain jobs, including Class GreeterExecutive Assistant. For  this job, the student will be required to greet visitors to the classroom with the script below. I will be auditioning interested students next week on . The student who can best deliver  the script while shaking hands and looking me in the eye will get  the job. If your child is interested in having this job, feel free to work  with him or her on rehearsing this greeting. Below is the Class  Greeter script: Hello, Im . Shake hands. Welcome to the   Classroom. Right now, we are .  How can I help you? Thanks! To further screen students for this position, offer free coaching at some point  on shaking hands and looking people in the eye. Put up Rehearse Student Greeter  Script as a Later during Real-World Workshop. Then take some time to audition students for the job, making sure you keep in mind how well they shake hands and look  you in the eye. Hire the most proficient student, taking special care to make sure that  they genuinely want the job. Inform your new Class GreeterExecutive Assistant of any people who should be  exempt from having to be greeted. The list should be short but may perhaps include  a teacher with whom you plan from across the hall or a special ed teacher who works 
The Classroom Behavior Manual hand-in-hand with you. Anyone who enters your room more than once per day may  be ignored by your Class GreeterExecutive Assistant, but they should greet everyone  else. You should train them to answer any question and solve any problem that they  can, depending upon their intellectual and developmental abilities.
7 Transitions: The LockIt-In Procedure It goes without question that our goal is for all of our students to use prosocial behaviors while transitioning efficiently from one activity to the next. But that will never  happen with students whose negative behaviors during transitions get them attention, allow them to feel free of consequences, give them the feeling of control over  their teachers emotions, and get them positive regard from their peers. Only when  students are unable to get these things as a result of their negative behaviors will they  turn to using positive behaviors to get what theyand wewant. Unfortunately, traditional means of attempting to elicit positive behaviors from  students during transitions often produce the opposite resultsand the worse the  behavior, the more students reap the negative benefits, and the worse it will continue  to get. From repeatedly stating the rules, to bossing students around, to punishing  them, to lecturing them, to sending them to the principals office, traditional methods for trying to get students to comply fail them, and most profoundly fail the most  difficult students. The reason for this failure is twofold. First, difficult students, by definition, are  the behavioral pioneers who will challenge the rules first and most often, so they  will have their antisocial behaviors most often reinforced. No wonder teachers often  say that they have tried everything with a student, and nothing seems to be working. The reason is that the methods being tried are inherently ineffective, so the more  you use them, the worse the behavior will get.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Second, when ineffective procedures for transitions fail, teachers have an understandable instinct to take increasingly more control away from students. This serves  to make a less pleasant environment for all students, but it is absolutely devastating to  the HCNCs, who usually then engage in some form of rebellion. The Lock-It-In procedure prevents students from getting any of the benefits for  negative behaviors that traditional transition techniques give students. This is why  the Lock-It-In procedure is effective and traditional techniques are notand why the  procedure deserves its own chapter. How to Begin Modeling   the Lock-It-In Procedure On the first day of school, immediately before your class makes their first transition  from one location to another, say the following. Say it clearly and well, because this  will be the only time that you discuss transitions for the rest of the year. The way you all will be transitioning from desks to the carpet, from the  carpet to desks, and from the desks and carpet to the line is going to be  different than what you are used to. I am going to do something called  locking it in. The way that I will do this is to notice which team is the  first team to have a silent and clean table and lock it into my brain. Then  I will notice which team is second to be silent and clean, and third, and  so on. I wont say anything when I notice these tables. I will wait until  everyone is ready. Then I will dismiss the teams in the order in which they  were ready. I will do this today, and sometime soon, I will ask one of you  to do it. I am going to start locking it in now. At this point, simply look around at your class using any of the four Eye Interventions  see Chapter 9 for details, probably starting with the Curious Eye and then going to  Confused Eye, occasionally to the Crazy Eye, and once in a long while to the Evil Eye.  Be very obvious and intentional with these interventions. Keep in mind that you are  modeling the proper way to Lock-It-In for students who will start leading this transition shortly. Feel free to move around the room, maintain proximity, or, rarely, use a   question from the Question Matrix Chapter 9. Keep these interventions very lowlevel, and dont use more than a couple outside of Eye Interventions. The reason  for this is that the procedure itself has a powerful immediate consequence at the  center of it, and there are also delayed consequences in store for students who are 

Transitions: The Lock-It-In Procedure    131 continuously uncooperative. You dont want to work too hard to save students from  these consequences, since consequences are the best and most effective teachers of  positive behavior. While you are doing interventions, silently and with no external reaction, mentally note and lock in which team is silent and clean first. Then note which team  is silent and clean second, then third, and so on. As soon as all teams are silent and  clean, dismiss each team one at a time in the order in which they were ready. During  this procedure, if a team is ready and they were locked in first, but a student on that  team talked, they are no longer locked in, and the second team, in this case, moves  up. Dont worry about the mental strain of this; no one will know if you confused the  order since you are making these notes silently and mentally. Dismiss teams at a speed that does not create a traffic jam. The speed necessary  to accomplish this will differ depending upon where the students begin and where  they are going. Elementary students who are lining up at the door can be dismissed  from their desks fairly quickly. High school students who can be released directly to  the hall can be dismissed even faster. The Lock-It-In procedure can be used for any transition, regardless of grade  level. Remember that these transitions may be happening after a prompt for cleanup  from the student or teacher. Once it is time for the actual transition, supplies, books,  and trash should be taken care of already. The transition will not have to include putting anything away or cleaning up: those things will already have been done, and they  will have been done in more of a relaxed environment, where students are able to talk  and socialize while taking care of their classroom. Remember that there have been no consequences for slow transitioners. Those  consequences will happen naturally, either by not being prepared to transition  during Lock-It-In or as Failure to Get Locked In PLO. How to Pass the Responsibility   to Your Students When you are ready, tell your students that you dont want to boss them around, that  this is their classroom, and that they are going to get to be in charge of their own  transitions. Let them know that from now on, you will simply pick a student who  is already doing what they are supposed to be doing sitting quietly at a clean workspace to Lock-It-In. To be clear, the person whose job it is to Lock-It-In is not hired  and fired. Instead, you will pick a different person each time. Simply say, , 
The Classroom Behavior Manual you are ready. Could you lock it in? Say it so that other students can hear, but dont  make it an announcement. The benefits of this procedure are tremendous: 	 It gives a significant amount of control to your class. 	 Instead of taking control away from your HCNCs every time the class needs to  transition, it gives them a chance to get control by being quiet and ready. 	 It systematically trains HCNCs that being cooperative gives them more control. 	 It gives you back hours, if not days, per year. While a student is locking it in, you  can be preparing for the next lesson, grading papers, or eating a snack. 	 It shows that the maintenance of your classroom is your students responsibility, not yours. 	 If you feel like it, allowing a student to lock it in gives you the time and energy to  do low-level interventions to guide students toward compliance. 	 It is one less thing you need to worry about. Allow your Lock-It-Iner to take plenty of timeup to four minutes is fine if it is  OK with you and you are not inconveniencing anyone. Keep in mind that this is time  that you can spend relaxing or getting things done, all while showing students that  the management of the class is their responsibility. As soon as all students are silent, your Lock-It-Iner will begin to dismiss one team  at a time. When students first begin to lead this procedure, they may require some  coaching, even in high school. Stand or sit near them so that you can coach them to  slow down or speed up. Students may occasionally dismiss a team first when they  should have dismissed them last. You will be able to correct this when necessary,  though it will happen rarely. You may be surprised how well the Lock-It-Iner naturally uses the Eye Interventions from Chapter 9 if you have modeled them properly  and for enough time. As the Lock-It-Iner dismisses teams, you will have the time and  energy to stand between where the students are coming from carpet, desks, etc. and  where they are going carpet, desks, the door and use interventions or a Failure to  Transition Correctly PLO. The number of days that you will model the Lock-It-In procedure will depend on  your comfort level and what you see as developmentally appropriate for your students  in that order. Here is a suggested number of days depending on grade level: 	 6th and up: after 6 days of modeling 	 5th: after 7 days of modeling 	 4th: after 8 days of modeling

Transitions: The Lock-It-In Procedure    133 	 3rd: after 9 days of modeling 	 2nd: after 10 days of modeling 	 1st: after 11 days of modeling 	 K: after 12 days of modeling If an unreasonable amount of time elapses without every student in your classroom being silent and ready, or if you see your Lock-It-Iner getting frustrated that a  team is not complying, go to the Failure to Get Locked In PLO. Natural Consequences of   the Lock-It-In Procedure The natural consequences of being locked in later than others and therefore transitioning later is woven into the procedure. This is highly effective with students in  preK5th grade, who typically want to be the first to do things. After 5th grade, this  natural consequence begins to be less effective with every passing year. It is still a  great organizational tool, although students new to this procedure will have to learn  about proper behavior by relying more on the logical consequences that befall students in the Failure to Get Locked In PLO. In addition, taking a long time to line up for lunch or specials classes is its own  natural consequence. Use this as much as is functional for you and your school. A rule  of thumb: as soon as this causes a real problem for someone outside your classroom, it  is time to stop allowing this natural consequence to befall your students. This is OK,  since the natural consequences are not necessary in training your students. Consider  them to be a bonus: when you can use them, great; if you cant, no problem. In other  words, if you are worried that the lunch server is going to slash your tires because  your class has been late to lunch every day for a week, its time to go beyond the natural consequences of being late to lunch and bring on the PLOs. Failure to Transition Correctly PLOs If students fail to transition correctly, there are simple, immediate consequences  that can be used to prompt the expected behaviors. If a student exhibits a negative  behavior while transitioning, use your Calm Signal, but then ask the student to go  back to their seat: Oh, man. Could you please take a seat?
The Classroom Behavior Manual If at any point multiple students from the same team exhibit negative behaviors while  transitioning, so much so that picking out which students did what becomes difficult  in any way, simply have the entire team go back and sit down. If you let team consequences be your default position for the first three weeks, you should rarely, if ever,  have multiple students on a team consistently exhibit negative behaviors afterward. Failure to Get Locked In PLOs Nearly all classrooms will have at least a few students who have gotten what  they wanted by being uncooperative over a sustained time period. These students  will continue to use those behaviors during the Lock-It-In procedure before being  effectively trained not to. For them, Failure to Get Locked In PLOs provide another  excellent opportunity to learn the lesson that being uncooperative doesnt get them  what they want. Failure to Get Locked In PLOs differ from Prompt for Quiet PLOs in that students  are held accountable by their team, at least initially. This means that if even one student is uncooperative on a team, that entire team is held accountable. In 99 percent of  cases, students will be held accountable with either a Class Transition PLO or a Single  Team Transition PLO. It is easy to determine which practice procedure to use. If you  have one team that fails with the procedure read: is not perfectly cooperative, use a  Single Team Transition PLO. If two or more teams fail, use a Class Transition PLO. In  either case, say the following: Oh, man. I will help you do some learning later. Dont let it ruin your day. Then dismiss one team at a time, starting with the teams that were perfectly cooperative, in order of how quickly they became cooperative.  Once cooperative teams have transitioned, stop transitioning. For transitions to  lining up at the door, allow cooperative teams to begin leaving the room before uncooperative teams get called to the door. Do not say anything to uncooperative teams or  students about their behavior. For students who are not lining up but just walking out  the classroom door, make sure all cooperative team members are gone before uncooperative team members are able to leave. For transitions within the roomcarpet  to desks, desks to carpetmake sure there is some kind of natural break between the  cooperative and uncooperative teams. This is usually best done by beginning some  small part of instruction before the uncooperative teams are asked to transition. Even  transitioning cooperative students and then sitting down with them for a read-aloud  before inviting the others to join you is enough to make cooperative behaviors functional and uncooperative behaviors nonfunctional.

Transitions: The Lock-It-In Procedure    135 Class Transition PLO Notice that we did not give the opportunity for students to practice the procedure  repeatedly during instructional time, since we have already done that by waiting  patiently and perhaps even using some interventions. The students have already  shown that they cant be successful with this behavior right now. When students on more than one team are unwilling to create a quiet and clean  team environment in what you find to be a reasonable amount of time, it is time to let  the entire class know that you will be utilizing a Class Transition PLO. Say the following with sadness and empathy: Oh, man, class nickname. It looks like you all are struggling with creating a quiet, clean environment when it is time to transition to another  activity. No worries. Im not mad at you. When you struggle with something, you need to practice doing it until you are an expert. So now Im  going to give you the chance to practice and become an expert. If you can  become an expert today, thats fine. Otherwise, you will be coming in to  practice this every  for the rest of the year until you become an  expert. Thats fine, too. I am going to give you all a chance to talk to each other. You dont  have to, though. Then I will say the prompt or have the Lock-It-Iner  give the prompt. I will then give you 30 seconds to create a quiet and  clean learning environment while I lock it in. I will count in my head. If  the entire class has created a quiet, clean learning environment before 30  seconds, I will dismiss you all in the order that you were ready, and that  will count for a successful practice. Tell me, how many times do you need  to practice successfully: two times or three times? Do this until everyone has successfully practiced for the amount that they chose,  or until all but one team has practiced successfully and that one team has annoyed  the rest of the class. At that point, dismiss successful teams one at a time and continue  with a Single Team Transition PLO. Single Team Transition PLO Use the same script and procedures as you did with the Class Transition PLO. If  you have transitioned from the Class Transition PLO to a Single Team Transition PLO,  start with the same number of practices you had left when the cooperative teams left.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Single Individual Transition PLO You should only use a Single Individual Transition PLO in the most extreme  cases. If a student has been the only one to be unsuccessful for more than 30 minutes,  have the student practice individually. Allowing the student to annoy teammates  with their behavior is productive: it is an opportunity for the student to learn that  being uncooperative is not going to get positive regard from peers. How to Utilize Lock-It-Iners for PLOs Lock-It-Iners may walk up to teams and use such delicate interventions as Hey! Be  quiet! Let this go as long the student is not being abusive or threatening and as long  as this fits into your value structure. If the student does become abusive, fire that  student and hire another Lock-It-Iner. If you feel that other logical consequences are  necessary, have the student do Lock-It-Iner practice later. Otherwise, let the Lock-ItIner proceed with their own interventions, though its a good idea to monitor them.  After all, this is a student doing what used to be your job. If necessary, you can intervene by saying the following: Oh, man. Looks like this team needs to practice being quiet when  prompted. Turn to Lock-It-Iner. Would you like to help them to practice  later, or do you want me to do it by myself? Prompt the Lock-It-Iner to only dismiss teams who are being unanimously cooperative. Once the cooperative teams have lined up, or sat on the carpet, or sat in their  seats including the Lock-It-Iner, you can begin the next activity in some small way.  If beginning a read-aloud, for example, you could sit down with the book in hand.  Upon beginning this instruction, dismiss uncooperative teams. When lining up,  make sure you line up uncooperative teams immediately after you have prompted  the cooperative teams to leave. If possible, walk out of the room before the uncooperative students cross the threshold while still being able to observe all of the students.  These interventions say to uncooperative students, We love you, were not mad at  you, your antisocial behaviors dont work here, and we are moving on without you.
8 Academic ControlSharing Procedures Teachers are tasked with delivering a tremendous amount of material to students.  It may even be unrealistic for a teacher to impart this amount of content to students  during the time allotted, especially considering how much teachers are asked to differentiate for abilities and learning styles. This causes stress for the teacher, which  may often be transferred to the students. For many classrooms, academic learning  time is a time of high anxiety, when teachers hoard control as a natural human  defense mechanism: when we feel out of control, we hold on to the control we do have  for dear life. Teachers are often at their worst while trying to deliver instruction and monitor  work. While instructing, some teachers hoard control by badgering, lecturing, warning, and threatening students. In addition, its not uncommon for teachers to yell and  try to intimidate students into doing their work. The problems with this dynamic are many. First, students are skilled at identifying and trying to avoid stressful situations. They avoid stressful academic situations  by using negative behaviors to get out of class, retreating into their own minds daydreaming, being off task, or doing work half-heartedly. Second, when academic time  is the most stressful time of the day, students come to dislike learning and hard work,  even if they have an inherent interest in the subject matter. Ultimately, when students learn to see learning and work as bad things that  make them sad and stressed, it has a devastating effect on their effectiveness as people, their chances to become lifelong learners, and their prospects for happiness in 
The Classroom Behavior Manual school and beyond. The stress created by these dynamics is even more damaging for  HCNCs who have experienced significant trauma in their lives. It is for these reasons that filling the entire academic portion of the day with  choices given by a calm teacher is essential to the shortand long-term happiness  of both students and teachers. It is also essential that these procedures be facilitated  by the students themselves before the end of the third week of school, if not sooner.  The only way for this to occur at an optimal level is by providing teachers with the  procedures necessary to avoid all instances of anger, lectures, threats, and warnings.  Simultaneously, teachers need to be able to give away any unnecessary control while  confidently keeping the control that they do need. The following procedures are described in the order in which they may take  place throughout the day. Not every class will have an opportunity to use all of these  procedures every day, due to grade level or type of class, but every teacher can use   all or parts of these procedures to create procedures of their own. See pages 155157   for guidelines for making your own procedures that best fit your grade level and   specific circumstances. Morning Meeting Successfully getting started every morning for every student every day depends on  an effective Relationship-Building Procedure ESPN Greeting and a Control-Sharing  Procedure a Morning Meeting, both working their magic immediately upon the  students arrival. Remember, you have no idea what has happened in the lives of your  students over the weekend or since you saw them the day before. They may have  experienced difficult or even traumatic events since they last left your classroom. All  students, but especially your most difficult ones, need these relationships and this  feeling of control immediately when they walk into your room, and you need to fulfill  those needs. Something else that they need is consistency. Keep in mind that your students  lives may be a haphazard, random series of events from the moment they leave your  classroom in the afternoon to the moment they arrive in your room every morning.  You standing in exactly the same place giving an ESPN Greeting every morning will  be the first building block in creating a consistent, calm, predictable, caring environment for your students. The second building block is a consistent Morning Meeting,  starting with a Quick Start Activity. The content of this meeting will change daily, but  it has the same components every single dayby design.

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     139 The Control-Sharing and Relationship-Building elements of the Morning  Meeting procedure will successfully encourage most students to cooperate in the  successful participation in and maintenance of this procedure. The thoughtfully  created structure of this procedure includes logical consequences for those remaining students who are uncooperative. Limits should be set once per year. After that,  Gentle Guidance Interventions see Chapter 9 should be used to gently guide students  toward cooperation. In rare cases, consequences not already woven into the procedure can be used; most of these will be delayed. Quick Start Activity Guidelines As soon as your students have participated in the ESPN Greeting, have them put  their belongings away and get to work on a Quick Start Activity. This activity must  be aligned with standards; it is not playtime. If you do not require students to begin  working as soon as they arrive, your class will lose weeks of instruction per year. A  Quick Start Activity also gives the implicit message that, first and foremost, school is  a place for learning. Furthermore, the conditions under which students start working on their Quick  Start Activity immediately create a relaxed, calm environment to start out each and  every school day. Students should be allowed to socialize during this time. If students  eat breakfast in the room, they can eat while doing the activity. Again, logical consequences await students who do not finish this activity in time, so students will learn  how to concentrate within the context of these freedoms. If the activity is something that needs be to put out by the teacher, distribute  all of the materials perhaps just papers to team mailboxes, rather than putting  each paper on each students desk. If the activity is to be done in journals, write the  activities on the board. The activities themselves can vary in content as widely as the  preK12th grade standards vary, so obviously the content will be at your discretion. A  Quick Start Activity should meet the following criteria: 	 Able to be finished by the end of Morning Meeting. 	 Includes a question that must be answered or a task that must be completed. 	 Able to be checked by a teacher or student who will make sure it is completed. 	 Easily completed at first. Make sure everyone is able to do the activity, and err  on the side of it being too easy. The idea is to get students addicted to the feeling  of success first thing in the morning every day. Very gradually, increase the  difficulty. Differentiate insofar as it is possible. Allow students to be helped by 
The Classroom Behavior Manual teammates, but as time goes by, encourage students to try to find answers on  their own. 	 Aligns with the standards you teach. 	 At least a little fun. Funny word problems for 4th graders with students names  in them are usually better than 20 multiplication problems. A question asking  for an opinion for a high school social studies class about a current event that  happened the day before is preferable to a question asking students to describe  the three branches of government. At least at first, fun and funny is better than  challenging and frustrating. 	 Something that can be created quickly. You are a teacher. You have no extra time,  and you have to make this Quick Start Activity every day. Some savvy teachers  create a template to simplify the process. As a 3rd grade teacher, I always did  one daily edit and one daily math problem. I created a template, and each day  I would change its contents and project the new activity onto my board. Feel  free to use templates created by others in your school or online. 	 Draws upon old information. You should be the one teaching new concepts, and  that should be done during regular lessons throughout the class day. Team Captains Each team should have a new team captain each day. On the first day of school,  select one student as team captain from each team. The function of that student  during Morning Meeting is to get Quick Start Activity materials for the team, located  in the class mailbox or materials bin. It is also the job of the team captain to pass out  papers to the team throughout the day. Each day, the position of the student who is the team captain rotates counterclockwise. It is up to the students to manage this order. If there is a disagreement,  allow the team to attempt to work it out. If it becomes a problem for you, or if you are  asked by the students to resolve the issue, simply give the choice, Would you like to  solve this yourself, or would you like me to solve it? If the students ask you to solve it,  or if they are unable to solve the problem immediately, select a student from another  team to be the team captain for that team for the day, creating a very high likelihood  that next time, the team will be able to solve the problem on their own. Team of the Day TOD Every day, one of the classs teams will be the team of the day TOD. That  team will have special responsibilities during Morning Meeting, detailed here, and 

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     141 during Afternoon Meeting, described later in the chapter. The team of the day will  rotate from day to day based on an order decided by you. The only responsibility that  you have in maintaining the TOD is to make a colored dot on a spot on the board  before students arrive every day. The team whose color matches the color of the dot   is the TOD. Every day, place a note in the TODs mailbox or on their team table or desks that  involves a friendly greeting, any announcements that need to be made, and the days  schedule. The TOD can immediately get to work on writing the days schedule on the  board. The title of my schedule that I handed the TOD to post every day was Fun  Things to Do Today. This implied that the school day is meant to be enjoyable. For classes that are self-contained, or for classes that switch once throughout the  day, each lesson should be referred to, in order, as a lesson that is to be learned, not an  activity that must be done. Therefore, you should not write math as one of the Fun  Things. The word math holds little or no value by itself, and perhaps no word in  the English language produces less excitement in the average human brain than the  word math. Learn about rays and angles is significantly more compelling: What  is an angle? students might ask themselves. Whats a ray? Is that like a stingray? I  like stingrays. I dont really like math, but maybe Ill find out if a ray is like a stingray.  Hmm. I am sort of looking forward to that.  One extra step you can take is by communicating with teachers about what will  be learned in their classes, so that instead of listing PE as just something that everyone has to do, you could have students write Learn to accurately throw a ball at a  target, for example. Listing the things to be learned instead of just showing your students what they will be doing makes a profound difference in buy-in and excitement  about learning every single day. For classes and grade levels that teach patterns and multiplication, consider  sharing a rule adding by 7, subtracting by 2 or a pattern ABBC. Have the TOD  incorporate the pattern and rule into the schedule list, and see if the other students  can figure out what they are see Figure 8.1. Tip for TOD Schedule Writing For a more relaxed, comfortable way for the TOD to design and post the daily  schedule, you may want to create a removable dry-erase board so the students  can work together on the schedule at their desks or on the floor. Simply take  a portable dry-erase board, at least three feet by two feet, and apply magnetic  tape to the back so students can place it on the magnetized board at the front 
The Classroom Behavior Manual as long as it can be placed securely when theyve finished. Alternatively, you  could hang the board on designated hookswhatever works best in your classroom. Figure 8.1 Sample Schedule Incorporating Pattern and Rule Fun Things to Do Today  4 Morning Meeting  6 Learn about adding doubles  8 Learn about writing a personal narrative  10 Lunch  12 Recess  14 Read The Sisters Grimm  16 Learn about map grids  18 Readers Workshop  20 Afternoon Meeting Pattern: Rule: The TOD has their work cut out for them every morning because they must get  the schedule up on the board and get their Quick Start Activity completed. Do not  require students to do one before the other, and do not require students to participate  in putting up the schedule. The schedule does not need to be completed, though when  you remove all potential power struggles from this process, students will tend to want  to do it. If the schedule is not completed, add this task as a Later and have the TOD  representative verbally announce the schedule to the class. For intermediate students who change classes once during the day, a bit of communication between morning and afternoon teachers may be necessary to find out  what is happening in the afternoon so that it can be added to the schedule, or two  different schedules can be made for morning and afternoon. For middle and high  school students, you may choose to not do a schedule at all, but simply have students  write what is for lunch, a news headline, or important announcements. Some teachers dont ask students to write anything. Having students verbally making announcements and running the room in general during a nonacademic homeroom is essential  in middle and high schools. It communicates to students not only that it is their class  but also that it is their school. You might even encourage middle and high school students to add to these announcements in any appropriate ways that they would like: 

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     143 creating news desks, comedy sketches, and so on. Homeroom, perhaps more than  any other period, should be like a clubhouse where students like to be. A fantastically  welcoming, loving middle or high school homeroom can improve student attendance  and promptness! When appropriate for the grade level, the TOD can also be in charge of arranging  the calendar, weather report, and so on. Any and all activities that you do routinely  that are not being done by a hired student in the morning should be done by the TOD. Get Started At a time of your choosing, you or your student prompter will prompt the class  to prepare for the student-led Morning Meeting. If students are moving from one  place to another to begin the meeting usually desks to carpet for younger students,  after a reasonable amount of time, ask a student who is silent with a clean workspace  to start the Lock-It-In procedure see Chapter 7. As students transition, the TOD  team captain will go in front of the group and begin Morning Meeting as soon as all  students are silent and seated. For students who are not transitioning locations, skip  the Lock-It-In step and simply have the TOD team captain begin Morning Meeting.  After each activity, members of the TOD will select another TOD member. Once all  TOD members have run part of the meeting, the TOD starts over, going through the  students in the same order. Of course, these components are merely suggestions. As a teacher, you are the  expert in what elements of the Morning Meeting are most appropriate for your class.  How you run Morning Meeting is more important than its elements. Make this procedure your own, but ensure that the time is owned and operated by your students and  that you are barely working, or not working at all, during this period of time. All this being said, on the first day, you should run most or all of Morning  Meeting yourself for modeling purposes. It will be exhausting, but dont worry: you  wont do this again until the first day of school next year. Make sure you communicate  to your students that, starting tomorrow, they will be taking over some, most, or all  of these responsibilities depending on their developmental levels. Daring teachers  of older students may want students to do parts of Morning Meeting without any  modeling. For all students, hand over these responsibilities as soon as possible. The following directions for elements of a Morning Meeting are presented  from the perspective of a classroom whose students are fully in control of Morning  Meeting. You decide when that should be. Generally, all aspects of the Morning  Meeting should be handed over in the first three weeks of school for grades 3 through 
The Classroom Behavior Manual 12. Kindergarten2nd grade classes may take around six weeks before full student  ownership. Pledges. The TOD team captain has the honor of running the pledge or pledges.  When prompted by the teacher, the team captain uses the Prompt for Quiet procedure see Chapter 6. Remember, your students will be managing behaviors along  with you, according to the procedures described in earlier chapters. They will take  the lead, with your guidance; you will facilitate students setting limits on each other. If your school does not do the Pledge of Allegiance all at once, do it at this time,  led by the TOD team captain, and follow it with the Class Pledge. Schedule. The TOD team captain then chooses another TOD member who is  seated and ready. That TOD member can read the entire schedule, perhaps chorally  with other students, as well as any lesson that is tied in with the revealing of the  schedule e.g., detecting patterns or rules. Keep in mind that students can learn  practically anything if it is taught every day. For years, every one of my students was  proficient in naming patterns and finding rules for operations because we did it every  single day.  Date. The date should always be posted by the TOD somewhere in the room, and  the next TOD member selected should announce the date. This can also be the time  to share a daily fun fact, weird news, and so on. Weather. The next selected TOD member can go over current, low, and high  temperatures; atmospheric conditions; or even detailed weather forecasts. Draw data  from thermometers and other meteorological instruments or from an online weather  information source. Character education. Many schools already have prescribed character education programs. These programs can be woven into the Morning Meeting and put  here. One member of the team of the day can lead a discussion in any way that makes  sense. The key is for the discussion leader to truly lead the discussion. For example, in  my classroom, we used a Word of the Week format, where we would have a character education word respect, responsibility, self-discipline, etc. every week, and  a student from the team of the day would lead a quick discussion about that word by  asking questions like What is the Word of the Week? or What does responsibility  mean to you? or Who can think of an example of someone being respectful? You  can help facilitate these discussions, but make sure the student takes the lead, insofar  as they are able. The next TOD member is the lead teacher in charge of reviewing the Quick Start  Activity of the day. If and when necessary, you can assist, but giving the responsibility for the review to a student frees you up to use Gentle Guidance Interventions 

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     145 to create and nurture a positive learning environment. Of course, you will need to  scaffold appropriately for the student teaching. Never send students into a situation  that they cannot handle, but challenge them by giving them just enough support to  be successful.  Once the answer is written on the board and all teaching is done, allow an appropriate amount of time for students to complete their work, if necessary. Students  should be done or nearly done by the time teaching is done. Allow them to copy  the work off the board at this point. Remember that most students should have had  significant time to work on this already: it has been available since the moment they  arrived at school.  The following means of holding students accountable will supercharge hard  work without anyone but the students working hard. Tagging From the first day of the school year, once it is possible that a student may be done  with the Quick Start Activity, say the following: I will tag students who are done with the Quick Start Activity and have  their hands down. Once you have been tagged, you may  and  talk with your friends, or you may sit and wait silently. Fill in the blank with the actions necessary for students to be ready for the next activity. Depending on grade level and circumstances, the blank could be filled in with the  following: 	 Take out your math book and open it to page 33. 	 Sit on your square on the carpet. 	 Get out your writing journal. 	 Stare off into space. At that point, you may walk around and tag those who are done, while helping  those students who ask for help. Ignore students who are not working hard. The procedure itself will teach them to work hard. At the appropriate time, say the following: Feel free to finish any time in the next 120 seconds, or after your other  Nows are done during Real-World Workshop, or at recess or lunch if  there is no recess. Do not lecture or warn or threaten. Just make the statement. With 10 seconds remaining, walk around with a clipboard and write down the names of students who have  not completed the Quick Start Activity. When done correctly, you will never have 
The Classroom Behavior Manual more students not getting done in any given week than you had the week before. If  you do, you are not following these procedures correctly, not giving enough time, or  giving work that is too challenging for some students. This procedure requires too much work for you to do for very long. Second  through 12th grade teachers should move on to the Tagging Taggers subprocedure  below within the first three weeks of school; preK1st grade teachers may take up to  six weeks. Tagging Taggers This subprocedure is identical to Tagging in all ways but one. When you tag  taggers, you will have help holding students accountable for finishing their work.  Say the following once the TOD member is done reviewing the Quick Start Activity: We will be starting something  fun today that we will do for the rest of the  year. Instead of me tagging everyone when they are done, I will simply  tag the first person who is done on each team. That person will become  the tagger for their team and will be in charge of helping their teammates  and tagging them when they are done. Finally, they will be in charge of  telling me if anyone didnt get done in time so I know who has to finish  their Quick Start Activity after their other Nows during Real-World  Workshop or at recesslunch. Then go around and find one student on each team who is done first. This will have  the side effect of students not allowing other students to copy off their work before a  tagger is chosen from each team. Also, the first person done on each team is almost  always quite proficient at the skills necessary to complete the work and will be similarly proficient at teaching and helping other students. Once you have chosen a tagger  from a team, ignore that teamthey have a new teacher. Many teachers, myself included, dont give the option for students to complete  the Quick Start Activity during Real-World Workshop, but allow them to do so if they  ask. In a decade of using this procedure, Ive never had a class who didnt quickly  figure out that they could get their work checked by their teacher during workshop  instead of during recess. This, of course, increases ownership of the work. Real-World Workshop Procedure The way teachers traditionally organize independent work time for students prepares  students for a world that no longer exists; systematically disincentivizes hard work; 

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     147 forces teachers into time-consuming, unwinnable power struggles; takes time away  from instruction; and systematically encourages belligerent and resistant behavior. Traditional work time usually proceeds as follows: 1.	 The teacher introduces and teaches a standard. 2.	 The students practice the standard by completing an assignment. 3.	 Once the assignment is completed, the student is made to complete more  assignments to practice the use of that standard or other standards that have  already been taught until it is time to learn something else or until the school  day or class period ends. 4.	 Students who do not do the work or do not work hard enough, are toldoften  repeatedly and with increasing emotionto do their work or to work harder. This process repeats itself thousands and thousands and thousands of times over  the course of a students educational life . . . and its all wrong. How Traditional Work Time Prepares Students for   a Way of Life They Will Never Actually Encounter Traditional work time creates an environment in which students who work  hard to get work done get one thing immediately after the completion of said work:  more work. This model, not coincidentally, coincides perfectly with training students to be part of the workforce that existed during the time when compulsory  public schooling was coming into existence. In the early and mid-20th century, more  than half of working Americans worked on farms or in factories. Traditional work  time in schools follows the 9 to 5 factories and the sunup to sundown farms  models for work. American public schools were designed to train students to be part of an economy in which participants were expected to work hard from the beginning of their  workday to the end. But this type of economy hasnt existed for 50 years, and it will  never exist again. Its time to stop preparing students for a world that no longer exists. In todays economy, hard work is as important as ever, and people still have  essential work that they must do, and they face far more choices about what work  they enjoy and how to pursue that work with enthusiasm. In todays economy, the  efficacy of a worker is more often based on the product or output of work, not the  consistency and steadiness of input.
The Classroom Behavior Manual How Traditional Work Time Destroys the Work Ethic This contrived way of organizing work prevents students from learning an existential truth about hard work: the harder people work, the better their lives become.  When students understand this truism, they will work harder without teacher input.  They will equate hard work with pleasure instead of pain. This should not be construed as any kind of pull yourself up by your own bootstraps political statement about hard work. Nor should it be taken to mean that hard  work leads to a generally happy life in the distant future. What it actually means is  that, in a real-world setting, working hard enough to get specific tasks done makes  your life better and more pleasant instantly because you no longer have to do those  tasks! In real life, when you are done with your work, you get to do things that you  would rather do. How Traditional Work Time Creates Power Struggles and  Encourages Belligerent and Lazy Behaviors Many students dont enjoy learning for the sake of learning. And many are wired  to be difficult, control-seeking, attention-seeking, and stubborn. For those students, traditional work time is very frustrating. I should know, because I was one of   those students. If a student cant feel the control and satisfaction of being done with work, they  often try to replace those feelings by controlling something that they can always  control: whether or not they do the work. Over the years, tens of millions of teachers  have spent billions of hours trying to get students to complete work. This creates  anger, resentment, and power struggles that teachers are bound to lose, because they  cannot make students workand the students know this. The more stubborn the student, the more their stubbornness is reinforced and heightened. This stubbornness  can become belligerence or overt aggression. Most often, though, these behaviors are  misunderstood as laziness. In actuality, laziness is usually just a passive-aggressive  or passive-resistant reaction to being told to do work. Many students like me would  rather win an unlosable power struggle than actually do the work, especially when  the reward for doing work is . . . more work. The Alternative to Traditional Work Time The Real-World Workshop procedure creates an environment whereby students  lives get better instantly when they work hard enough to complete quality work.  On the other hand, just like in real life, not getting done with their work is its own   consequence because they still have work to do so they are not able to do the things 

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     149 they would rather do. Real-World Workshop trains students to work hard and   teaches them, through experience, the essential life truth that life improves when  you work hard. How to Use the Real-World Workshop Procedure In order to teach every detail of this procedure, we will examine the most complicated version first. Simpler differentiated versions of the procedure will follow,  though none of the versions is truly complicated. Approximately 95 percent of the  necessary information can be found in the first descriptions, as all versions are nearly  identical. Once the basics of the procedure are detailed, and differentiations are given  for preK, kindergarten, and intermediate, middle, and high school, we will look at  Procedural Learning Opportunities for setting and enforcing limits regarding voice  level with individuals, small groups, and whole groups. The first version is designed for a 3rd grade self-contained classroomthat is, a  classroom that teaches all non-enrichment subjects typically everything but physical  education, art, music, and technology. Kindergarten through 2nd grade Real-World  Workshop is exactly the same in procedure and process, though the preK and kindergarten procedures involve some very simple differentiations, mostly to accommodate  for nonreaders. And 4th12th grade Real-World Workshop is significantly simpler  than preK3rd. Relax and Trust the Procedure The procedure itself will teach students all the necessary lessons about hard  work. Simply follow these directions to put the procedures in place. Fight the urge to  nag students about working hard. Such actions will have the opposite of the intended  effect. Instead, let the natural consequences built into the procedure work their  magic. The Real-World Workshops incorporation of Nows, Laters, and Mystery  Laters is the basis for the procedure that teaches these lessons about hard work. Nows Nows are activities that correspond to direct instruction. Just as with traditional  work time, the teacher teaches to a standard, and then students practice that standard using a Now activity. Nows are generally put on the Nows and Laters Board one  at a time, immediately after the corresponding standard has been introduced. Once  students are done with the Nows, they can move on to the Laters. When more standards from different subjects are introduced, more Nows are written on the Nows and  Laters Board. If students fail to complete a Now before the class moves on to the next 
The Classroom Behavior Manual lesson, they need to complete the Now that goes with the next lesson, and then double  back to the first Now. Just like in life, work that goes unfinished piles up. While Nows are usually academic, they can also be Behavioral Leadership  Classroom ownership or management tasks. For example, your first Now, done on  the first day, could be Choose team namehardly academic, but very important. Of  course, lessons, Nows included, should be as interesting, stimulating, and compelling  as possible. Laters Laters are the activities that students can do once they complete their Nows.  These activities should also align with Common Core standards; they are not playtime. With only occasional exceptions, Laters should be academic in nature or  Behavioral Leadership activities and something that the students already know how  to do on their own. At least one should be something that is impossible to completely  finish, for example, Read or Play math board games. This prevents the ever-popular cry of Im done! What do I do now? Though mostly academic, the Laters should also be fun! As a rule of thumb,  every student needs to have at least one academic Later that is extremely appealing.  Students need the incentive of seeing that their life will get better when they apply  the effort necessary to get done with work exemplified by the Nows. Laters can also be tasks that students choose to serve their classroom. This builds  ownership of the classroom while making your life easier. If you know you need to  have something done and a student can do it, make it a Later. Do your students need  to have mail delivered to their mailboxes? Have Deliver mail be a Later. If it has to  be delivered every day, keep it up as a Later every day! This is an alternative to having  Mail Carrier as an assigned and fireable job. Neither way is right or wrongthe only  wrong way for mail to be delivered in a classroom is for the teacher to do it!  Worried that students are missing too much class time? No problem. Simply stop  putting nonacademic Laters on the board for a while. Concerned that a student keeps  picking the same academic Later? Remove it. Varying which Laters are available to  students makes each individual Later more reinforcing anyway. Add more and more  Laters as the year goes on. There is nothing wrong with having 15 Laters in a 3rd grade  Real-World Workshop in November. While you cant control whether students do their Nows, you have total control  over how appealing, fun, exciting, educational, and wonderful your Laters are.  Students who are left alone to decide whether to do their Nows without teacher prodding, lecturing, or warning will eventually start work if the Laters and the Mystery 

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     151 Later see below are appealing enough. However, if you turn doing the Nows into  a power struggle, many students will refuse to do them just to win, no matter how  appealing the Laters are. Laters could include the following: 	 Vocabulary-related word games 	 Any number of computer-based academic games or activities 	 Writing and sending a letter to a celebrity 	 Math whiteboard challenges 	 Delivering mail 	 Any number of the hundreds of possible activities provided by your curriculum Celebrations: A Character Education Later One Later that I always had available was Celebrations. Once they had completed  their Nows, students could take a sticky note and write an example that they have  seen of a schoolmate or teacher exemplifying a characteristic of good character: I  would like to celebrate DeMarcus for being respectful when he said please and  thank you to the lunch server yesterday. We always had a Celebrations Board available where students would post their Celebrations. Then during Afternoon Meeting,  students who had posted Celebrations, if called on, would have an opportunity to  read their Celebrations with the class. Mystery Later The Mystery Later is a Later that is not shown to the students immediately. It  is signified by a question mark below all other Laters. It is generally not academic,  it is especially appealing, and it does not have to be provided every day, though the  question mark should always be on the board. It is meant to do an especially effective  job of encouraging students to complete their Nows to your satisfaction every day.  It teaches the real-world lesson that when you work hard and get your work done, if  a fantastic opportunity for fun presents itself, you can take advantage of it! Mystery  Laters should usually be revealed on the board once most students who have been  working hard are on their Laters. For self-contained classrooms, this will usually be  during the last 45 minutes of your academic day. Mystery Laters could include activities like the following: 	 Recess 	 Play basketball with Principal Jones
The Classroom Behavior Manual 	 Play on Chromebooks 	 Play dodgeball with Coach Johnson 	 Relax under a tree 	 Do relay races on the track The possibilities are endless. Of course, some of these involve some logistical organization, but perhaps not as  many as you might think. If Principal Jones shows up unannounced in your doorway  with a basketball under his arm, you know you can reveal the corresponding Mystery  Later, and students who are on their Laters can leave with him to play basketball.  The same is true when Coach Johnson shows up with a dodgeball. If you team-teach  or do inclusion with another teacher, and you erase your question mark and put up  Recess, one teacher can take those who are working on their Laters and wish to  have recess outside, and the other teacher can work with those still on their Nows.  If you teach alone, you can put recess up as a Mystery Later, line up your entire class,  and have students who are not done with Nows bring those Nows outside to work on  in a designated area while those on their Laters play. The same can be done with relay  races or any other outdoor activity. Now that you understand how to use Nows, Laters, and Mystery Laters, the text  below will show you how to enact the Real-World Workshop procedure starting on  the second day of school. Recall that you already used the procedure on your first day,  without even having all the details under your belt. On Day 2, you may begin some academic work; for example, you might start  your first math lesson. Please note that this book offers no suggestions about any  academic content; this is purely an example. Lets say you are doing a review of 2nd  grade addition. You have taught the lesson, and students will practice their skills by  doing a workbook page. Your board may look like this: Nows Math book, page 1, 612 Laters Create team tags Read ? Note that your board will look like this at the beginning of Day 2 only if all teams  successfully and unanimously chose team names on Day 1 the only Now for that day.  If there is even one team who has not yet chosen a team name, that Now remains, 

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     153 although it applies only to teams who have not yet completed it. Under those circumstances, your board will look like this: Nows Math book, page 1, 612 Unanimously decide on a team nickname Laters Create team tags Read ? In circumstances like this one, teams will tend to discuss the name while they do  their academic Now. Accept their choice at any time. As students complete their Now, they will, one at a time, be able to move on to  their Laters. It is essential that you dont allow students to do Laters until they have  completed their Nows. Also, make sure that the Nows are done to whatever level  of quality that you require. Keep in mind that this procedure has already given you  significantly more time and mental bandwidth with which to hold students accountable, since you are no longer trying to convince, cajole, bribe, or lecture students into  working. Have students demonstrate accountability in any way that works for you; whatever you have done in the past will be easier to do now due to this procedure. Here  are some strategies that have worked for me during my career, starting with the most  time-consuming and ending with the least time-consuming. 1.	 Grade for 100 percent mastery. In short, students need to get everything right  to show that they completely grasp the standard being practiced. This works  quite well for certain elementary school math lessons or for PE lessons of all  levels, for example. Keep sending the student back until the work is perfect.  Write down scores in a gradebook. 2.	 Grade for a certain level of proficiency. Using an established rubric, have a  certain level of proficiency necessary for you to accept a Now. Send the student back if they do not meet that minimal standard. Write down scores in a  gradebook. 3.	 Just make sure its not garbage. This is a lower level of scrutiny. It is helpful  for when you can grade the work later and, frankly, when you are especially  busy. Using this method, you have students submit work to you, you look at  it to make sure that the writingmathart is not a travesty against humanity,  and, if not, you accept it. You can simply put a dot in the correct spot in your 
The Classroom Behavior Manual gradebook and overwrite the dot with a grade later. The dot helps you easily  see that the student completed the Now. 4.	 Trust, pray, and spot check. When you are in a huge hurry, you may want to  resort to this once in a long while. This tactic involves allowing students to  simply turn in work to a designated place when they are done with it. When  and if you have time, you can look through it and hand back work not done  to your satisfaction, at least to make sure it isnt garbage. Numbers 3 and 4  require the same very low-level demonstration of proficiency. In order to facilitate strategies 13, call on students who indicate they have completed their Nows by raising their hands and remaining seated. You can either sit at  a desk or reading table with your gradebook or walk around with it; a reading table  is optimal for interacting with multiple students while checking their work. If you  are seated in one spot and are sensitive to noise level, you can set the following limit:  Feel free to stay in line as long as you are silently checking your work. If a student who is in line to have their work checked speaks or stops checking  their work, use the following script: Oh, man, student name, could you please have a seat? Thanks. The student can then sit down, raise their hand, and wait to be called upon again.  This limit should be the same no matter what voice level your students choose with  their vote and their behavior choices which will be discussed further below. I use  this silence expectation  simply because it is difficult for me to concentrate when several students talk right next to me, even at the appropriate soft talking voice level.  If this doesnt bother you, ignore this advice. Realistic Differentiation Using the Nows and Laters Board In most real-life classrooms, traditional work time practices make it extremely  difficult to implement quality differentiated instruction, especially in classrooms  with wide-ranging ability levels. Real-World Workshop makes it possible and, in  some cases easy, to differentiate instruction. Notice that as each student completes the Now on Day 2 and moves on to the  Laters, which are self-directed, you will have fewer and fewer students who are  still on their Nows. These students may need help refocusing see Gentle Guidance  Interventions, Chapter 9, or they may need more help academically. Either way,  Real-World Workshop creates a more advantageous student-to-teacher ratio for them  with every student who completes their Nows. In this way, the students scaffold for  themselves simply by not having the proficiency to complete their Nows.

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     155 Eventually on Day 2, only those truly struggling academically or having problems  with focus or refusing to work which is fine will still be on their Nowsperhaps  three students or so. When it is time to teach another lesson, do so. Once you finish  teaching that lesson, add the corresponding Now to the Nows and Laters Board. Nows Math book, page 1, 612 Write introductory narrative paragraph Laters Create team tags Read ? Now everyone has a new Now Write introductory narrative paragraph, and  that is what they all should work on until they are finished. Once that task is completed, the three students who did not finish their math task should double back  to complete it. Everyone else, once done with the narrative paragraph, can do their  Laters. Trust that your students will come to recognize this reality on their own.  Pointing it out or, worse, lecturing kids about it, will have the opposite of the intended  effect. Trust the procedure to do the teaching. Students will complete their second Now with the benefit of your expert instruction while you are also holding them accountable by not allowing them to get to their  Laters before finishing all of their Nows. Again, you will notice that you are more and  more able to help those who need help as more and more students move on to their  Laters. The same pattern will happen in the afternoon when a reading lesson is added: Nows Math book, page 1, 612 Write introductory narrative paragraph Answer reading questions 14 Laters Create team tags Read ? With perhaps 45 minutes left in the academic day, you can reveal your Mystery  Later. On Day 1, you added Recess. For simplicity, well add the same Mystery Later  here: Nows Math book, page 1, 612
The Classroom Behavior Manual Write introductory narrative paragraph Answer reading questions 14 Laters Create team tags Read Recess Again, let the procedure do the teaching. Instead of lecturing students about the  consequence, allow them to learn from the consequences. Further Differentiation Aside from the inherent differentiation detailed above, Real-World Workshop  can create a fantastic platform for more fully differentiating for all students, regardless of their academic levels. Special education students, gifted students, and students  with cognitive issues and other special needs can all be served optimally using RealWorld Workshop. Below are various ways to differentiate. For some students, these  differentiations may be planned and facilitated, at least in part, by gifted and special  education intervention specialists. Feel free to use any methods that are appropriate  for the students that you serve. The first, simplest, and most conventional way to differentiate is to simply create  different Nows for different groups of students. Having different groups for math  and reading, for example, could involve two different assignments for each of these  subjects, designated by two different colors: Nows Math book, page 1, 612 page 1, 69 Write introductory narrative paragraph Answer reading questions 1412 Laters Create team tags Read ? This grouping may be enough to sufficiently differentiate for most students.  Those who need more can have their own Workshop Folders that they keep with  them. For some students, their folders may include additional and enriching Laters  that other students might not be ready for, such as the following: Laters Create Team Tags Read

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     157 Advanced sudoku Write a letter to Bill Gates Number puzzles Other advanced students might have either extra Nows or completely different  and more challenging Nows that still correspond to the same lesson or both; or they  can go without the lesson if they dont need it and go straight to their Now; or they  could leave during the Now and get a lesson from the gifted intervention specialist  that corresponds to a special Now in their Workshop Folders. Their folder may contain a list that looks like this: Nows Complete addition art puzzle Write narrative survey possibilities Answer all reading questions on page 46 Laters Create team tags Read Advanced sudoku Write a letter to Bill Gates Number puzzles Conversely, students who require simplified or specialized work due to cognitive  disabilities might have a list that looks like this: Nows Practice making 10 with blocks with Ms. Frank Write a sentence about myself Read leveled reader book 3 with Mr. Levy Laters Create Team Tags Make more 10s with blocks Read ? Real-World Workshop is a platform that allows students who need accommodations to remain in the least restrictive environment and feel that they are part of the  Behavioral Leadership Classroom so that they can reap all of its benefits! Old Homework When you list old homework as a permanent Now, you will never, ever have to  talk to students about whether they did their homework again. All they have to do is 
The Classroom Behavior Manual make sure that it is completed before they do their Laters. If a student says that they  didnt do their homework, you can just say, Dont worry about it. You can do it today  before you do your Laters. Ill like you whether you do your homework at home or   at school! Todays Homework Allowing students to do the homework assigned that day as a Later has a profound effect. Students who love learning and working hard often love to get homework done in class to feel good about themselves and perhaps to benefit from your  expert instruction before going home where there is no teacher to enrich their intellectual exploits. Other students want to get done with their homework at school so  they can go out and play basketball immediately after arriving at home. Either way,  having Todays homework as a Later can be a game-changer. Recess Work If a particular assignment or assignments have remained undone for a length of  time that you find to be unreasonable, and if it is acceptable to your administration  and consistent with your value structure, you can move that assignment from the  Nows column to a new column: Recess Work. When this happens, students must stay  in from recess until their Recess Work is completed. If you deem it to be appropriate,  Old homework can become Recess Work. Nows Write introductory narrative paragraph Answer reading questions 14 Recess Work Math book, page 1, 612 Old homework Laters Create Team Tags Read ? Behavioral Nows Once all academic Nows have been completed, those students who need to do  so can practice a positive behavior, solve a problem that they caused, or destress an  adult or student as a behavioral Now. There will be more discussion of these Delayed  Learning Opportunity techniques in Chapter 11. In this case, your Nows and Laters 

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     159 Board may look like this, with perhaps just a few students needing to do the behavioral Now: Nows Math book, page 1, 612 page 1, 69 Write introductory narrative paragraph Answer reading questions 1412 Practice not touching people in line Laters Create Team Tags Read ? Real-World Workshop During Indoor Recess When using Real-World Workshop, you may see some amazing things happen  during indoor recess. Let students know that they are allowed to do their Laters at  that time even if they havent finished their Nows it is recess, after all. Of course,  they are also allowed to play any indoor recess games, as they always have. This is a test of the quality of your Laters. If no one ever chooses Laters during  indoor recess, your Laters are not good enough. Improve them. Allowing students  to do Laters during indoor recess will help to get students who have not been consistently getting to them during Real-World Workshop addicted to these educational  activities. They will realize that when recess is over, they will have to go back to doing  Nows more or less all day long unless they work harder. They then realize that if they  work hard, they can play much or most of the day! Additionally, you will find that many students, even students who have never  worked hard in their lives, will start doing Nows during recess! I have had students  look around during indoor recess, turn to me and ask, Wait . . . is this recess, or is  this Workshop? Start Off Easy and Get Them Addicted to Success Keep in mind that you may have students who have had success in the past with  acting lazy and becoming belligerent. These students will reveal themselves in the  first few days of school. It is your job to create the optimal environment for all of your  students to become successful in working hard and using positive behaviors. No procedure better accomplishes this than Real-World Workshop. Think about the outlook that most of your difficult students have on their first  day of school: they generally dont like school because its too hard, it isnt fun, and 
The Classroom Behavior Manual their teachers are mean. They see themselves as being not smart enough to succeed  in the ways their teachers want them to be successfulbeing human and wanting to  be competent at somethingso many try to be competent at being disruptive and at  controlling their teachers emotions. One important way to make this procedure more immediately effective is to  simply set the academic expectations of the Nows significantly lower than you otherwise would. Of course, you should differentiate for students, and you shouldnt make  assignments insultingly easy, but err on the side of assignments being a little too easy,  at first. The first three weeks of the school year are not the time to be challenging  kids. The first three weeks are most important for building your routines, sharing  control, building relationships, showing students that negative behaviors dont work  in your room, having fun, and getting students addicted to success. By the end of the  first three weeks, you want your students to think, This grade is easy, and I am good  at it! Once you have hooked your kids, as the year goes on, slowly increase the difficulty of the Nows, eventually challenging students on a level that they never dreamed  they could attain. By the end of the year, all of your students will be able to experience  successnot just when things are easy but also when things are extremely difficult.  This will greatly improve their self-confidence and self-concept. This progress over  the course of just one year will be profoundly life-changing for these students. While some students love learning for the sake of learning, many dont. The use  of Real-World Workshop gets students motors running and gets them addicted to  working hard. Once the motor is running and they are energized to do work, they are  likely to find work that they like or even love. Whether they find that they love math  in 2nd grade or that they love industrial drawing at a career-based high school as a  junior, Real-World Workshop can keep students motivated so they can find out what  they love to learn! Close Down School On the very first day of school, I always said the following to my students.  Consider trying something similar with your own students. Look, folks, Im a different sort of teacher. I dont believe in making kids  learn for no reason, and I dont believe in hard work for the sake of hard  work. There will be a bunch of things that you are supposed to do every  day. I will only ask you to do work that will help you to learn important  things. Ill never ask you to do extra work. When you are done doing  everything you have to do, which are your Nows, you can do stuff youd 

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     161 rather do, which are your Laters. Heres the thing: when everyone in the  room is done with all of their Nows, were done. School is closed. Theres a  law that says that we have to be here until dismissal time, but as far as  Im concerned, our school day will be over. We can sort of do anything you  want to do. I dont really care what we do. Now Im not saying everyone  must get done with their work every day. Im just saying that Im here  to help you learn a certain amount of things every day. Once everyone  learns them, were done. We can go outside; you can hang out. You can  fall asleep under a tree for all I care. Some of my students like to goof  around. Last year, we all silently snuck around the school and pretended  to be ninjas. It freaked everyone out. Anyway, the point is that once were  done, were done. Allow your students to come up with what they want to do if and when everyone  in the room is done with their Nows. Accept any ideas that do not cause problems and  that allow you to monitor all of your students at all times. Keep in mind that closing  down school may never happen all year long, and that is OK. Even the possibility of  this outcome can have tremendous benefits. Students being able to shut down their  classrooms with their hard work reinforces positive behaviors in a profound way. PrekindergartenFirst Grade Differentiation Although all of the aforementioned elements of Real-World Workshop also apply  to grades preK1, a few modifications are necessary. The most obvious is that you  may have to accommodate for nonreaders. One way to make this accommodation is  to draw pictures of Nows and Laters instead of writing them, when possible. Another  difference is to have fewer Nows and Laters, especially at first, and especially in preK  and kindergarten. All grades preK1st should start out with no more than one Now  and one Later, with 1st grade possibly being an exception if the extra Later is Read.  Therefore, on Day 1, your preK or kindergarten Nows and Laters Board might show  just two symbols. Under Nows, there could be an icon of a paint palette indicating  fingerpainting. Under Laters, there would be a picture of a book, indicating independent reading. For 1st grade, the Nows and Laters Board might look like this: Nows Math book, page 8, 16 Laters Play apple counting game Read
The Classroom Behavior Manual Differentiation for Grades 412 As stated previously, 4th12th grade differentiation is actually a simplification  because, in most U.S. schools, grades 412 involve specialized classes. If you have  a self-contained classroom in any grade, follow the above procedure without these  modifications.  For Secondary Grades As a teacher of only one subject, your simplifications may be obvious to you: 	 Your academic Nows will only correspond to the subject that you teach. 	 Your academic Laters will only correspond to the subject that you teach. 	 You will have significantly fewer Nows. If you have a 48-minute class period, for  example, you will typically only have one or two Nows. 	 In the first three weeks, you should plan so that the hardest-working students  are able to complete all Nows in the first 25 to 30 minutes of class. Remember not  to challenge students too much during this time, and make sure to have a great  Mystery Later at least four out of five days. 	 Work in office can be a fantastic Later in schools where school administrative  assistants need help answering phones or filing non-HIPAA-related papers. For  secondary students in schools that have adjoining elementary schools, helping  with younger students can be a Later. Anything that is OK with your administration can be a Later. 	 If your administration stresses teaching bell-to-bell, you will tend to lean on  excellent academic Laters instead of nonacademic or classroom job Laters to  encourage hard work. Remember, an academic Later still involves academic  work to academic standards. In addition, you should ask your administrator to  read this Real-World Workshop section of the manual so that they might then  allow you to get your students more quickly addicted to hard work using nonacademic Laters, Mystery Laters, and Closing Down School. 	 If and when your students can work hard enough to Close Down School, let that  time be as fun as your students can make it without causing problems for you  or for them. Your students should be eligible for this possibility near the end  of every class period. Truly let students do whatever they want unless it causes  a problem. If it does not contradict your values, you can even allow students  to check their phones, watch ridiculous but appropriate internet videos on  the class SMART Board, have an impromptu dance contest, and generally goof  off. Slowly increase academic rigor over time so that this outcome eventually 

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     163 happens only very rarely, but the first three weeks of school are not the time for  significant academic rigor. Hopefully, each one of your classrooms hard work  will be able to close the room down a couple of times in the first three weeks. For Intermediate Grades This section refers to grades that split the day in two, generally in situations  where math is taught during one half of the day, language arts is during the other  half, and science and social studies are taught one on each side of the midday break.  This way of doing things is most typical in grades 4, 5, and sometimes 6. The differentiations here are a hybrid between the self-contained procedure and the secondary  grades procedure: 	 If you teach two subjects during your half-day, only allow academic Nows and  Laters from those subjects. 	 Your students should have half as many Nows compared with students in a  self-contained, full-day classroom. 	 Close down your half of school when appropriate. Voice Level PLO The instructions for creating Real-World Workshop given thus far are nearly  all-inclusive in terms of using a procedure to create a real-world situation whereby  working hard becomes a functional behavior and not working hard becomes dysfunctional. Not getting into power struggles over work makes cooperation functional and  belligerent behavior dysfunctional. But getting hard work and cooperation from students in Real-World Workshop is only two-thirds of the equation. The final piece of  the puzzle is the procedure for establishing and enforcing a proper voice level during  Real-World Workshop. A vast majority of teachers fail miserably at this. There are two essential reasons  for this failure: 1.	 Students feel bossed around regarding voice level. Teachers tend to feel out of  control when it comes to trying to maintain a proper voice level since, up  until the publishing of this book, they have not had a surefire procedure for  setting and enforcing limits about voice level. When their need for control is  not met, some students rebel with louder and louder voices. The problem is  compounded when all students try to talk over each other in order to be heard,  resulting in a noise level that makes it difficult or impossible to learn.
The Classroom Behavior Manual 2.	 The use of warnings. Students need as many warnings as they are given.  Astute students take note that when a teacher constantly warns about, in this  case, the voice level of the room being too loud, that teacher has proven themselves to be someone who takes no action, even after repeatedly warning that  action will be taken. Difficult students quickly realize that they can be as loud  as they want, and it will only cause the teacher to become angrier and perhaps  more entertaining. The Voice Level PLO solves both problems simultaneously: the teacher bombards  the entire class with choices about voice level and music to be played or not while  never, ever warning students about their voice level. Setting limits. At the beginning of every single Real-World Workshop, overwhelm  your class with choices in a simple, scripted way. Feel free to read the script verbatim or paraphrase, using developmentally appropriate language while introducing  Real-World Workshop. The first part will be said only onceright before the first  Workshop of the year: Class name, we are about to begin Real-World Workshop. We will do  this hundreds of times this year. Each time, I will give you three choices  on which voice level you prefer. You will vote, and we will keep using  that voice level for as many seconds as you can stay on that voice level  as a group. I will describe each voice level one time, right now, and I will  never bother you all about it again. One voice level you can choose is silence. Silence, as you know, means  absolutely no noises made verbally or with your body.  Put your index and middle finger on your throat and speak in a whisper. Whispering is talking like this. I am going to show you a cool trick  for determining whether or not you are whispering. If you would like  to do this with me, feel free to put your fingers on your throat like I am  doing. Pause. On the count of three, say your name with your normal  speaking voice, and notice if you feel vibrations on your fingers. One,  two, three: say your name. Did you feel the vibrations? Me too. In a whisper. Now, on the count of three, whisper your name. One,  two, three: say your name in a whisper. Did you notice that you couldnt  feel a vibration? When we are in Whispering Workshop, if it helps you to  remember, you can put your fingers on your throat before talking. Soft talking is the third option. Soft talking means that someone at  another table cannot hear you, but the people at your table can hear you.

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     165 I will also ask you all if you want to listen to music or not, and then I  will give you two choices of music. For elementary students, continue with the following: Some of you may struggle with tuning your ears to being able to hear  the proper voice level and talking at or below that voice level. That is  totally normal. Everyone is different. If you accidentally talk above the  proper voice level, I will give you a chance to put your head down and listen carefully to the voice level so you can tune your ears to what it sounds  like. Sometime later, I will come to you and ask if you can hear our silence.  If you think that you have properly tuned your ears, you can tell me using  the proper voice level, or give me a thumbs-up if we are on silent. If you  need more time, you can tell me, or give me a thumbs-down if we are on  silent, and I will give you more time so you can go back to ear tuning.  For secondary students, say the following: Heres the deal, folks. You have probably dealt with teachers nagging  you about your voice level in class for a long time. You are in  grade,  which means youve probably been nagged about voice level for   years. That has to have been annoying, and Im sorry about that. We all  know what happens: one person speaks 1 percent louder than everyone  else, and then everyone speaks 1 percent louder than everyone else, and  then everyone gets louder, and so on. Its just kind of natural, and in some  ways it isnt really anyones fault. Then the teacher gets frustrated, and  then you get annoyed by the nagging teacher, and so on and so forth. The good news for you all is that I will never nag you and none of  us will have to be in a room where its too loudever. The reality is that  when anyone is in a room that starts to get loud, your ears and voices just  go out of tune: you lose the ability to hear the right voice level, and your  voice just naturally gets louder. What we are going to do is have a system  for not letting our ears and voices get out of tune. Once you all choose  your preferred voice level and we get started, I, or one of you, will be in  charge of retuning people. If you talk above the chosen voice leveland  it isnt a big deal if you dothe Retuner will go and give a sign that you  need to retune. Well vote on a signal later if you want, but for now the  sign is just quietly saying, Retune, and tapping the person gently on  the shoulder. Dont embarrass the person by saying this loudly. Then, if  you were the one who went out of tune, just put your head down so no  one can see your eyes, with your entire head above the desk or table. Just 
The Classroom Behavior Manual retune your ears by listening to the correct voice level. The Retuner will  then wait between 1 minute and about 10 minutes before they come back  to you, tag you, and quietly say the word tuned. If you are retuning  someone for the first time, it should be closer to 1 minute. If it is their third  or fourth time, it should be more like 10 minutes. Sometimes three or four  students sitting next to each other may all need to be retuned at the same  time. In that case just tag each one and say, Retune, to each. Now, if more than four students need to be retuned at the same time,  were just going to give up on that voice level for a bit and we will go to  the next quietest voice level. The reason for this is that the lower voice  levels like silence and whispering are easier to retune to. We may go from  soft talking to whispering, or whispering to silence. If more than four  people need to be retuned at silence level, well just have the whole class  retune until its time to go on to the next thing. The Retuner will say, so  everyone can hear, You have chosen whispering or silent workshop  when more than four students need to be retuned. For the first few times we have Workshop, Ill be the Retuner so that  you all can see how I do it. Very soon, though, Ill just pick someone at the  beginning of Workshop who has the tuned-in voice level right away. If  you are the Retuner, that means Im not, so if I speak too loudly during  Workshop, you can retune me if I need it. The only difference is that I  will sit with my head up, since I have to be observing the classroom. The  Retuner will still come and tag me and say, Tuned, anywhere between 1  minute and 10 minutes later. Just like for you all, have me retune for something like 1 minute if its my first retune and more like 10 minutes if its my  third or fourth. By doing this, no one gets nagged, no one gets angry, and  well never have to be in a room that is too loud. Take questions from the group at this point. Giving Choices The following script should be the same every time you do Real-World Workshop.  Keeping it the same every time makes it easier for you to remember it, allows you to  do it faster, and creates consistency in the lives of students who may not be getting  consistency anywhere else. Feel free to read it yourself at first, but turn the task over  to students as soon as it is developmentally appropriate. The minimal amount of time  this takes is well worth the control you are giving away each time this procedure is  executed. The script can be shortened and made to be more casual, especially when 

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     167 being led by secondary students. Of course, manage and monitor that all musical  artists and songs are school-appropriate. The script for giving students choices about  voice level and music during Real-World Workshop is as follows: OK, here we go. Show of hands: who would like silent workshop? Count  hands. Who would like whispering workshop? Count hands. Who  would like soft talking workshop? Count hands. Who does not want  music? Count hands. Who does want music? Count hands. We will  listen to either Beyonc or Taylor Swift. Who wants Beyonc? Count  hands. Who wants Taylor Swift? Count hands. Musical artist it is. I  will begin playing the music when I hear chosen voice level here. Find the artist on a device, put your finger on the play button or mouse, look up  at your class with a smile, and begin playing music when the proper voice level is  achieved. If the proper voice level is not achieved within 10 seconds, say the following: Oh, man. No music today. Then immediately enforce the limits that you just set. Note that students will choose soft talking workshop 95 percent of the time, but  which level they choose is 100 percent irrelevant. What is relevant is that they are  systematically, repeatedly, and on an overwhelming basis given a feeling of control.  Secondary students are guaranteed to roll their eyes and act annoyed by this procedure. Again, their acceptance of doing this as cool or whatever teenagers say is  irrelevant. The point is for the students to be bombarded by choice, even to the point  that it becomes uncool. Actual counting of hands is not necessary, unless it looks  like either silent or whisper Workshop might get the majority vote, which will be rare. Enforcing the Limits Individual and Small-Group PLOs. Remember, there will be absolutely no  warnings. When one, two, or three students choose to speak above whichever voice  level has been voted upon, the consequence is always the same, and it is expressed by  walking near the students and saying the following: Elementary Oh, man. Could you put your head down and listen for the  current voice level? Secondary Oh, man. Retune. The students will then put their heads down on their tables or desks for anywhere  between 25 seconds and 10 minutes, depending on the age and developmental level of  the students and how often they have had to listen to the voice level in the past. The  idea of the listening consequence is that they are fine-tuning their ears to be able to 
The Classroom Behavior Manual notice and use the proper voice level in class. This is often difficult at first for students  for whom loud voice levels are common in their homes. After a period of time, whisper the following to the students with their heads  down: Elementary Do you hear our voice level? Pull on your earlobe. Secondary Retuned. Tap student on the shoulder. After any affirmative response from your elementary students, return an affirmative  response indicating that they can get back to work. After this procedure has been in  place for a few weeks, you can merely say the students name and pull on your earlobe  with a quizzical expression, get an affirmative, and give one back, and the student  can get back to working with only the students name being uttered. For secondary  students, just assume intelligence and walk away. Proper head-down position involves the students eyes not being able to be seen  by anyone and their head being fully above the desk or table. If a student fails at this,  simply say the following: Oh, man. Looks like you need to practice putting your head down the  right way. You can either practice now by doing it perfectly, or you can  practice later. Either way is fine. If the student puts their head down properly while tuning their ear to the voice level,  no further action needs to be taken besides spending more time, right then, with  their head down. Students who continue to not put their head down correctly will  practice doing so later, during noninstructional time. For more details on how to do  this, see Delayed Learning Opportunities in Chapter 11. If one to three students do this repeatedly, simply repeat the procedure, giving  them more head-down time each time to tune their ears to the proper voice level. Whole-Class Voice Demotion PLO. Remember that, when developmentally  appropriate and properly monitored, older students will be administering this PLO.  For the purposes of this manual, the directions below indicate that you will be doing  this as the teacher. Just keep in mind that, when appropriate, a student could be  administering the PLO. Utilizing students for these PLOs is optional. If you dont  think your students are up for it, or you think this might cause more problems than  it solves, dont do it. To review, the possible voice levels are, in order, the following: 1.	 Soft talking 2.	 Whispering 3.	 Silent

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     169 Each level is more enjoyable for the students than the one that comes after it. The  trouble is that the most enjoyable voice levels are the most difficult to maintain: soft  talking involves lots of thoughtful awareness. Silent involves almost no awareness. When four or more students speak above the voted-upon voice level, that is the  classs way of telling you, We cannot yet handle this voice level; we need an easier  one. When this happens, you should oblige. If they voted for soft talking Workshop,  and four or more students talk above that level, say the following: Oh, man. Looks like you guys have chosen start whispering and put two  fingers on your throat whispering Workshop. Again, this script can be more casual with secondary students, and if you have a volunteer Retuner, this is even more the case. If you are the Retuner, however, do not  omit your Calm Signal, no matter how casual your language becomes. The expectation is that everyone is now in whispering Workshop. Whispering  Workshop is quieter and easier to monitor anyway! Hooray for you! Once in whispering Workshop, when four or more students talk above whispering, say, while still  whispering: Oh, man. Looks like you all have chosen silent Workshop. The expectation is that everyone is now in silent Workshop. Silence! Yes! You thought  you would have to wait until the end of the day, and now you get it early. Plus, silence  is incredibly easy to manage! Do you see how you have flipped the script? Do you see how, without this procedure, you have to hope and pray that students dont get too loud, but with this procedure, you will hope that they do get too loud? Once in silent Workshop, when four or more students talk or whisper say, while  still whispering: Oh, man. Looks like you are not ready to do Workshop at all. Could everyone please put their heads down and listen to our silence while I get some  work done? Thanks. Students should then have their heads down for as long as Real-World Workshop  was supposed to last. Use this Class Head Down PLO when necessary. If you have  three minutes left, their heads will be down for that amount of time. The same is true  if you have 45 minutes left. In all my years of teaching, I only had to shut it down three times. Two of those  times, there were less than 10 minutes left. That makes senseit should take a long  time for four or more students to fail over and over. Because of this, you will usually  only have a few minutes for shut down time. One time, I did have to shut it down 
The Classroom Behavior Manual with 45 minutes to go. After a couple of whispered uses of the Class Head Down PLO,  everyone sat with their heads down silently, and I got 44 minutes of grading done. I also never had to shut them down again. Preventive Movement As detailed in Chapter 4, Preventive Movement is an essential part of the RealWorld Workshop procedure. Make sure that you are moving around as much as is  feasible for you. Instructing, grading, and holding students accountable for their  Nows while walking around with a gradebook is one great way to prevent negative  behaviors with your movement. Instructing, grading, and teaching from a seated position at your desk and, optimally, from a reading table also has its advantages, especially if you can have several  students immediately around you. When you lead the class from this position, it is  important to occasionally do a Preventive Sweep by getting up and moving around  the room before sitting back at your table or desk. The goal of both of these Preventive  Movement strategies is to create intermittent reinforcement so your students   will have to think twice about negative behaviors, since you could be just around   the corner. Strategic Noticing This strategy, also detailed in Chapter 4, is likewise essential to Real-World  Workshop. One simple statement can be used to supercharge the effectiveness of this  procedure: I noticed you using the right voice level. Refer to Chapter 4 for more about the why of Strategic Noticing and with which  students this should be privateindividual, publicindividual, or whole group, but  this statement should be made every four minutes, at least, at the beginning of the  year during Workshop. Your students want to be noticed. Even older students will often get visibly happier when they are on the receiving end of Strategic Noticing. Your difficult students  have been noticed in the past for being loud in class; that is why they have been loud  in class in the past. By noticing them having the appropriate voice levels over and  over again, you are giving them and everyone around them instructions about how  they can use their voice level to get attention in your classroom.

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     171 Gentle Guidance Interventions   During Real-World Workshop Only use all of the fantastic and helpful Gentle Guidance Interventions GGIs  that you will learn in Chapter 9 when guiding non-voice-level behaviors. In other  words, any other behavior can be dealt with using these interventions, but do not  use them for voice level infractions. For instance, you can use GGIs for two students  grabbing at each other, a student being out of their seat, or a student eating in class,  but you would use the in-built PLOs for two students talking above an agreed-to voice  level. The only sort of exception to this guideline is when you are not quite able to  tell if students are above the class-prescribed voice level. In that circumstance, you  can consider using an interventionusually an Eye Intervention 14, and nearly  always one of the nonverbal interventions 124. Feel free to skip over to Chapter 9  for a sneak peek at those interventions. Put It All Together Real-World Workshop is, by far, the most involved procedure described in this  book. Relative to other procedures, it takes the longest to learn. But it is also a highly  effective tool. Remember, all independent work that can be done while students are  allowed to talk or work cooperatively should be done through Real-World Workshop! Silent Work Procedure Times that students are not allowed to talk or work independently e.g., state testing  or Silent Sustained Reading time call for the Silent Work procedure. Fortunately, you  have already learned it! The Silent Work Procedure is just the Real-World Workshop  procedure without any choices about voice level. You can even do music choices if  appropriate and turn the music off as an immediate consequence for less than perfect silent work behavior. All PLOs for voice level infractions are the same, including  shutting it down. You are just starting off on silent. You can use the Silent Work procedure for mandated testing, though in this  case you cannot use the ear-tuning PLO. You will only be able to use interventions  and Delayed Learning Opportunities for voice level infractions, since you cannot  take time away from the tests. For all other learning activities for which you have an 
The Classroom Behavior Manual expectation of silence, you can use the PLOs for students who talk just like in RealWorld Workshop. The only caveat to this is that if you are giving a nonmandated test  and you use the head-down PLO, you must give that student the time back later preferably during noninstructional time so they have the same amount of time to finish  testing as their classmates. Silent Sustained Reading Use the Silent Work procedure for any Silent Sustained Reading SSR time.  Without the procedure and PLOs, it is nearly impossible to have students read and  work silently, as called for in many reading curricula, while the teacher works with  small, usually leveled, groups. This is true for Silent Sustained Reading from preK  through high school. Following are additional techniques that will enhance the  Silent Work Procedure during SSR. Three weeks of modeling. Kids have a hard time emulating what they have  never seen, and some kids have never seen an adult read a book. If they have never  seen an adult read a book, at worst, they might feel like they are having to read as  some sort of punishment. At best, they may feel alienated from the process of reading. If they have never seen an adult read a book, they will never see reading as just  a thing that people do, and they will be very likely to be resistant to reading. That  is why, for the first three weeks of school, the only job assigned to you during Silent  Work is to read a good book that you enjoy while following the procedure. Taking  time to model reading during the first three weeks of school will result in getting that  time back many times over throughout the year. In addition, you actually get to take  care of yourself by relaxing with a good book in the middle of the school day! Lock it in. If your curriculum calls for you to teach a reading lesson, do so at  the beginning of your reading period or block. Once finished, dismiss your students  to get books and begin Silent Work using the Lock-It-In procedure see Chapter 7,  taking special care to do it slowly enough that each team is mostly out of the way and  reading before the next team is called.  If you have made it to the point where students are locking it in, start reading  immediately after picking your Lock-It-Iner the first student you see who is sitting  quietly at a clean desk or whatever your expectation is.  An advanced move that will help you simultaneously build relationships, share  ownership, and share control is to pick the Lock-It-Iner and direct them to dismiss  you when you are ready: Damien, you are ready. Could you lock it in? Remember to  treat me like a team and dismiss me to Silent Work when you notice that I am ready.  Then sit at your desk or table if students are at their desks, or sit on the carpet if 

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     173 students are at the carpet. Alternatively, you could sit with a team and be Locked-In  with them. This can be particularly useful in order to create proximity with a team  who is having trouble being ready. Position yourself by putting a chair in a Power Position see Chapter 3, and  assume an assertive, seated stance while reading. This tells students that you are in  charge; nothing they can do will change that. Knowing who the alpha is and not  having to figure it out for themselves is calming for students. Combine reading with Preventive Movement. Read your book for a minute or  two. Make sure you have a drink, snack, or both. Again, this alpha move shows that  you are in charge without telling your students so. Then, without taking your eyes off  your book, do a Behavioral Sweep. Slowly walk around the room while reading. Just  like in Real-World Workshop, use Gentle Guidance Interventions only for behaviors  that do not have to do with voice level. Again, only use your PLOs for talking. Afternoon Meeting All students, preK12, have an end to their day, and all students, preK12, are human.  In order for humans to feel an optimal sense of satisfaction with an experience, they  require closure. Both students and teachers can obtain this sense of closure through  the Afternoon Meeting procedure. Part of this closure literally involves checking off  the classs to-do list. The Morning Meeting allows students to say to each other, This  is what we will achieve. This is the reason why we are here today. The Afternoon  Meeting allows them to say, This is what we achieved today. In addition to creating a sense of purpose and closure daily, the Afternoon  Meeting procedure gives students a feeling of control by allowing them to run this  part of the day. As a teacher, you will do very little and exert minimal energy during a  time when most teachers have very little energy left. Finally, after achieving closure  to the academic day, students will have the opportunity to end each day with a fun,  nonacademic game or activity to end on a good note. The procedure for Afternoon Meeting detailed below is generally for elementary students who are in a self-contained room all day or intermediate students who  switch classes midday. Secondary teachers should read this procedure with an eye  toward picking and choosing small parts of the procedure for the end of each class  period, or only for their last class period of the day. Of special importance is that  all secondary class periods have some kind of closure to the lesson and connection  to what will be learned the next school day, and that the last period of the day has  that element plus at least some token closure statement for the day and some kind 
The Classroom Behavior Manual of announcement about the following school day. This trains everyone, including  you, to think, I accomplished something today, and I will accomplish something  tomorrow, instead of There went another time period of random activity; I suppose  another one will happen tomorrow. Secondary school closure statements may sound  like the following: 	 Single class period closure Student: Today we learned about elements of quadratic equations. Tomorrow we will learn about using those equations to solve  real-world problems. 	 Last period closure Student: Today we learned about elements of quadratic  equations. Tomorrow we will learn about using those equations to solve realworld problems. Remember to wear school colors for Spirit Day tomorrow.  Goodnight, everybody! Be safe driving home! As always, give away as much control to students as is effective and appropriate  on how this is done and what is said. Secondary teachers should also see below for  specific secondary Activity Choices. At every level, the Afternoon Meeting procedure allows students to proclaim  every day, This is our classroom, we are awesome, and this is what we accomplished  together! Afternoon Prompt The student hired as End of Day Prompter see Chapter 6 prompts the class to  prepare for Afternoon Meeting at a predetermined time. When selecting the correct  time for the End of Day Prompt, do not make the mistake of giving the students considerably more time than they will need to get ready for the meeting in the future.  Teachers who do this accidentally train their students to be slower at this transition  than they need to be. Instead, assign a time that you think will be appropriate for  your students all year long. If you pick the right time, students will feel challenged  to be ready in a timely manner. Give extra support at the beginning of the year in the  form of Gentle Guidance Interventions, with an emphasis on the questions from the  Question Matrix see Chapter 9. Allow students to rise to the challenge with your  calm guidance. Most important, remember to use Strategic Noticing with students  and teams who are transitioning quickly: 	 I notice Red is being efficient and quick. 	 I notice the Dinos taking care of business.

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     175 The possible exceptions to this rule of thumb are for preK and kindergarten.  These students develop physiologically and neurologically so rapidly and their ability to complete tasks increases so quickly that the teacher should usually shorten   the amount of time given to prepare for Afternoon Meeting once or twice as the year  goes on. Team of the Day Responsibilities When prompted, the TOD goes into high gear. Besides the responsibilities placed  on all students at this time see below, TOD tasks can include the following: 	 Custodial duties: sweeping, vacuuming, taking out the trash, wiping down  doorknobs, wiping down boards, etc. 	 Closing windows and blinds 	 Cleaning and organizing common and teacher areas: reading tables, reading  chair, teacher desk Who does what on any given day is not your concern; TODs should be left to  decide who does what. Any attempt on your part to try to manage the process will  have extensive negative effects on student ownership, student cooperation, and student enthusiasm. When left alone, students work out an infinite number of ways to  divide up and complete labor. Some students just do the thing they like to do all year:  kids who find sweeping to be satisfactory sweep every time their team is the TOD.  Some kids love organizing the reading area. Some teams come up with complicated  rotations of duties. Some teams have had one rotating person do all TOD responsibilities while the other members of the team gather that persons personal items. After  many years of using this procedure, I have been amazed by how creative and cooperative students are. It is extremely rare for students to refuse to pitch in, as long as you  can keep yourself from interfering. Dont intervene when a student isnt contributing; you will find that the natural consequences of laziness and not being helpful will  almost always change their behavior toward being more helpful. Just as with TOD disagreements during Morning Meeting, you should avoid  being tricked into owning the TODs problems. If there is any kind of disagreement  that does not involve activities that may cause lasting harm, respond by saying: Oh, man. Can you solve this, or would you like me to solve it for you? If the person who asks this responds that the TOD will solve the problem, wish them  good luck and walk away. If they say that you should solve it, hire another team to be  TOD for the rest of the daywhich includes running Afternoon Meeting.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Team Captain Responsibilities Each team captains Afternoon Meeting responsibilities may include the  following: 	 Wiping down all team desks or tables and all team areas with a bleach wipe 	 Delivering mail from mailboxes to student desks 	 Anything else that is specifically for the benefit of each team that can be done  by a student Again, if teachers stay away from the inner workings of the teams, it is rare that  team captains will refuse to do their duties. If they do start refusing during Afternoon  Meeting, instruct the next student in line for team captain duties to take over for the  rest of the day and continue as team captain the next day. Student Responsibilities Students should be responsible for organizing their own materials and having  them ready to go on their desks. All mail should be put away in folders. Students  should be seated silently. At this point, classes that gather their belongings on their  way to be dismissed and do not go to a carpet for Afternoon Meeting are ready for  Afternoon Meeting. Students who gather their belongings before Afternoon Meeting  should be dismissed using the Lock-It-In procedure see Chapter 7. If they are to go to  a carpet, that is where they go. If they are to go to their desks, they go to their desks. Celebrations When students have completed their responsibilities, the TOD team captain  stands up, goes to the front of the room next to the Celebrations Board, and says the  following: I will start Celebrations when everyone is seated silently. This is a good time for the teacher to sit among the students and use Gentle Guidance  Interventions Chapter 9. If students are not quiet after a reasonable amount of time,  consider a Delayed Learning Opportunity. The TOD team captain then chooses students who wish to celebrate their classmates, teachers, administrators, or anyone in their lives for living up to words that  are used as part of their classs character education program. Once the Celebrations  have all been read or the teacher notices that the class is running out of time, the TOD  team captain reviews the days schedule.

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     177 Daily Schedule Review A review of the days accomplishments is an essential part of Afternoon Meeting.  For older students, this review will almost always be less specific and more casual  in nature, since middle and high school students sharing their last period class will  almost never have done all of the same lessons. Nevertheless, some sort of final  review or checklist should be performed by a student for the benefit of all at the end  of the day. The TOD team captain can also use this time for announcements or reminders  about upcoming events. Middle and high school students will likely be better at this  than their younger counterparts, and they should be allowed to take as much ownership of these duties as theyd like. For younger students, it is necessary to review  the lessons and events of the day in terms of what was done and what was learned. In  this case, the TOD team captain points to each item on the list and asks for a choral  response from the class. TOD team captain: Did we do Morning Meeting? Class: Yes! TOD team captain puts a check mark next to Morning Meeting. TOD team captain: Did we learn about rays and angles? Class: Yes! TOD team captain puts a check mark next to Learn about rays and angles. TOD team captain: Did we write a thank-you card to Officer James? Class: No! TOD team captain circles Write a thank-you card to Officer James. TOD team captain: Did we learn to throw a ball at a target in PE? Class: Yes! TOD team captain puts a check mark next to Learn to throw a ball at a target in  PE. . . . and so on. Besides giving a tremendous amount of healthy control and ownership to students, this schedule review subprocedure gives you the added benefit of being able  to look at the daily schedule and see, at a glance, what was and was not accomplished  that day. Any circled items can appear on the next days schedule. Activity Choices or Ceremony At this point of Afternoon Meeting, you can either allow the students to choose  a game or hold a Nickname Ceremony see Chapter 5. The daily game choices must  be given by you, at least at first. If and when appropriate, and if and when you are 
The Classroom Behavior Manual ready, students can run this part of the day. Secondary teachers should turn this  procedure over to students almost immediately. Activities should be fun, generally  not academic, and often team-building exercises. Fun exercises at the end of the day  make all of Afternoon Meeting more functional because it becomes a motivating situation MS. When students are in an MS, the natural consequence of losing out on the  MS trains them to be cooperativeas long as you allow the natural consequence to   befall students without anger or lectures, and as long as you dont save students   from that consequence. Students quickly realize that the faster they get through  Afternoon Meeting and depending on the school and grade level, get their belongings and be ready to leave, the more time they have to take part in the Afternoon  Meeting activity. As long as the ceremony and games are fun and developmentally  appropriate so that the students enjoy them at least as much as going home, you  can maintain an MS that will, more than any other procedure, create and allow you  to maintain a functional end to your school day. You should recognize this same  dynamic from Real-World Workshop: the harder students work and the more responsible they are, the better their life becomes, and the better the lives of the people  around them become. Extremely entertaining and compelling activity choices at the end of the day are  the engine for a successful Afternoon Meeting: transitions will be more efficient,  students will use more positive behaviors, and they will be more likely to hold each  other accountable. Just like with Laters and Real-World Workshop, you cannot  make students do things, but you can control how compelling, fun, and awesome  the Afternoon Meeting activity choices are. These can be games that you know to be  favorites of your students, or any other activity that is fun and appropriate. Introduce  them one at a time throughout your day as brain breaks. Do this multiple times per  day during the first two weeks as beta testing to find out which activities and games  your students enjoy most. Use their favorites as Afternoon Meeting activities. Potential games are listed below, but here is a word on activities. One of the three  choices you give should be more of an activity; sit around and talk is one choice that  was usually available at the end of the day for my students. Pull up appropriate  videos on the internet can be another. Even if you know what your students favorite  activity or game is, you still need to give them a choice every day. Remember, within  every choice is a healthy rejection: when a high school senior chooses sit around and  talk five times in a row while rolling her eyes, she is rejecting on your terms your suggestion of two other games that she might think are stupid and beneath such a cool,  mature person such as herself. Make sure you cycle through all games and activities,  and dont have any game or activity available every day.

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     179 How to Begin Activity Choices Say the following from a Power Position: I will give activity choices when everyone is seated silently. Then wait. Do nothing but wait and pray that your students keep talking until all time is  gone and everyone has to leave. Hope that this happens on multiple days. As previously stated, this is an MS: not being able to participate in the situation is a consequence in and of itself. In very, very rare cases I have never experienced it during the  use of this procedure, you can give whole-group, small-group, or individual Delayed  Learning Opportunities for the failure to be silent to a prompt once that student or  those students have sufficiently frustrated their classmates over the course of several  days. Once everyone is silent, offer three activity choices, even if you are 100 percent  sure you know what the students will pick. Hopefully you were able to teach and  beta-test three activities on your first day. Have students vote. Play the winning game  and have fun! The Magic of Choices When I was teaching, after the TOD team captain completed the review of the  daily schedule, I would walk to my chair in front of my students before giving  the Activity Choices prompt: I will give activity choices when everyone is  seated silently. Every single year, for 10 years of doing this procedure, something magical  occurred in the first three weeks of school. Before I could even sit down in my  chair, students would say the same word to each otherthe same word for  10 straight years: Choices! Choices! they would say, often followed by some  shushing. After four or five weeks, the class would consistently go silent before  I could make it to my chair.  This can happen for any teacher who picks games and activities that are at  least as stimulating as going home. Games Red Ball. Students and teachers stand in a circle so that everyone can see each  other. The teacher pantomimes catching an invisible ball thrown from an invisible 
The Classroom Behavior Manual person and says, Thank you. The teacher looks at the ball and says, Red ball. The  teacher then makes eye contact with a student. The teacher pantomimes throwing the ball toward that student in a deliberate  manner, slowly following through toward the targeted student. The student repeats  all of the above actions, choosing another student or throwing the ball back to the  teacher. Once students seem to have achieved a reasonable amount of fluency, the teacher  repeats the above actions, this time accepting an invisible blue ball from the invisible ball thrower. There are now two invisible balls in play. The teacher adds a new  invisible ball of a different color, of course every 30 seconds or so. As long as the students are successful, keep adding balls of different colors.  When students are keeping a normal number of balls going for their developmental  level, use normal boring colors red, blue, green. Once they start to keep a number of balls going that seems to be particularly impressive, start adding ball colors  that ignite the imagination a bit silver, gold, rainbow, white fire, indigo. If you can  remember and repeat the same color order on different days, it can add to the excitement for kids, especially ones who have been raised using leveled video games. This game teaches kids to listen quietly, to concentrate, and to work cooperatively, but dont tell students what they should be learning. Instead, let the game do the  teaching. Czechoslovakia Boom-Sha-Boom. This game involves the students and teacher  standing in a circle so everyone can see everyone else. The teacher slowly and  methodically demonstrates a basic clapping motion as students join in: clap, thigh  slap, clap, thigh slap. The teacher tells students that the first time through this weird  song, they should just listen, unless they start to figure out the pattern and want to try  joining in on the first run-through. The teacher begins singing the following song to the beat of slow clappingthigh  slapping: Czechoslovakia boom-sha-boom Yugoslavia boom-sha-boom Whos got the rhythm of the hands? clap-clap-clap We got the rhythm of the hands. clap-clap-clap Whos got the rhythm of the feet? stomp-stomp-stomp We got the rhythm of the feet. stomp-stomp-stomp Whos got the rhythm of the hips? ono-mato-poeia while doing a running motion  with fists and shaking hips from side to side with each part of the word We got the rhythm of the hips. ono-mato-poeia same motions

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     181 Whos got the rhythm of the eyes? wooooooo!!!! while throwing hands in the air We got the rhythm of the eyes. wooooooo!!!! same motions The teacher then says, Everybody! and goes through the song slightly faster. The  song gets faster each time until students can no longer keep up. This game teaches kids to listen, concentrate, and work cooperatively. Shake It Out. This game involves students and teachers standing in a circle so  everyone can see everyone else. The teacher briefly describes how to play the game,  and asks for students to join in. The teacher shakes a hand limp-wristedly, as if to flick  something sticky off, counting each shake up to 10: 1-2-3-4-5-6-7-8-9-10. The teacher  then does the same with the other hand, then with one foot kicking a limp foot forward off the ground 10 times and then the other foot. The group then repeats the sequence of shakes, counting only to 9 each time:  1-2-3-4-5-6-7-8-9. Next, the sequences go to 8, 7, and so on, speeding up slightly as the  game proceeds. The game ends when everyone very quickly counts to one with each  appendage: 1-1-1-1! This game teaches kids to listen, concentrate, and work cooperatively. Mr. Ervin Dodgeball. This game should be played in a gym or outside with one  or two foam dodgeballs. Play this game at your own risk and do not use anything other  than official foam dodgeballs. Using anything else will likely cause injuries, and Ervin  Educational Consulting is not responsible for any injuries incurred by playing this  game. In any case, make sure your administrator approves the playing of this game. Create boundaries for play. The field of play should be small enough that students can all be eliminated by being hit with balls in a reasonable amount of time,  but big enough that they can run freely without running into each other. If physical  boundaries lines on a gym floor or trees, bushes, or outer walls of the school are  not available, use cones, or ask four students who do not wish to play to be the four  corners of the field of play. Rules 	 The objective of the game is to be the last player remaining. 	 The teacher is the all-time thrower of balls. If the teacher hits a student anywhere on their body, they are out. 	 If the student catches the ball, they are out. 	 If the ball bounces off the ground and hits the student, they are out. 	 If the ball bounces off another student and hits a student, both are out. 	 If a student goes outside the boundaries, they are out.
The Classroom Behavior Manual 	 If a ball is motionless on the ground, a student may pick it up and throw it back  to the teacher. That student cannot be a target for one throw from the teacher.  Once that teacher throws the ball at someone else, that student can be a target  again. 	 If a ball goes outside the boundaries, students may retrieve it and give it to the  thrower without being counted as out. 	 As each student is hit and is out, they stand along the barrier, forming a physical  rectangle around the playing area. 	 The last student remaining wins. Variations This game can be played with one ball and one teacher, two balls and one teacher,  or two balls and two teachers. The winner can become the thrower in the next game,  which can be played without the teacher, but the teacher being the thrower helps  greatly in building relationships with students, so be a thrower whenever you can.  Finally, the teacher can be a thrower at the same time as a student. Remember, the key word is fun. Make sure you are having fun. Make sure the  students are having fun. If the last thing you do before you do your ESPN Goodbye is  enjoy the company of your students, and your students see you enjoying them, it will  go a long way toward building relationships with your students. ESPN Goodbye Procedure The final Control-Sharing Procedure is an ESPN Goodbye. Where you give the ESPN  Goodbye will depend upon where, according to the logistics of your school, you last  see your students. Secondary teachers can even do this at the end of each period.  Though this form of the ESPN Goodbye may only be a high five or fist bump or some  other tap for reasons of timing, it will go a very long way to show your students that  you care about them. Usually, secondary teachers will last see their last period students as they walk  out of the classroom. Elementary teachers could be dismissing bus students, car  riders, and after-school care students from the room or dropping them off in bus  lots, after-school care, or car lots. Wherever you last see a student, that is where you  should use the ESPN Goodbye procedure. You can decide when to use a standard handshake and when to use the Class  Handshake. Often, teachers use the former in the morning and the latter at the end of 

Academic Control-Sharing Procedures     183 the day. This is most consistently true of secondary teachers, who prefer the quicker  remember it has to last less than a second for secondary school Class Handshake  when they have less time at the end of the day. For all grade levels, doing an ESPN  Goodbye from any location offers the added benefit of staggering the relocation of  your students to any given space, whether it is the hallway outside your classroom, a  bus lot, a car lot, or an after-school care room or area. The main benefit of the ESPN Goodbye is so very important: to let each and every  student know that, even though you are not required to do it, you are taking the time  to say goodbye to them because you care about them and like them enough to do it.  This consistent routine will improve the lives of your students, especially those who  may not be experiencing consistent routines and expressions of care at home.

By now you should be noticing that these procedures complement and enhance  each other: procedures that build relationships also share control, and procedures  that share control help to build relationships. When used together, these procedures  turn classrooms into control-sharing and relationship-building machines. If you  set the machine into motion in your first three weeks, it will create and perpetuate  a classroom environment that is safe, calm, and kinda place where students can  work, struggle, grow, and learn.
Part IV Control-Sharing   Strategies Hold students accountable without power struggles. Michaels oldest brother was in prison for murder. He had another brother, still a  minor, in juvenile detention for manslaughter. Michael was 7. Michael did not start the year in my 1st grade classroom. He was in Ms. Crushers  room. Five weeks into the school year, while in a lunch line, he grabbed another student and threw him face-first into a lunch table. The students open mouth slammed  into the side of the table in such a way that the table edge split both sides of his mouth  all the way up to his jaw. The injury required hundreds of stitches extending from the  edge of each side of his mouth almost all the way up to each ear. Michael was suspended for the last three weeks of our year-round schools trimester before a three-week break. During those six weeks, it had not crossed the  mind of our principal that the victim should not have to spend the rest of 1st grade in  the same classroom with the student who had permanently disfigured him. Instead, 
The Classroom Behavior Manual she made this decision the morning we returned from break. I was informed that  Michael would be in my class for the remainder of the school year just five minutes  before the start of the first school day of the second trimester. This was less than optimal, as my classroom during my second year of teaching  was already a mess of a place. Chaos reigned. A vast majority of my students came  from homes in crisis, and they ran the room. No amount of yelling and attempts at  bossing students around had done anything but cause more chaos. As rough as most  of my students were, I knew that Michael was on another level. Of course, I knew all  about the attack. I knew that Michael lived a traumatic existence at home. I knew all  about how both of his brothers had killed people. I also knew that Michael, and students like him who had lives filled with trauma,  had brains that had been short-circuited by these traumatic experiences. I knew  that they were often hardwired to have problems with attention and making good  choices, and that they were more prone to being aggressive or belligerent when faced  with challenges and problems. They would perceive and react to threats that werent  really there. I also knew that I had 300 seconds to prepare for Michaels arrival. As I walked my students including my new one from the gym where we congregated every morning for breakfast, I was overwhelmed by just how totally useless  all of this knowledge was. I knew that this students trauma had turned him into a  person who used aggression, belligerence, and potentially homicidal actions to get a  feeling of control. Well, so what? What was I supposed to do about it? Having had no instruction on  how to interact with a student like this or any of my other students, for that matter, I  attempted to manage Michael with the only two possible strategies I could think of:  being really nice to him so as not to anger him, and ignoring his negative behaviors. As he walked through the classroom doorway, I immediately realized that  there would be no honeymoon period. In Michaels first 60 seconds in the classroom, he used belligerent aggression to establish his dominance as the alpha in the   environmentand I was powerless to do anything about it. Yelling at me, challenging  other students to fight, and grabbing things out of peoples hands all happened in that  first minute. Just ignore him, I said to my students and myself, over and over, as he walked  around the room destroying school and student property. Ignoring negative behaviors started to seem like an insufficient strategy as the dollar amount of destroyed  property started to tally up, and Michaels yelled questions of What are you looking  at? intensified to death threats.

Part IV: Control-Sharing Strategies     187 As I attempted to ignore negative behaviors and be nice to Michael, his behaviors  escalated, as did my blood pressure. After 40 minutes in the classroom, I abandoned  the strategies of ignore and be nice all at once. ALL RIGHT, THATS IT! If you ever hear yourself saying these words, try your best to stop talking. No  one has ever followed up ALL RIGHT, THATS IT! by saying something smart or  helpful. YOU ARE NEVER GOING TO RECESS EVER AGAIN! I was so far gone and so fully controlled by my brain stem that I am surprised now  that I was able to form words of any kind. This ridiculous, unenforceable punishment  notification sent Michael into the stratosphere. Formerly targeting his belligerence  toward specific people and things, his path of destruction now became an arbitrary  and violent tantrum. As he began to roar and tear things off the wall, kicking and  hitting anyone around him, I reacted. NOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO! I bellowed, as I grabbed Michael by the  arm and pulled him out of the classroom and down the short hallway to the principals office. As Michael and I burst through her office door, she was sitting in a meeting with another adult whose job appeared, at that moment, to be significantly easier  than mine. Taking Michael by both shoulders now, I extended my arms forward  toward my principal. HERE! I said, before storming out of the office. Translation: YOU DID THIS TO ME, AND NOW I AM DOING THIS TO YOU!

Michael came from a profoundly unsafe, unpredictable, dangerous home environment where he practiced extremely negative behaviors such as stealing, lying,  and physical assault. These behaviors elicited anger, yelling, and physical abuse from  his mother and grandmother. These reactions from the women in his life began and  perpetuated the Bad Kid Cycle. You have learned how to break this cycle; you have learned to remain calm and  not give students the anger that they are trying to elicit with negative behaviors by  using the Calm Signal. You have learned how to systematically give students attention when they are using positive behaviors by using Strategic Noticing. For Michael,  the use of the Calm Signal and Strategic Noticing would still not be enough to break  the Bad Kid Cycle. 
The Classroom Behavior Manual Even if Calm Signals, Strategic Noticing, and the procedures were used, it would  not have been effective enough for Michael to be successful at being a positive contributor to his class in the short term and to his world in the long term. Because of  his level of trauma, Michael would use so many negative behaviors at such a high  frequency rate that those negative behaviors would have overwhelmed his class and  teacher before the Bad Kid Cycle could be reversed, before the procedures were able  to offer enough healthy control, and before they could build enough of the necessary  relationships. The final, missing piece that Michael would have needed is the content  of this section: Control-Sharing Strategies. Control-Sharing Strategies help you react to negative behaviors and change them  into positive ones in ways that are minimally intrusive and less likely to trigger explosive behaviors from students. They include Delayed Learning Opportunities DLOs  and Gentle Guidance Interventions GGIs. There are hundreds of thousands of Michaels all over the country. They deserve  to have a chance at success, and without these Control-Sharing Strategies, used over  time, their chances of success are minimal.

Control-Sharing Strategies are also important for Mykeshas. Mykesha was a happy, healthy student from a functional family, and she was  in the same class as Michael. She exclusively used positive behaviors, and she was  pulled out of my class by her parent because my room was physically dangerous and  she wasnt learning anything. There are tens of millions of Mykeshas in our country:  students who cannot learn anything in their classrooms because their schools are  being destroyed by Michaels. The bottom line is that both Mykeshas and Michaels deserve a positive, loving  environment in which they can feel safe, have fun, and learn. It is a civil right. It is a  human right. The following chapters will show you Gentle Guidance Interventions  that will allow you to mitigate low-level negative behaviors and gently guide students  away from those behaviors without creating power struggles that make behaviors  worse. One of these chapters is about a special GGI called a Mindfulness Break, which  allows students to take as much time as they need to regain the composure necessary  to again be a positive, prosocial member of the classroom. Delayed Learning Opportunities are the terminal destination for repeated  or serious negative behaviors not prevented by Relationship-Building Strategies,  Relationship-Building Procedures, and Control-Sharing Procedures and not mitigated 

Part IV: Control-Sharing Strategies     189 by Gentle Guidance Interventions. When all of these strategies and procedures have  failed, it means that the student is waving a flag at the adults in his or her life as if to  say, I need a real lesson about how to use positive behaviors or a lesson about responsibility. This chapter will show you how to notify the student of this lesson, and then  it will show you specifically how to teach the lesson. Once you have learned these Control-Sharing Strategies, you will possess the full  arsenal of behavioral leadership procedures and strategies. You will be ready to be a  behavioral leader!
9 Gentle Guidance   Interventions As anyone who remembers their own childhood can attest, students sometimes get  slightly off track by dabbling in negative behaviors in such a way that it doesnt cause a  major problem, and they just need to get guided back to the right path. Unfortunately,  the traditional ways of guiding students back to using positive behaviors warnings,  demands, lectures, and threats will drive explosive, unhealthy students into worse  behaviors while being less than effective with all students. A vast majority of the time, negative behaviors can be dealt with by using Gentle  Guidance Interventions GGIs. GGIs are ways of calmly guiding students to use positive behaviors that do not frighten or intimidate students, even if those students have  a propensity for being easily frightened or intimidated. GGIs are the first intervention to use to help Michaels and Mykeshas learn the most important lessons they will  ever learn: that negative behaviors dont work and that positive, prosocial behaviors  are the pathway to success and happiness. Avoiding the Impossible Choice When a student uses a minor negative behavior that causes problems for other  people but does not require what are traditionally called punishments or consequences, traditional discipline requires that educators make an impossible choice. 

Gentle Guidance Interventions     191 The outcomes of this choice are both bad, and they destroy classroom environments   over time. The two choices are as follows: 1.	 The teacher can ignore the behavior or 2.	 The teacher can make a declarative statement that the behavior should stop. The Problem with Ignoring When a student uses a somewhat disruptive behaviorplayfully poking a friend  under a desk, for exampleand the teacher ignores the behavior, the message is  communicated that the teacher either is unaware of the behavior or tacitly approves  of it. Either way, the behavior is reinforced and will be more likely to be used by  that student and by all other students who see the behavior being ignored. Students  will react in various ways to this ignoring. Some will be only slightly more likely to  mimic this playful but negative behavior. Some will immediately mimic, heighten,  and explore this behavior: poking softly becomes poking hard, and poking hard may  become grabbing hard and hurting people. Negative behaviors that get ignored tend  to spread and get worse. The Problem with Declarative Statements The other traditional, commonsense option is to make a simple statement  declaring that the behavior should stop. It seems innocent enough. After all, if you  want someone to stop doing something, it makes sense to tell them to stop doing it.  For some students, this can, at first glance, appear to be successful. The problem, however, is a pesky reality about human beings called psychological reactance. This phenomenon occurs when an unpleasant motivational arousal  emerges when people experience a threat to or loss of their freedom Brehm   Brehm, 1981, p. x; emphasis mine. These people will then work to get back freedoms  that they perceive were taken away. In other words, people dont like to be told what  to do, and when told what to do, they dont react well, often doing the opposite of  what was asked of them. Therefore, telling individuals or entire classrooms full of students what to do  in a declarative way is not an effective means of getting cooperation. It ignores the  reality presented by psychological reactance. When a demand is made through a  declarative statement sit down, work, or get in line, even students who are  generally cooperative will eventually become resistant in passive, reactive, or even  overtly aggressive ways.
The Classroom Behavior Manual The Impossible Choice and the   Most Vulnerable Students This binary choice is most acutely apparent when working with students with  high ACE scores who have high control needs. Any experienced teacher using traditional discipline practices has dreaded making the impossible choice with these  students. From experience, teachers know that they will repeat, intensify, and  explore low-level negative behaviors when they are ignored. They also know that if  they use a declarative statement, even politely worded, to try to stop the behavior,  this type of student is likely to explode, stopping all education and perhaps ruining  the rest of a class period or even an entire morning or afternoon. The Solution to the Impossible Choice The good news is that there is a third option for attending to low-level negative behaviors. This third and most effective option is the use of a Gentle Guidance  Intervention. These interventions are ways of gently guiding students toward positive behaviors, ways that are far more pleasant than declarative statements, even  when those statements are said calmly. GGIs do not embarrass, coerce, threaten, or  scare students into using positive behaviors. They merely guide students toward positive behaviors without the use of such tactics. They are highly effective in this effort  when used in the context of the rest of the procedures and strategies in this manual.  GGIs are not intended to teach students lessons about behavior. When the GGIs fail  to guide students to positive behavior, Delayed Learning Opportunities DLOs; see  Chapter 11 will do the teaching about behavior. How to Use GGIs The 42 GGIs are listed as a menu, ordered from least time-consuming and least intrusive to most time-consuming and most intrusive, although none of the GGIs are truly  time-consuming or intrusive. Use this chapter like a menu at a restaurant. Dont feel  the need to order the first thing on the menu, then the second, then the third, and so  on. Instead, pick and choose the GGIs that you find to be the most appealing. Ignore  the ones that you dont want to use. As you experiment, try to use the GGI with the  lowest number that you feel still fits the situation. These are the interventions that  are the best for you because they take the least time, and they are the best for the student because they are the least intrusive. If the behavior doesnt change, strongly consider moving to other GGIs down the menu before proceeding to Delayed Learning  Opportunities. 

Gentle Guidance Interventions     193 Remember to have fun. These GGIs will not only make your life easier but also  make your impossible choices a thing of the past. Eye Interventions The first four interventions involve merely looking at students. They are called  Eye Interventions. The benefits of Eye Interventions are that they take no time or  energy: you can continue teaching while you use them. The weakness of these GGIs  is that the student must be looking at you. Of course, use these whenever possible.  If you can change a students behavior just by looking at them, why would you do  anything else? 1.	 Curious Eye. Simply look at a student with a curious look. This, as with all  interventions, stimulates student thinking. Whys the teacher looking at  me? Oh, maybe I should stop doing this. 2.	 Confused Eye. Look at a student with the most confused look that you can  muster. With just one look, this intervention separates the student from the  behavior. It says to the student, You are so wonderful, and that behavior is not  wonderful. Whats happening? Im confused. 3.	 Evil Eye. All parents and teachers seem to have this one in their tool belt. 4.	 Crazy Eye. This one is extra-fun! Make your face look as crazy as possible as  you look at the student. How much thinking would this stimulate on the part  of the target studentand everyone else, for that matter? There is only room  for one crazy person in any situation. When working with students, be that  person first! Reactive Movement Interventions Interventions 510 involve stopping behaviors using teacher movement. This is  in contrast to the Preventive Movement strategy described in Chapter 4, which prevents negative behaviors before they start. To an observer, they would look the same.  The only difference is that Reactive Movement Interventions occur in response to a  negative behavior. 5.	 Reactive Movement. Move nonchalantly toward the site of the negative  behavior without drawing any attention to it with eye contact or verbal  reaction. 6.	 Hover. Simply stop your movement next to the site of the negative behavior.  Do not initiate eye contact, but  if the student attempts to initiate it, smile.
The Classroom Behavior Manual 7.	 Stretch the Classroom. Although this GGI is a bit more involved, it takes no  time because you dont need to stop teaching to use it. This is used when a student or another educator is answering a question, or speaking to the class for  any reason, and a negative behavior that requires a GGI takes place. Without  breaking eye contact with the speaker, move so that the line of vision between  you and the speaker intersects with the students using the negative behavior.  You can be 5 feet or 50 feet from the speaker; it doesnt matter. Doing this has  an almost magical effect in neutralizing the behavior. 8.	 Hand on Shoulder. While hovering and, when appropriate, while continuing  to teach, gently place your hand on the shoulder of a student. Again, if the  student tries to create eye contact, simply smile or use Eye Interventions 1,  2, or 4. You may want to continue enthusiastically teaching while keeping  your hand on a shoulder. Remember that this is a menu; you dont need to  use all the GGIs. If you are uncomfortable with touching any students or your  administration doesnt want you to touch students, dont use this one. If you  have students who dont want to be touched, dont use this with them. Use  your best professional judgment! 9.	 Hand on Chair. If you dont want to put your hand on a students shoulder,  you can, instead, put it on the back of their chair. When the chair back of many  plastic chairs is pushed down, it will gently bend to push on the students back,  making them sit up straighter! 10.	 Sit at a Student Desk. This is a fantastic intervention that has many benefits.  First, sitting is great. Your legs deserve a break. Second, it allows you to hover  around students while using less energy. Third, you have a chance to assume  the assertive seated position, which allows you to calmly assert dominance.  To assume the assertive seated position, sit in an empty student chair. If  one is not available, pull up your own and place it near students. Lean back.  Extend your legs forward with heels on the ground. Cross your legs at the  ankles if you like. Put your hands behind your head and interlace your fingers.  Sitting in this way at a student desk says to your students, You all are so easy  to handle that I can do it while sitting down and relaxing. 11.	 Point Down. This is highly effective with students who are not sitting properly  in their seats. If a student is kneeling, sitting on an undercurled leg, or sitting  on the back of a chair, casually pointing down can be highly effective and  minimally intrusive. This GGI can be combined with Confused Eye. Of course,  if none of these ways of sitting bother you, there is no reason to use this GGI!

Gentle Guidance Interventions     195 12.	 Point to the Side. For students who are not quite in the right place, pointing to  the side is far less intrusive than bossing students around regarding their exact  placement in the room. This can be effective in being strict in what you allow  as far as student desks being in the right place, students being in the right place  in line, sitting on the right spot on a learning carpet, and so on. Again, feel free  to combine with Confused Eye. The Stop Matrix These are three ways of stopping instruction that stimulate thinking, take no  effort, and take very little time. They can be used to scaffold the management of  negative behavior as the behavior continues, or they can be used as stand-alone GGIs. 13.	 Stop. This GGI, like many others, is one that teachers have been using for years  that was created simply through trial and error. When a student is using a lowlevel negative behavior, simply stopping instruction without making any other  movement or change in eye focus is highly effective in getting students to stop  their negative behaviors and does not bring attention to the students using  the negative behavior. Once the behavior stops, teaching continues. 14.	 StopLook to the Middle Distance. This intervention is the same as 13, but  it also involves you lifting your gaze over the heads of your students toward,  usually, a back wall. 15.	 StopLook at Student. This can be done in tandem with any of the Eye  Interventions. 16.	 StopUse a Mindfulness Center. See Chapter 10. 17.	 Shoulder Drum. This can stimulate thinking in students who are not in the  right place in the room or can gently bring space cadets back to Earth. It must  be done exactly as described here. While passing by a student, take your index  and middle fingers on each hand and gently tap on both shoulders of a student, playing a rhythm: bum-da-bum. Do not stop walking. Do not look at the  student. 18.	 Work Tap. This is a simple GGI that allows teachers to gently refocus students  on their work if that focus has waned. In order to make sure this is effective, it  needs to be done as described here, with nothing added. Walk by the student  and calmly and gently tap the students work without initiating eye contact  and without stopping for more than a second. This is just a gentle refocus.  Remember, you should never try to make a student work: the Real-World  Workshop procedure will do that for you.
The Classroom Behavior Manual 19.	 Desk Tap. This is exactly the same GGI as the Work Tap, except you simply tap  the desk to refocus the student. 20.	 Contraband Tap. Contraband is something that is, on its face, illegal. Cocaine  and plutonium, for example, are illegal to possess. In classrooms, some other  things are never allowed, for example, cell phones, trading cards, or food. The  possession of contraband in classrooms needlessly causes power struggles for  educators who arent using GGIs. Instead of making demands of students, simply tapping the contraband while walking by can give the student an opportunity to put away the phone, the food, or the Lebron James card while saving  face and not being threatened. Only look at the contraband enough to make  contact with your fingerstwo gentle taps on the object, and never make eye  contact with the student. Again, do not stop moving before, during, or after  the tap. 21.	 Problem Stimuli Tap. This works exactly the same way as Contraband Tap  but does not involve something that is inherently disallowed in the classroom.  Instead, it involves something that has become a problem because of the way  it is being used. A slap-bracelet that is being used not as wrist dcor but for its  slapping properties on another student and a pencil that is being used for its  poking properties have both become problem stimuli. Just tap them and  walk away. Notice that GGIs 121 have allowed the student the opportunity to correct their own  behavior without it being corrected in any way! Remember psychological reactance? Being corrected, as anyone can attest, is unpleasant. This is even more true  for students with a high ACE score. Using GGIs 121 allows teachers to sidestep this  unpleasantness and the resistance that it can generate. Notice that students who are able to change their behavior with the use of GGIs  121 were smart enough to do so? We know this because no one had to tell them what  to do: they told themselves. This is called the assumption of intelligence. When  you assume intelligence, students act smarter, and you build relationships with them.  This idea stands in stark contrast to the implicit assumption of stupidity aligned  with traditional discipline practices, when teachers demand that students do things  that they already know they should be doing. It hurts relationships and tends to make  students act like their IQs are lower than they actually are. You should have a very good reason to use a GGI above 21. Dont correct students  unless you have to.

Gentle Guidance Interventions     197 22.	 Curious EyeQuick Head Shake. This is a combination GGI. Use Curious  Eye 1 while also shaking your head no very quickly. The idea behind the  quick shake is that it shows the student that you are trying to allow them  to save faceyou are trying not to embarrass them, just giving a quick head  shake before anyone notices. This can build the relationship, while calling  them out would hurt it. It says to the student, Lets keep this between us, but  please stop. 23.	 Confused EyeQuick Head Shake. Another combination that is exactly the  same as 19 with a different look. 24.	 Request Thinking Nonverbal. This involves a quick tap of your temple.  Thats it! The silent message is that it would perhaps be a good idea to use some  increased brain power to be able to use the correct, positive behavior. Here is a good place to stop and look back at GGIs 124. Do you notice anything  important? More specifically, do you notice something missing? Something that is a  particularly important part of traditional discipline? Did you notice that there has been absolutely no talking? Thats right, you have not made a single sound! You havent spoken a word.  Talking takes energy that you dont need to spend. If you can stop a behavior without  talking, why would you talk? No teacher in the history of the world has ever walked  to their car at the end of the school day thinking, Today I wish I had talked more to  my students about discipline. While using a GGI above 21 demands a good reason  to do so, you should have a great reason to use an intervention higher than 24! Rest  assured, however, that you will have plenty of students who give you some great reasons to use GGIs 2542, so lets keep going! 25.	 Request Thinking Verbal. You are finally going to speak! This one is done  exactly like 24, but when you point to your temple you calmly say, Think.  This will be helpful scaffolding for students who do not yet know where their  brains are. I have traditionally used the verbal request for thinking once per  year with my students to make sure everyone is familiar with their own brain  location, and then I fall back to the nonverbal intervention. 26.	 Noticing Misdirect. This GGI is sometimes called the perfect intervention.  It is simultaneously a preventive pre-intervention for one student who is using  a positive behavior and a GGI for another student who is using a negative  behavior. Whats more, while most of the other GGIs minimize attention of  negative behaviors, Noticing Misdirect gives no attention to these behaviors.  Even better, you already know how to do it.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Noticing Misdirect is done exactly the same way as  Strategic Noticing, but  with an extra effect. You simply notice the positive behavior of a student or of  students: I notice you playing this game cooperatively, for example. The only  difference between Noticing Misdirect and Strategic Noticing is when you do  it. You can make Strategic Noticing also become Noticing Misdirect by using  it with students who are playing cooperatively near students who are not playing cooperatively. Again, this reinforces the positive behaviors, completely  ignores the negative behaviors, and gently guides the students using the negative behaviors toward positive behaviors. Perfect! 27.	 Preventive Helping. This one is highly effective if done correctly, but it can be  highly destructive when done wrong. Teachers who attempt something close  to this with traditional discipline often destroy their environments. When a student appears to be getting angry and frustrated, but other students have not yet noticed or only noticed in a very minimal way, ask for some  Preventive Helping. Have a teaching tool of some kind at the readya stapler,  a hole punch, or an empty flash drive. Give it to the student and ask them  to take it to another specific teacher relatively nearby. You will have already  talked to this teacher and they know to simply accept the teaching tool and say,  Thank you. This minimizes attention given to the emotional buildup, and it  gives the student a chance to take a break and briefly change environments. What many teachers do is wait until the student is angry in a way that  everyone sees, then allow the student to take a lap whereby they are allowed  to wander around the school. Do not do this. The effects of regularly responding to student emotion this way will usually be catastrophic. Besides the  fact that you are allowing a very angry student to wander around the school  unmonitored, you are also letting all of your students know that they can  leave the room whenever they want as long as they act very, very angrily and  dramatically first. In a matter of days after this action, you may find yourself  in a room full of very angry, dramatic students. 28.	 Assumption of Intelligence. Ninety-nine percent of the time when we tell  students to do something, they already know what they should do. When we  tell students to throw away their food or put away their materials because the  bell rang, we are needlessly taking away control, implying that we think kids  are unintelligent and making them feel bossed around. This statement simply tells the student that you know that they are so  smart that you dont even need to tell them what to do next: You know what 

Gentle Guidance Interventions     199 to do. Say it in passing, without eye contact. Think about how many demands  you could replace with this single GGI. 29.	 Statement of Fact. This is a simple statement that assumes intelligence, most  often used when students or teams are being less than responsible. It is just a  statement of something that is true but should not be. Examples may include  the following: 	 Your desk has stuff under it. 	 Purple Foxes have some things to do before Afternoon Meeting. 	 Theres a coat on the floor. 	 The Astronauts still have mail in their mailboxes. These simple statements prompt students to do what they are supposed to do  without nagging them. The Question Matrix While asking questions is a time-honored part of the teaching of academic subjects that goes back to Socrates, questions are woefully absent in the world of discipline. The effects of this absence are often catastrophic. The words question and demand are antonyms. Demands stimulate psychological reactance and make students less cooperative: human beings dont like being  told what to do. Questions, on the other hand, have an almost magical ability to allow  the person being questioned to take ownership of their life and answer the question,  at least in their mind. Questions also allow the questioner to assume cooperation,  assume intelligence asking a question makes the assumption that the questionee can  answer it, and avoid being anxious about trying to figure out what students should  be doing. After all, when you tell someone what to do, you must first determine what  they should be doing. Doing this for 25 to 35 students at a time is exhausting. By using  the Question Matrix, you can avoid this dynamic. Replacing demands with the following questions can revolutionize your classroom. 30.	 Whats next? A great prompt for a space cadet lost in space for a moment. 31.	 What now? 32.	 Where should you be? For when the cadets start to leave the Milky Way. 33.	 What should you be doing? 34.	 Is now the right time for that? Most behaviors that are negative problem-causing in school arent inherently bad. Running, yelling, and chewing  gum are not the actions of an evil person; they just arent appropriate for  certain locations and times in the school day. Asking this question allows you 
The Classroom Behavior Manual to respectfully let the student think about why the otherwise OK behavior is a  negative behavior in a school context. 35.	 Does that cause a problem? This simply asks if a behavior goes against the  rule that the class made up see Chapter 5. If the student replies that they do  not feel that the behavior causes a problem, this presents an even better opportunity not only to avoid hoarding control but to share that control more fully.  In this case, thoughtfully say the following to the student: You know, you may be right. Lets talk later about this. I want  to hear your thoughts. For now, just do me a favor and stop,  and well figure it out later together. Later, you can ask about the logic behind the students thought process  and render a decision. This shouldnt lead to a Delayed Learning Opportunity.  If you feel that the student is, in fact, correct that the behavior does not cause  a problem, you should agree and even announce the decision to the class,  emphasizing that you were wrong and the student was right. You can also  open the entire discussion up to the class and have them decide. This will build  the relationship whether you agree or disagree with the student. At the very  least, you respected them enough to think that they might be right, and you  took the time to hear them out. 36.	 Are you OK? These should often be the first words by any human who sees  another human being who appears to be suffering. This is very helpful with  students who are in tears, appear to be agitated, have their heads down on a  desk, or walk into a room with a frown. 37.	 Change the Students Location. This is another GGI that has been used by  teachers for years. You can ask a student who is causing a problem to move or  ask a student who is being bothered by the other students negative behaviors  to move. You can also have a student move for no reason at all, just to remove  any possible punitive feeling from this GGI. It is best to assume cooperation  in this case by asking, Could you move over here? Thanks, and immediately  moving away as you say the words. Note that these changes in location are  merely temporary until the next transition. 38.	 Contraband Removal. This can be done as a follow-up to Contraband Tap  if the contraband is not removed. It can also be done as the first intervention when contraband is present. Simply take the contraband. Whether and  when you use this GGI will depend on you: how important is it to you that all 

Gentle Guidance Interventions     201 students are trained to not bring all or certain contraband into the classroom?  It may also be affected by your schools rules for how strict you must be with  cell phones, makeup, electronics, fidget spinners, food, and so on. Use your Calm Signal as contraband is removed. The objects should be put  away. For GGIs 3943, if the removal of student possessions is likely to cause an  explosion of negative behaviors, it may be wiser to simply use your DLO Delaying  Script see Chapter 11 and change the behavior later by using a DLO, because if you  are reasonably sure that explosive behaviors will occur after the use of an intervention, you will have to do a DLO anyway. In this case, this student will still have to learn  some important behaviors, and you can avoid an explosion of negative behaviors.  Similarly, if a student physically attempts to stop you from removing an item, simply  delay the learning opportunity. 39.	 Contraband Removal as a Gateway to a DLO. This is exactly the same as  3842, but you will note figuratively or literally that you will be giving a DLO  at a later time regarding the improper classroom importation of contraband.  Of course, contraband such as weapons, drugs, and alcohol may have to be  dealt with in a manner dictated by school policies, but try to use DLOs whenever possible to deal with even these kinds of rule infractions. 40.	Problem Stimuli Removal. While contraband is, by definition, not allowed to  be present in a classroom, any object can be used in such a way that it causes a  problem. Anything that can be played with can become a distracting toy, and  when it does, GGIs are necessary. Take the item exactly as you do when executing Contraband Removal. 41.	 Problem Stimuli Removal as a Gateway to a DLO. See 39. 42.	 Plan a Meeting. This GGI is usually one that is used for behaviors that almost  need a DLO. Sometimes students just need to be told honestly that their behavior is causing a real problem. This helps the student see you as a real person  who is trying to do a difficult job. Of course, you should never do this at the  moment of the negative behavior. Instead, whisper to the student: Oh, man. We need to have a meeting. Please meet me here at  :. Then, at that time, briefly let the student know that their behavior is  causing a real problem for you, perhaps communicating that the behavior is  making it difficult or impossible for you to do your job. Depending upon the  nature of the behavior, you may want to make an honest statement about the 
The Classroom Behavior Manual fact that other students are becoming very frustrated with them and that this  continued behavior may cause the student to lose friends. This is not to be a  discussion; just make the statement, warmly thank the student for coming,  and dismiss them.
10 Mindfulness Breaks Mindfulness Breaks are a special intervention that require extensive explanation in  order to do them correctly. They can be done at any time and can be initiated by the  students themselves. They are done as needed, without anxiety or haste. Traditional discipline uses something somewhat similar called time-out,  and other common programs use comparable methods. None of these methods is a   true Mindfulness Break and all will come up short, especially when used with difficult students. Not every student can learn and function as a prosocial member of a classroom  during every second of every day. Past and current traumas, lack of sleep, lack of  nutrition, mental or physical illness, or current agitation that is exacerbated by these  other underlying issues can make it impossible for students to learn. Students must  be able to retreat to a minimally stimulating environment so that they can feel a  healthy kind of control and change their own brain chemistry in order to again be  able to be part of the learning environment in a prosocial way. In addition, teachers  need to be able to maintain a functional learning environment by making sure that  students who are not in the right frame of mind for school are not affecting that  learning environment. Mindfulness Breaks offer all of this to all students. The use of these breaks allows  students to understand that it is OK not to be in the right frame of mind for school  and that they have a safe, calm place where they must be until they are able to be a  part of the learning environment. The learning environment is set up for people who 
The Classroom Behavior Manual are ready to be prosocial learners and teachers; others must take Mindfulness Breaks  until the moment they are able to become prosocial learners and teachers. Yes, as a  teacher, you can use Mindfulness Breaks as well. Mindfulness Breaks: What They Are Not Mindfulness Breaks are not desperate, last-ditch attempts to remove the student  after they have become belligerent and angry. They are not punishments that attempt  to inflict pain on students to get them to behave. They are not a way of rejecting students. They are not a means of embarrassing students. They are not a way of hurting  students feelings. They are not time-outs. A Necessary Alternative to Catastrophic Tactics Mindfulness Breaks are a desperately needed alternative to two of the most  hurtful tactics of traditional discipline: sending disruptive students to the principal,  and using a sensory room when students use disruptive behaviors. These tactics  are often employed with the best of intentions by people who care about students.  Unfortunately, sending students to the principal or using a sensory room in this  capacity can destroy entire schoolsand has done so over and over again. At first glance, these two tactics seems to make logical sense. They both accomplish their primary goal: they remove disruptive students from the learning environment so students can learn and teachers can teach. In addition, a sensory room is  designed to give students a chance to return to a functional state of mind and return  to class after someone has engaged the student in sensory activities. Unfortunately, as any experienced teacher can tell you, the negative outcomes  from these tactics far outweigh the supposed benefits, and those benefits are only  immediate in that the student is removed from a negative situation. However,  both tactics make negative behaviors far more likely in the future. To be clear, the  catastrophic effects of a sensory room refer to using a sensory room to house students who have been disruptive. Scheduled trips to a sensory room managed by staff   usually occupational therapy professionals are a functional and appropriate use of  effective interventions. Negative Effects of Sending Students   to the Principals Office Any teacher can tell you that sending a student to the principal does not make  negative behaviors any less likely. Sending students to the office often encourages  negative behaviors, which leads to suspensions, which leads to expulsions, which 

Mindfulness Breaks    205 leads to dropping out, which leads to mass incarceration. Specifically, sending  students to the principals office creates this and other types of dysfunction for the  following reasons: 	 It takes away the teachers power and implies that the teacher should not be  seen as an authority figure. 	 It can diminish the amount of respect that parents have for the teacher as an  authority figure. 	 It can create tension between the principal and teacher if the parties disagree on  how disciplinary situations are handled in the office or in the classroom. 	 It is usually prefaced with warnings and threats, which condition students to  think that they will always be warned or threatened before any action is taken. 	 It doesnt take into account that the principal is often not immediately available  to address the problem. 	 It makes the school office a chaotic place to work. 	 It creates a threatening situation that activates the students brain stem. 	 It creates or continues an unwinnable power struggle. 	 It makes the student feel rejected. 	 It makes the student feel that they are not as good as the other students. 	 It implies that the teacher feels that the student cannot handle the challenges  of life. 	 It is punitive. 	 It takes an undue amount of control from the student. 	 It allows the student to avoid work. 	 It creates logistical problems regarding the student going to or being picked  up by the principal. 	 It rewards students who use negative behaviors to get what they want, as some  combination of attention, control, and avoidance is achieved every time a student is sent to the office. 	 It creates a negative ripple effect: other students who want some combination  of attention, control, and avoidance will see that one student has gotten these  things, so they will use negative behaviors to get these things for themselves.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Negative Effects of Sending Students to a Sensory Room There is no research that shows that sending a student to a sensory room makes  future negative behaviors less likely, and there is significant research that the opposite is true. Specifically, sending students to a sensory room in response to negative  behaviors creates dysfunction for the following reasons: 	 It makes regularly scheduled and extremely positive sensory room activities  dysfunctional. 	 It implies that the teacher feels that the student cannot handle the challenges  of life. 	 It allows the student to avoid work. 	 It creates logistical problems regarding the student going to or being picked  up by a school staff member. 	 It takes an undue amount of control away from the student. 	 It makes the student feel rejected. 	 It makes the student feel that they are not as good as the other students. 	 It rewards students who use negative behaviors to get what they want, as some  combination of attention, control, and avoidance is achieved every time a student is sent to the sensory room. This effect can be greatly magnified depending  on the amount of attention given in the sensory room and the amount of fun to  be had when participating in sensory activities. 	 It creates a negative ripple effect: other students who want some combination  of attention, control, and avoidance will see that one student has gotten these  things, so they will use negative behaviors to get these things for themselves. The Alternative and Solution When done properly, Mindfulness Breaks offer all the positives of these two dysfunctional tactics without any of the negatives. In addition, every time they are used,  it gives students a feeling of healthy control instead of reinforcing negative behaviors. Teaching Mindfulness Sometime during the first day of class, you should teach some sort of mindfulness  activity. Feel free to use any quality instruction, such as teaching deep breathing   in through the nose, out through the mouth or basic yoga positions Sun Salutation,  Warrior 1, Warrior 2, and Warrior 3 are favorites. Find or create whatever you  

Mindfulness Breaks    207 want, and demonstrate and practice with students. Its probably a good idea to do  some type of mindfulness activity every morning, or every class, for middle and high  school students. Introduce the concept of mindfulness in whatever way you like or in whatever  way a program that you like suggests. Give students the option to use certain mindfulness activities whenever they wish make sure that you only allow activities that  wont cause a problem for you; if a student doing Sun Salutation at their desk during  your instructions will bother you or others, dont allow it!. Many teachers allow students to close their eyes at their desks and deep breathe whenever they want. The other important element in teaching your students about mindfulness is to  make sure that your introduction is not in any way connected to Mindfulness Breaks.  The emphasis of the introduction needs to be on using mindfulness to prevent your  brain from being hijacked by difficult situations. If you connect the concept primarily to using it to cope once you are so upset that you can no longer function as a  member of the group, students will tend to wait too long to try it. You will also see in  the directions for using the Mindfulness Breaks intervention below that you should  only briefly mention mindfulness activities as a part of the intervention. Emphasize  that students should use Mindfulness Breaks when they need to calm their minds,  but emphasize that they should do so preventively and before they get too frustrated! Introduction to Students The introduction of the Mindfulness Breaks procedure should occur on the first  day, after the first yogabreathing instruction, but not immediately after this instruction. You do not want students to primarily associate mindfulness and breathing with  Mindfulness Breaks. It is best for people to think of and practice mindfulness and  yoga primarily as something preventive for good health and self-care. The following is how I introduced Mindfulness Breaks in my class. Make this  script your own, but be sure to project a casual, kind, relaxed manner. OK, folks, I want to talk with you all about something important. I want  to explain a problem that I have and a way that I deal with my problem.  Sometimes I get frustrated. Sometimes I get upset. This is especially true  here at work. It may be easy for you all to forget, but I am at work right  now, and work can be frustrating. Sometimes, because I have too many  things to do, or because I didnt get enough sleep, or because something  bad is going on in my life, I get so frustrated that I feel like I cant even be  part of the class. Raise your hand if this has ever happened to you. Look 
The Classroom Behavior Manual for a show of hands. OK, because of this problem I have, I have placed  Mindfulness Centers in the room. One is here point and one is there  point. From time to time, you may see me walk over to a Mindfulness  Center and sit and breathe. Or you may see me stand right in front of the  chair and do yoga. Mostly, I am telling you this so you dont think that  your teacher has gone crazy. When I do this, it just means that my brain  isnt quite working right and that I need to take a break from my job, calm  my brain down, and relax. I want to apologize in advance, because when I am really frustrated,  or tired, or overwhelmed, or sad, or whatever, I may stay over there for  a long time, if thats how long it takes to get my brain working right. I  wont talk to you all when I am taking one of these breaks, and I just ask  that you ignore me when Im back there. My being back there is telling  you that I cant handle teaching right then, so Ill ask you to please leave  me alone and just keep working. Ill try not to, but if I have to go take a  break when Im in the middle of teaching, I will just ask that, if I dont  come back after around one minute, you start on your Nows and Laters.  I thank you in advance for not causing problems while Im getting myself  back together. I promise that I will come back as soon as I am able. Just  know that, if I take a break, it doesnt mean Im angry at you or that I am  not OK. Im just needing a break. Heres the deal: a lot of hands went up when I asked if you have ever  been so mad or sad or hurt or frustrated that you couldnt handle being  part of the class. I get it, believe me. Im going to let you also use these  spots if you ever feel like I feel sometimes. Some of you will never need  them, and thats fine. Some of you will need them, and thats fine, too.  Use them whenever you want. You dont have to ask. Just like when Im  in there, please completely ignore whoever is in the Mindfulness Center  so they can chill out and come back when they are ready. You can stay as  long as you need to; just know though that you are still responsible for all  the work that you miss. Please dont bring anything over there, and come  back whenever you are ready! Now, as a kid expert, and as someone who often has to take breaks  myself, I am incredibly skilled at telling when a kid might need to take a  break. In fact, I may notice that you need to take a break even before you  notice that you need to take a break. I may give you a little nudge or ask  if you need to take a break. If I ask, dont be offended. You can either go 

Mindfulness Breaks    209 or stay. Either way is fine. If you go, stay there as long as you want, and  come back when you are ready. If you choose to go, great! If you choose to stay, great! If, however,  I see that you are not looking like you can be with us because you seem  agitated or because you are causing a problem or both, I will actually ask  you to go to a Mindfulness Center, but, like always, you can come back as  soon as you are able to come back. Please listen to me: this is not a punishment! I dont punish students.  If it were a punishment, I wouldnt let you come back, but I wouldnt do  that because I would miss you. I want you to be with us. So if you feel  like, Whoa, Mr. Ervin is rightI need a serious break, just go and stay  there until your brain is right. Or, if I ask you to please go to a Mindfulness  Center and you think that I am being ridiculous and that you werent  really acting agitated or that you werent really causing a problem, just  go to the center and see how quickly you can tap your butt on the chair  and come right back. Thats fine. I make mistakes all the time. Thats  your way of telling me that I was wrong and ridiculous and that you can  totally stay in class without causing a problem. I may need to tell you to go to a certain Mindfulness Center, so we  need a name for each one. No time to vote, so first come, first served: we  can name these two places to chill the names of any country in the world  except for the one in which we are currently living. I will call on silently  raised hands! Get names of two countries. Sudan and Luxembourg it is!  You will notice that Make Mindfulness Center Labels is a Later for today.  Feel free to make those if you would like. Turn them in and we can laminate them all together to make cool signs. In addition, my friends Mr. Hetrick and Mrs. Singer across the hall  also have Mindfulness Centers for themselves and their students. I may  ask you to use one of those centers, or I may give you a choice of a center  in here or over there. All I ask is that you please dont go there on your  own, since theres a rule about teachers knowing where their students  are. If you do end up in there, look for a chair with the name of a country  on it. Just sneak in, use the Mindfulness Center for as long as you need  it, and come back as soon as you can. You dont have to talk to anyone.  Again, I cant emphasize enough that this is not a punishment! Just take a  vacation in your mind, or do some breathing, or do some yoga, or do some 
The Classroom Behavior Manual combination of those, and come back whenever you are ready. Just make  sure you follow our rules, just like always, when you are there. Any questions? Take questions. OK. Im never going to talk about this again. Lets move on! Then . . . move on, and dont ever talk about it again, unless askedand then only  answer the question during noninstructional time. Simple, Positive Goals The only goals involved with the use of the Mindfulness Breaks procedure are   that the learning environment will be maintained and that students will be able to   use an environment change to regain their neurological ability to act as a positive,  prosocial member of the learning environmentand that they can stay there if they  are unable to do so. Mindfulness Breaks systematically share healthy control with  students who are struggling to use the necessary behaviors in the learning environment. This is in contrast to the chaos-inducing tactics through which students   use negative behaviors to make it to the principals office and sensory room,  respectivelyplaces where they get what they want attention, control, avoidance,  fun squishy objects through their negative behaviors, making those behaviors   more likely. Mindfulness Breaks avoid giving unhealthy control to students and simultaneously give healthy control under the following conditions: 	 They are used before negative behaviors have become too heightened. 	 They are used in context of the control-sharing and relationship-building methods in this manual. 	 Where Mindfulness Centers are located and how they are utilized does not  reinforce negative behaviors by giving students attention, control, avoidance,  or squishy fun things. 	 Students can use them whenever they need to do so. 	 They allow students to return to the learning environment whenever they feel  ready. 	 They are not punitive and are even used by teachers and staff. All of this is happening at a time when students are teetering between being  able to be prosocial and not being able to be prosocial. It is at this time when students, especially ones who have experienced or are experiencing trauma, are in 

Mindfulness Breaks    211 desperate need of control. If you dont share some healthy control with students by  using Mindfulness Breaks, they will take that control in an unhealthy way that is  likely to cause chaos. Explicit Instructions for Creating, Implementing,   and Maintaining Mindfulness Breaks As with many things that are difficult and important, exactly how you create,  implement, and maintain Mindfulness Centers is the difference between success and  failure. Simply designating a spot in the room where you send students once they use  particularly bad behaviors, or once they exhaust or anger you, is not a Mindfulness  Break, and the two should not be conflated. Keep reading for details on optimizing  the Mindfulness Breaks GGI. Mindfulness Centers: What They Are From the perspective of the educator, a Mindfulness Center is neutral in every possible way. It is simply a chair placed somewhere that is not a focal point for anyone,  where a student can be at least minimally monitored and totally ignored. It is neither  comfortable nor uncomfortable. It is a place that has fewer stimuli than the learning  environment. This means that the center includes nothing to play with, work on, or  do. Students who visit a Mindfulness Center need less stimulation, not more. It is  acceptable, healthy, and helpful for students to be permitted to bring sensory objects  that they already have to the Mindfulness Center, but they wont be able to get a new  one there. Schoolwork is not permitted in the center. It is helpful, whenever possible, to have a chair situated in the Mindfulness  Center so that to the seated students left or right good or both left and right best,  though not usually possible there is a solidly colored surface that obstructs the  students view of visual stimuli and slightly muffles auditory stimuli. Having the  chair back against a solid wall or surface is also helpful. This is usually facilitated by  having a wall on one or two sides of the student, and sometimes using a bookshelf to  create a third wall. The chair should never be positioned facing a wall, since this has  a punitive connotation, though if a student moves the chair to face a wall, allow it.  It can sometimes help to use a chair that is slightly shorter than a normal classroom  chair, as the lowered seat position can further minimize visual stimuli. The chair size  should not, however, be so small that the student will be significantly uncomfortable  or embarrassed.
The Classroom Behavior Manual The area immediately around the Mindfulness Center should, of course, be as  safe as the rest of the classroom, and there should be an attempt made to not have  objects nearby that are overly stimulating, tempting to touch, or easily available.  However, it is not necessary to make sure that the area is mischief proof. Students  who need training to be prosocial while in the Mindfulness Center will be trained  through a specific DLO see Chapter 11 to do so. Mindfulness Centers: Where They Are In-Room Mindfulness Centers An In-Room Mindfulness Center should be as removed as possible from any  focal points in the room. The center should not be at the front of a forward-facing  classroom. It should not be next to or facing a reading table in an elementary room. It  should also be positioned so that you are able to casually monitor students in at least a  minimal way while ignoring them. Mindfulness Centers should never be in or next  to the classroom door and should never be in the hallway. It is rare for a Mindfulness  Center to not utilize a classroom wall. In a typical preK12 classroom, there should almost always be room for two different Mindfulness Centers, though you may need or want to have only one. Larger  rooms typically used for PE, music, or career-based instruction may even have room  for more than two Mindfulness Centers. Multiple centers can exist under the following guidelines. In-room centers should not be near each other, for obvious reasons.  Mindfulness Center chairs should not face each other, even from across the room.  Though a specific DLO will be used to make sure all students are trained to not cause  problems while taking a Mindfulness Break, it is very difficult for any two people not  to get the giggles when made to face each other. In addition, having to look directly at  another person works against the goal of decreased stimuli for a Mindfulness Center. Reciprocal Room Mindfulness Centers If another school staff member has a room near yours, has read this manual,  and wishes to coordinate with you, their In-Room Mindfulness Centers can be your  Reciprocal Room Mindfulness Centers and vice versa. Discuss with reciprocating  teachers exactly how students will travel between rooms and how you and the  reciprocating teacher will make sure that they arrive at the reciprocal room while  receiving minimal or no attention. Mindfulness Breaks must follow the procedures  exactly as described in this manual; do not attempt to use Reciprocal Mindfulness 

Mindfulness Breaks    213 Centers with a person who has not absorbed these lessons. Attempting this may cause  more problems than it solves. Mindfulness Center Alcove Due to space constraints, it may not be possible to find a suitable location for  a Mindfulness Center Alcove. However, if using one is possible, here are the ideal  parameters. A Mindfulness Center Alcove must be a place in a common area or back  office that is constantly supervised by a person who has read this manual and can  simultaneously monitor and completely ignore the student. This, in and of itself, is  a rarity to have in a school. This cannot be in the principals office which can be the  most stimulating place in the school, and it cant be in a hallway. If it just so happens  that there is a convenient spot in the far reaches of the back end of a business office  staffed by someone with their associates degree in Being Boring and Not Really  Enjoying Children, this could be a perfect Mindfulness Center Alcove spot, if it can  fulfill the parameters previously described. Mindfulness Room A Mindfulness Room is not an in-school suspension room. This is simply a room  with multiple Mindfulness Centers staffed by a person whose only job is to monitor  and completely ignore students. The staff member must have read this manual and  should acquire some kind of reading material, because there should be no interaction  with the students who visit the room. Students should be able to come and go as they  please. Logistics of how students will come and go from this room must be worked  out by the Mindfulness Room monitor and teachers. It is usually unnecessary to have  a Mindfulness Room, but it can be useful and effective for schools that need and can  provide such a room. How to Use Mindfulness   Centers Correctly Now that you understand the importance of Mindfulness Breaks as an alternative  to other chaos-inducing options, you understand what Mindfulness Centers are,  you have created your Mindfulness Centers, you have your new Mindfulness Breaks  paradigm, and you are ready to use Mindfulness Breaks in the context of the other  parts of this book, you are ready to learn how to use Mindfulness Centers to create an  excellent GGI!
The Classroom Behavior Manual Again, it is important to recognize the use of Mindfulness Breaks as a gentle  intervention, not as a punishment and not as something to do when all other hope  is lost. It is important to recommit yourself to the idea that not all students can be  in the learning environment at all times and that this is not their fault. When they  are unable to be in the learning environment, they must be able to take control in a  healthy way by being able to go to a low-stimulation location and take as much time as  they need to regulate themselves so they can re-enter the learning environment. Keep  in mind that Mindfulness Breaks are to be used in the context of the rest of this manual. The Real-World Workshop procedure, for example, makes using Mindfulness  Breaks to avoid work a nonfunctional behavior for students. This knowledge will  help you to make the necessary paradigm shift, because it further helps you convince  students that negative behaviors are nonfunctional. The Mindfulness Break Interventions MBIs below are once again in menu  formthis time, a menu within a menu. Just as with the greater GGI menu, they  go from least intrusive to most intrusive, and from least time-consuming to most  time-consuming. Again, ignore the ones you dont like. Use your favorites over and  over. Experiment. Keep in mind that you should usually use multiple other GGIs from the GGI menu  in Chapter 9 before you use Mindfulness Breaks. After all, most agitation builds relatively slowly over time. However, students may sometimes show up to your fourth  period calculus class, or your 3rd grade room in the morning, or your kindergarten  room after recess in a mental state that immediately requires a Mindfulness Break.  Or something particularly upsetting may happen, all of a sudden, in your classroom.  A fantastic gateway intervention to a Mindfulness Break for a student who has  become locked into their brain stem is GGI 36: simply asking, Are you OK? After  all, what else would a nice person say to someone in distress? The Interventions There are six Mindfulness Break Interventions MBIs. The first four are Choice  Interventions, and the final two are Directive Interventions, though one of the  Directive Interventions also involves a choice. All verbal parts of these interventions  should be whispered whenever possible. Choice MBIs 1.	 Confused EyePointMindfulness Break. The first, and therefore least intrusive, intervention is perhaps the most effective, in that it builds relationships 

Mindfulness Breaks    215 every time it is used. However, it may not be optimal for students, especially  younger ones, until they are comfortable with Mindfulness Breaks as a concept.  This MBI is a combination of GGI 2 and GGI 11, with the only difference being  that you will point toward a Mindfulness Center. When done correctly, this says  to the student, Are you OK? Do you need a break? I respect and like you, and  Im trying to give you a little prompt without embarrassing you. In one way, this is a bit more intrusive than MBIs 24 because it usually  requires some kind of responseoften nonverbalfrom the student. Usually  it will garner a quick no head shake. This is fantastic: its a healthy form  of rejection of a suggestion from a teacher. Your response should be a quick,  discreet head nod, as if to say, Cool. Good. Just checking. The most effective  use of Mindfulness Breaks involves teachers implementing this MBI almost  exclusively. 2.	 Ask MBI. Simply whisper, Do you need a break? Wait for a response without  eye contact and without squaring your shoulders to the student. No is a great  answer. Yes is a great answer. No answer is a great answer. Walk away if you  dont get one. 3.	 Rule-Choice MBI. Ask, Can you follow our rules, or do you need to go to  name of Mindfulness Center? Say it and walk away. Notice that the question stimulates thinking and the choice gives the student preventive, healthy  control. An answer is not required. You canbut dont have tocome back  soon after and whisper, You stayin? The colloquial writing is purposeful  and important. Language here should be overtly comfortable and familiar. It  should be spoken in a register that is close to the students own. Of course, you  dont want to force anything that feels inauthentic, but crisply asking, Are you  staying? is less effective at keeping students out of their brain stem. 4.	 Rule-Statement MBI. Say to the student, Feel free to stay with us as long as  you are following our rules, and walk away. If the student chooses to take a  Mindfulness Break, great. If the student chooses not to take a Mindfulness  Break, great. Either way, the student is taking control and advocating for  themselves through their actions. They are choosing the best way to regulate  their own behavior. Having choices about how they regulate themselves helps  students to regulate themselves! If students choose to take a Mindfulness Break, you need to always invite the student  back using the following script, and nothing else: Come back as soon as you are ready. We want you to be with us.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Directive MBIs Every effort to use Choice MBIs should be made before resorting to a Directive  MBI. If you have to jump directly to a Directive MBI, it usually not always means  that one or more parts of the strategies or procedures in this book has broken down.  Often, theres not enough Strategic Noticing taking place. Perhaps not enough procedures are being employed. Perhaps not enough GGIs are being used. Perhaps, though,  a behavior may reveal itself immediately and without warning, even when sufficient  strategies and procedures have been in place. As their respective names suggest, Choice MBIs allow agitated students a choice  about whether they need to take a Mindfulness Break; Directive MBIs require them  to. From a practical perspective, notice that Choice MBIs do not give students a  chance to refuse to go to a Mindfulness Center, since they arent required to go. This  is why you should always try to use a Choice MBI before a Directive MBI. If a student  refuses to go to a Mindfulness Center, youre forced to follow the procedure on page  218. 5.	 Directive-Choice MBI. Say to the student, Feel free to go to name of  Mindfulness Center 1 or name of Mindfulness Center 2. Come back as  soon as you are ready. We want you to be with us. Notice that even though  this directs the student to do something, it still involves a choice. Notice also  that this and the next MBI both include the mandatory invitation to rejoin the  class. 6.	 Directive MBI. Say to the student, Theres a spot for you in name of  Mindfulness Center. Come back as soon as you are ready. We want you to be  with us. Whenever possible, use MBI 5 instead of MBI 6. Only go straight to 6 when  either all other centers are full or you are frustrated enough with a student that it is  wise for all involved that you do not see the student for a bit. In this case, direct the  student to go to a Mindfulness Center outside your classroom. Which Mindfulness Centers you offer to students in MBIs 56 to go to is up to  you. It is optimal to give a choice of two centers, one that is in your room and one that  is out of your room. This gives the student more control than offering only in-room  choices. Just as you may not want to look at a students face, the student may choose  to go to another rooms center because theyre tired of you as well! Note: Keep in  mind that if you are continually getting so frustrated with students that you often  need them to leave the room, some or many other parts of the procedures or strategies 

Mindfulness Breaks    217 may be breaking down, or you are simply waiting too long to prompt them to take  Mindfulness Breaks. Or you may need to take a Mindfulness Break yourself! What If They Dont Go? Take a moment to look back at the number of Control-Sharing and RelationshipBuilding Strategies and Procedures that you are now able to put in place in your classroom. From ESPN Greetings, to Strategic Noticing, to all of the prevention woven  into the procedures, to the GGIs, consider for a moment how different and more  cooperative your students will be once you put these methods in place. Now consider the MBI menu and pay specific attention to how rare it should be  to actually direct a student to take a Mindfulness Break. In the context of so much  effective prevention and efforts to use Choice MBIs first, the use of Directive MBIs  should be infrequent. If you do use a Directive MBI, there is a chance that a student  might refuse. If you are faithfully using all of the preventive and other mitigative  methods of this manual, the chances of this happening are low, but still, it may happen. Below is a list of DLOs for students who refuse to take a Mindfulness Break when  directed to. These interventions are not designed to make it less likely to refuse to  take a Mindfulness Break the next time this situation arises; they are only designed  to enable you to continue teaching with a minimum of disruption to student learning  and a minimum of disruption to school staff. What will teach the student to go to a  Mindfulness Center when requested is a specific, simple, and very serious DLO that  will put much or all of the students social time on pause until they learn to go to the  Mindfulness Center when asked.  For the rest of the elements of this manual to work perfectly, it is essential  that students are able to use Mindfulness Breaks effectively. As you may recall,  Mindfulness Breaks are the alternative to two destructive tactics of traditional discipline: sending students to the principal, and using sensory rooms as an escape for  students who cannot regulate their behaviorboth practices that can envelop students in chaos and possibly enter them into the school-to-prison pipeline. Therefore,  students must be trained, with serious DLOs, to use these breaks effectively. For many  of them, it could be a matter of life and death. While you can feel confident that you will be able to train your students to use  Mindfulness Breaks over the course of the school year, that confidence does you no  good in the moment when a student is refusing, sometimes loudly, to take one. Here  is another menu for what to do when a student refuses to take a Mindfulness Break  when requested to. Remember the guidelines:
The Classroom Behavior Manual 	 Use only your favorite interventions. 	 Ignore the ones you dont like. 	 Give a significant DLO later that will teach students proper behavior of taking a  Mindfulness Break when asked. 	 You cant make a student take a Mindfulness Breaknot in the moment,  anyway! Tactics for Dealing with Mindfulness Break Refusal 1.	 Delay the DLO Verbally. Simply use your personal DLO Delaying Script, as  described in Chapter 11. Concentrate on using your Calm Signal. Move on.  This will likely have the effect of the student calming down enough to remain  in the learning environment, especially if the inevitability of DLOs has been  established. 2.	 Delay the DLO with Only a Calm Signal. For students you know to be more  explosive, meet their refusal with only your Calm Signal. Move on. Keep   teaching as if nothing happened. 3.	 Delay the DLO Mentally. Simply meet the refusal by walking away. Use this  with only your most explosive and savvy students. Mindfulness Break Refusal DLOs 13 should be your primary tools in refusal  situations. However, if the student was sent into a belligerent rage either when asked   to take the break or in response to these DLOs, the following two interventions can  be used: 4.	 Coachs Gambit. In professional basketball, coaches of the most poorly performing teams are often fired in the middle of the season. The average winning percentage for bad teams after the coach is replaced is about .900 in the  five games immediately after the coach was fired, though the teams inevitably  go back to their losing ways. What is the explanation for the brief fantastic performance of these terrible teams? The players effort greatly increases when a  coach is fired because they are trying to show the world that the coach was the  reason they were losing previously: they want to show the coach up. This intervention uses the same dynamics. It takes a bit of planning. You will  need two student volunteers. Ask one student, when you give a code word, to be in  charge of lining up the class and taking them to a predetermined place where they  can be monitored for only a few minutesfor example, another classroom a PE class  is often optimal, because 25 students sitting on bleachers usually isnt disruptive. 

Mindfulness Breaks    219 The other student should be trained to get an adult preferably not an administrator  who is able to leave their responsibilities for just a few minutes, when you give the  code word. The teacher should sit or stand in a position in the doorway where they can be  seen by people in the hallway and where the teacher can see the refusing student.  This is important for legal reasons whenever you can avoid being alone in a room  with an angry student, you should. When the alternate adult comes to the room,  they should simply use their Calm Signal and then say, OK, lets get out of here. In  all my years, I have never seen the student not go with the other adult, and I have only  heard about it not working once. Just like with the coach, the student is angry with  you, wants to get away from you, and wants to show you up. How does the student  accomplish all those things? By going with the other adult! The audience who saw the  refusal has gone, so the student does not lose face, and being able to go with the new,  better than my stupid teacher adult gives the student a sense of control. That adult can simply take the student to any Reciprocal Mindfulness Center and  follow a slightly modified Rejoin Invitation script: Go back as soon as you can. They  want you to be in there! 5.	 Reverse Mindfulness Break. This works when you have a student who has  had a recent history of being completely out of controlso much so that you  know that preventive methods will have no effect, that they have not yet been  trained successfully by the more intensive DLOs, and that they will refuse to  take a Mindfulness Break. It requires some planning as well as an alternative  learning space at the ready. That learning space could be an empty classroom  or an outdoor area, depending upon the current learning activity. It also  requires another staff member preferably not a principal. If no alternative  learning area can be arranged and no staff member can give up time, you cannot use this intervention. Having to use a Reverse Mindfulness Break is most  typical at the beginning of the year with younger students, but it can be necessary at any time with any students, preK12. When the student refuses the Mindfulness Break, simply have the previously  assigned helper student lead the class to the alternate learning area and have the  other student get the helpful adult. This time, stay with your class and ask students  to bring any necessary learning materials with them. Make sure you dont leave until  the adult shows up at your class. Once you leave to continue teaching, the other adult  will simply ignore and monitor the belligerent student in what is now their private  Mindfulness Center! For added convenience, a class can begin in the alternative 
The Classroom Behavior Manual location and plan on going to the home classroom once the predictable belligerence  begins. It may go without saying, but when students need to have other adults involved  in the Mindfulness Break Refusal Intervention, that means that the DLOs need to  become even more targeted and intensified. 
11 Delayed Learning   Opportunities When I received Michael into my classroom unexpectedly, he suffered from a tremendous and life-threatening deficit: he did not know how to use positive behaviors to get  what he wanted in life. There is no more destructive deficit for human beings. Students  who continue to have this deficit into adulthood will live lives of pain and misery.  When this deficit is not addressed by parents, it must be addressed by educators. Delayed Learning Opportunities DLOs are an essential part of this endeavor.  DLOs are opportunities for students to learn to use positive behaviors that help to  create a positive environment in the classroom. DLOs teach students to use positive  behaviors and be responsible for their behaviors, giving them the opportunity to  become happy, productive, and successful members of society. DLOs do not incorporate warnings, lectures, threats, or punishments. These  hurtful strategies, which are all too often part of traditional discipline, are not  effective at altering behaviors and are therefore not included in this manual. DLOs  are the only way to effectively teach all students, with kindness and empathy, how  to use positive, prosocial behaviors. This chapter will systematically and explicitly  teach you exactly how to use Gentle Guidance Interventions and Delayed Learning  Opportunities with your students.
The Classroom Behavior Manual The Terminal Destination   for Negative Behaviors The terminal destination for negative behaviors that are not prevented by procedures or mitigated by GGIs is that students will need to learn positive behaviors  through Learning Opportunities. You know how to use the Procedural Learning  Opportunities that are integrated into Control-Sharing Procedures; for example,  students who are not silent in response to a Prompt for Silence know that, in the end,  they will need to practice being silent. Likewise, teachers must make sure that the  terminal destination of all negative behaviors not prevented or mitigated through  GGIs is a DLO. When a teacher sees students using negative behaviors, it is necessary  for the mental health of the teacher to know that if the behavior does not stop, the  students will learn a lesson about not using that behavior in the future. Giving students these two choices is calming for teachers. The third possibility, in which students do whatever they want, their bad behaviors becoming bad habits that become  bad personalities that the world has to deal with forevermore, is too stressful of a  thought to have while also teaching high school chemistry. Through the use of DLOs,  we take away that option from students. A Sense of the Inevitable: An Essential Piece of the Puzzle All parties must be aware that a learning opportunitywhether procedural  PLO, natural NLO, or delayed DLOis the inevitable terminal destination of  all unprevented and unmitigated negative behaviors. While this understanding is  important for the mental health of teachers, as noted above, it is also important for  the mental health of students. Understanding that if they dont use positive behaviors, they will have to learn to do so in a way that may be less convenient than using  positive behaviors, is essential if students are to be able to use positive behaviors  without Learning Opportunities and even without GGIs. When students accept this  inevitability, they are on the road to becoming calm, self-regulated, and able to spend  their days learning instead of trying to figure out what they can get away with. DLOs offer students a logical, realistic opportunity to learn a behavior or solve a  problem that they have caused through a negative behavior. These opportunities are  delayed, rather than performed in the moment when the negative behaviors occur,  for two reasons. First, at the moment of a negative behavior that requires a DLO, it is  likely that both teacher and student may be experiencing too much stress to teach or  learn, respectively, anything about behavior. Second, class time is for the teaching of  lessons. DLOs take place during noninstructional time.

Delayed Learning Opportunities     223 DLOs Versus Punishment A DLO is not punishment. Punishment is as simple as it is ineffective. Punishment simply prescribes that  when a student uses a negative behavior, the teacher makes that students life arbitrarily painful so that the student learns to not use that behavior again. There need  not be any learning or logical connection between the negative behavior and the  punishment. The punishment just needs to cause some kind of pain. The pain is the  point. Consider these examples of punishment: 	 A 6th grade student uses sassy language with her teacher, so the teacher makes  her eat lunch by herself in the classroom. 	 A 3rd grade student does not finish an assignment, so he is made to stand on  the fence silently at recess. 	 A high school junior amasses a significant number of tardy slips, so he is not  allowed to attend a school dance. Punishments miss opportunities to teach important lessons about the world and  how to live successfully in it. These examples illustrate attempts at teaching students  nothing besides the idea that teachers will make students lives more painful if the  students are not cooperative. This is not a useful life lesson; it teaches nothing but  blind obedience for the sake of obedience itself. Delayed Learning Opportunities teach important lessons about life and also  build skills so that students are prepared for the challenges posed by the real world.  Students who struggle using important life skills need to get better at them so that  they are sufficiently equipped to be successful in the future. Delayed Learning Opportunities:   Being Able to Think and Learn While punishment involves fear, pain, and thoughtless obedience, Delayed Learning  Opportunities involve learning important life lessons. If students are to learn, they  must be able to think. Therefore, all of the tactics typically used with punishment  need to be abandoned. The use of DLOs never involves warnings, threats, or lectures.  It never involves anger. It never involves breaking students in order to make them  cry. It never involves intimidation. Perhaps most important, DLOs never involve students being asked to learn the  important life lesson immediately. These are Delayed Learning Opportunities. From 
The Classroom Behavior Manual both a neurological and logistical standpoint, this is the only way this kind of learning can take place. From a neurological perspective, if a students behavior has not been prevented  by the use of Relationship-Building Procedures, Control-Sharing Procedures, and  Relationship-Building Strategies and has not been successfully mitigated by Gentle  Guidance Interventions, that student will surely not be in a thinking state once the  teacher has determined that the student has reached the terminal destination: a DLO.  In this state, the students brain stem is activated, and the prefrontal cortex is effectively turned off. At that moment, the student cannot learn; indeed, the student is  literally incapable of thinking. Even if a perfect learning opportunity could be created  at that moment, the student would be noncompliant and incapable of learning the life  lesson. And even if the student could learn the lesson, conversely, the teacher in this  scenario is also very likely in their brain stem and also unable to think, so it would be  impossible to come up with the correct learning opportunity in the first place! Furthermore, even if the teacher could think, attempting to create the learning  opportunity in that moment is a diversion from teaching the other students in the  class who deserve an education! Stopping the learning of perhaps 30 other students  to try to teach a lesson that cant be taught and cant be learned is not a good use of  the educators time. One final logistical concern is that attending to the students negative behaviors  by stopping instruction and dealing with a behavior in the moment gives the student  attention, control, and work avoidancethe holy trinity of student behavioral  goals. Even just attending to it immediately reinforces the negative behavior. Suffering Is Incidental Just as DLOs are not punishments, they also do not consist of the repeated reteaching  of skills. For very young children, minimal reteaching may be performed once, but  DLOs do not make the assumption that students who use a negative behavior simply  forgot how to use a positive behavior. While this may be true, and DLOs attend to  the possibility, it is not assumed. Students almost always know what positive behaviors they should be exhibiting,  but they continue to use negative behaviors because those behaviors get them what  they want attention, control, or  avoidance. Instead of repeatedly teaching what the  student already knows, you will ask the student to do one of two learning activities:

Delayed Learning Opportunities     225 1.	 Solving a problem that they caused. 2.	 Practicing the positive behavior with which they are struggling. These will be explored in detail later in this chapter. Being engaged in these learning opportunities may be unpleasant. In life, learning difficult lessons about how to act can involve suffering. The suffering, though,  is not the intention, as it is when using punishment. Any suffering that might be  incurred by students during DLOs is incidental. While this incidental suffering   may reinforce the lesson, it is not the point of the lesson. Learning is the point of   the lesson. Picture a high school basketball coach who is having guards practice coming  across a screen and catching the ball in triple threat position while squared to the  basket. Everyone does a proficient job except for one player, who does it all wrong.  In response, the coach blows the whistle and loudly informs the player that they did  the drill wrong and that the player needs to run from baseline to baseline 50 times  immediately, while everyone else continues with the drill. This is an example of a punishment. The coachs intent is to arbitrarily cause pain  for the player after a mistake in order to stop the player from making the mistake  again. There is no learning involved; this is simply an attempt to get blind obedience  through the use of painin this case, the pain of lactic acid buildup in the muscles  due to a physically demanding activity. By contrast, using a DLO in the same situation looks like this: When the player  makes the mistake, the coach lets the player know that they will be working on  that skill later. When others are taking a break or once practice is over, that player  practices coming across a screen and catching the ball in triple threat position while  squared to the basket over and over again until the skill is perfected. The intention is  for the player to learn how to do this effectively. In addition to developing the required  muscle memory from repeated practice, the player may experience muscle pain, but  that is not the point of the exercise: the point is the learning. While physical pain  in classrooms shouldnt be a part of learning, there can be other kinds of suffering.  Students will often be bored while they are practicing positive behaviors. Sometimes  students will have to solve problems that they caused in ways that involve some form  of suffering, such as experiencing monotony or not being able to do something that  they would rather do. This kind of suffering is only incidental to DLOs, for which the  learning is the point, not the suffering.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Safe and Uncomfortable:   Two Parts to the DLO Calming tactics such as the repeated use of a Calm Signal and delaying scripts help  students feel safe: unthreatened, respected, and loved. Through every moment of the  DLO process, you will make it clear that the students negative behaviors, no matter  how severe, have not triggered anger from you and that these behaviors have not  caused you to dislike the student. But while the student will feel as safe as is possible  given the situation and the students own arousal level, it is not your goal to make  them comfortable. On the contrarylearning something new involves at least a minimal level of discomfort. There are two parts to using DLOs. The first involves how to effectively let a  student know that there will be a DLO coming in the future. The second section is  about how to create and deliver an appropriate DLO. You will see that there is specific  instruction about exactly how to make sure your students feel appropriately uncomfortable within the context of a safe, loving environment. Getting to Later Here is a logistical truth: Students own now; teachers own later. Savvy students who are seeking attention, control, andor work avoidance know  that, if they are brave enough, they can always achieve one or more of these goals if  the teacher attempts to deal with their behaviors in the present. Its inherently true:  even if the teacher understands that a learning opportunity needs to be the terminal  destination of serious negative behaviors, the student is guaranteed to get some combination of attention, control, andor work avoidance if the teacher does not know  how to delay the learning opportunity. If you give a student a learning opportunity immediately, you will draw your  attention, and the attention of other students, to the student using the negative  behavior; you will be allowing the student to control your actions, and perhaps emotions; and you will be allowing the student to avoid work, since they cannot participate in a learning opportunity and do work at the same time. The fact is that trying to give a student a learning opportunity in the moment  only makes the serious negative behavior more likely in the future. Just by responding immediately, you reinforce the negative behavior. Here is an emotional truth: When you dont know what to do, its a good idea not to  do it. 

Delayed Learning Opportunities     227 Savvy students know that if a teacher does not have the skills to delay a DLO, the  teacher also wont be able to intellectually and emotionally handle behavioral problems while trying to teach perhaps 30 other students. Truly appropriate DLOs are  hard to create and implement while you are teaching. Many students find profound  enjoyment in forcing teachers to deal with behavioral situations in the moment,  knowing that the worse their behaviors get, the more frazzled, upset, and entertaining the teacher will become. This also has a reinforcing effect. The first goal of the DLO process is to notify students that there will be an opportunity for them to learn about positive behaviors later. There are three subgoals to be  accomplished while you are giving students this notification: 1.	 Lower or at least maintain the arousal levels of both student and teacher so as to  avoid outbursts. This refers to outbursts from both student and teacher. Of  course, merely delaying the learning opportunity takes care of most of this  by avoiding the immediate power struggle that would take place in front of  the students peers. Exactly what we say and how we say it is important in this  endeavor. 2.	 Keep teaching. This allows you to deny the student the work avoidance they are  perhaps seeking and perhaps trying to provide for their friends. 3.	 Stop the behavior. Traditional discipline tells teachers to attempt to overpower  students with immediate punishments to stop their negative behavior. This  will not work with difficult and brave students who are aware of their strategic  advantage in the moment see above. However, once students see a pattern in  the teachers behavior, and know that a DLO is always inevitable, and if the  DLO process is correctly followed, the mere delaying of the learning opportunity will stop the behavior. Creating Your Own DLO Delaying Script You will be delaying learning opportunities over and over throughout the rest of your  career. The words that you use to do this should be ones that you are comfortable  with, and they should be exactly the same every time: a predetermined script. Once  memorized, the script will be one less thing to think about, making your life easier.  In addition, using the exact same words every time will give you and your students a  feeling of consistency that can maintain and even decrease arousal levels. There are three parts to a DLO Delaying Script:
The Classroom Behavior Manual 1.	 Calm Signal 2.	 Expression of regret 3.	 Notification of the DLO You will choose each part, and then put them all together to create your own personal  script that is perfect for you. While you will be choosing the words for each element, you must not deviate  from the order above. The Calm Signal needs to do its magic of changing the students  brain chemistry, and then you will double down on the calm sadness by expressing  regret. Only then will you notify the student that a DLO will be coming sometime in  the future. Part 1: Calm Signal Of course, you have already decided upon your personal Calm Signal. For review,  here are some choices:  Oh, man. Oh, boy. Yikes. Yeesh. Ugh. Huh. Oh. Whoa. Blerg. The sound of a  slow exhale To begin to create your DLO Delaying Script, first write your Calm Signal down on a  piece of paper. Part 2: Expression of Regret Now you can choose an expression of regret. The purpose of the expression of  regret is to double down on the sadness expressed in the Calm Signal and to communicate that you are not upset or angry with the student. This shows the student that  you are on  the same team and that together, you and the student will be working to  defeat the behavior itself. Here are some suggestions: This is a tough one. This is rough. This is less than ideal. This is a difficult situation. This is unfortunate.

Delayed Learning Opportunities     229 Once you choose one, write it after your Calm Signal. Part 3: Notification of the DLO Once you have a Calm Signal and an expression of regret, you are ready to add the  notification of the DLO. This is simply informing the student that they will be learning about their behavior through a DLO at some point in the future. Choose one of  the following and complete your script by writing it next to your expression of regret: Im going to help you learn about this later. You can learn about this sometime in the future. You can do some learning later. Now you have a completed personalized DLO Delaying Script with a Calm Signal,  expression of regret, and notification of the DLO. It should look similar to these: Oh, man. This is a difficult situation. You can do some learning later. Yeesh. This is rough. Im going to help you learn about this later. Sound of a slow exhale. This is a tough one. You can learn about this  sometime in the future. Delivering Your DLO Delaying Script Once you have decided that a DLO is necessary for a student to learn about a behavior,  it may help you to think of your Calm Signal as something separate. Perhaps by now  you have trained yourself to use the Calm Signal even when frustrated. Once you say  your Calm Signal, you should be safe from getting angry. Remember to inhale, and  then say your Calm Signal on the exhale. If you are far away from the student, feel  free to use the Calm Signal as soon as you see the behavior that makes you think that  the student will need a DLO. This one is for you; this Calm Signal is used so you dont  swear. Its used so you dont say or do something youll regret. At this point, any calming effect that it has on the student is of secondary importance. Now you should slowly walk toward the culprit. Avoid squaring your shoulders  to the student. Look sad. You can keep your palms up with your hands open. This is  your nonthreatening stance. Whenever possible, quietly whisper your script into the  students ear, then walk away. In certain situations, it may be difficult or impossible to move next to a student  and whisper in a way that doesnt draw more attention to the situation for instance,  during a read-aloud with young students. In these situations, you can say the script  while fixing your gaze on the middle distance, never looking directly at any student. 
The Classroom Behavior Manual This offers the added benefit of stopping other behaviors that you did not even notice  and allowing the student in question to save face. At all costs, avoid bringing attention  to the student who needs a DLO. Meet any attempts at argument with your Calm Signal and nothing else. This  includes any attempts by the student to find out what the DLO will entail. If you  would like, you can answer these questions with a simple I dont know yet. And then, keep teaching. Do not make any reference to the negative behavior or the upcoming DLO. Its  over. Move on. Any more attention than what is described here reinforces the negative behavior, takes time that you dont have, and tells your students that behavior is  more important than learning. Differentiating for Extremely Explosive Students Your explosive students are almost always students who have often gotten what  they wanted with explosive, belligerent behavior. Some may have a biological or  pathological propensity toward being explosive. Even though you will minimize  the potential for explosions by using this process as instructed, and maximize the  chances that the mere use of your DLO Delaying Script will stop the behavior once  students know that the DLO is inevitable, some students will try the same belligerent  behaviors. This means that being trained not to use these behaviors is even more  important. For the most explosive students, some differentiation may be necessary. When a particularly difficult student needs a DLO, take a long, slow inhale. Next,  the use of an extra and immediate Calm Signal is mandatory when working with  extremely difficult students. Once youve used the inhale and Calm Signal, move  away from the student. Attend to something else. Help another student. Keep teaching. Then, very, very, slowly, walk toward the student. Inhale deeply. Reapply your  whispered Calm Signal with sadness and empathy in your voice. Whisper the rest of  your script. Follow the rest of the suggested protocols, including walking away and  moving on. Differentiating for the Most Explosive Students For the most belligerent and out-of-control students, there are two additional  strategies to implement. After the first use of your Calm Signal and before the second,  whisper the following while smiling broadly or while looking calm, sad, or even silly: Psst. Student namenickname here. Look at my face. Do I look mad? Be ready for the student to say yes. If so, use your Calm Signal and respond, Im not.  A silly look can be helpful. Then, whether or not the student becomes explosive, use 

Delayed Learning Opportunities     231 your Calm Signal and walk away. Thats it. Do not use the rest of your script. You will  still give a DLO later. Remember that the DLO procedure is to be done in the context of the previously  described highly preventive procedures and strategies. In addition, GGIs will be used  to guide students away from needing most DLOs and create a classroom without the  yelling and bossing around of students. Furthermore, if you follow this part of the  DLO procedure, you will be minimizing the amount of explosive behaviors from  students. If you are concerned that you may forget that you have delayed a DLO, write  it down. You may even want to have a clipboard that you can use to jot down notes  about DLOs. Finally, once all students understand that the application of the DLO is inevitable, just the continued use of the DLO Delaying Script will stop negative behaviors.  This will become even more true once students comprehend that continuing to use  negative behaviors after the DLO Delaying Script will intensify the DLO, since the  student is communicating to the teacher that the student needs to learn more. The  importance of these lessons cannot be understated for a teacher trying to manage  behaviors while teaching. Eventually, the students will be so well-conditioned that  the mere use of the Calm Signal will stop the negative behaviors, even from the most  now formerly belligerent students. How quickly this happens will depend on how  well you follow these instructions.  The difference between having a chance to live a happy, productive life and not  getting cooperation from students through any means at all is the difference between  life and death for teachers and their students. For teachers, the inability to act with  certainty will create cortisol secretion that will age you, kill brain cells, and may lead  to premature death. For students, learning to use positive, prosocial behaviors is the  difference between living a happy, productive life or facing a lifetime of being beaten  down by a world that does not take kindly to the repeated use of antisocial behaviors. The only effective way for learning to take place is for teacher and student to be  able to teach and learn in a calm environment. What If They Just Go Berserk? By using the procedures and strategies in this book, you are doing everything  you can do to build relationships and share control to effectively prevent explosive behaviors from students. In addition, using the DLO process and differentiating for the most explosive students will further reduce the instances whereby  students will use totally out-of-control and belligerent behavior.
The Classroom Behavior Manual While traditional discipline yields far more of these types of outbursts,  they may still happen even if you use every single procedure and strategy in  this book perfectly. After all, a student may have been beaten or neglected or  assaulted immediately before school. In some of these cases, an outburst may  be completely inevitable and, of course, not the students fault. It is also possible  that belligerent behavior has gotten that student out of trouble in the past,  reinforcing its use. In these cases, offer students a chance to compose themselves in a  Mindfulness Center. If that fails to resolve the problem, remember the importance of keeping your students safe. Once you have given the DLO Delaying  Script, you have successfully initiated the process. Do not proceed with any  more of the process until later, when everyone is calm. If the student becomes  belligerent, you can send them to a Mindfulness Center, use the Coachs  Gambit, or create a Reverse Mindfulness Break. If these interventions fail to keep you and your students safe, you can rely  on emergency procedures that have already been established by your school to  respond to emergencies. When students pose an immediate physical danger to  themselves or others, restraint by a trained staff member may be appropriate  and necessary. If students run out of the room, someone from outside your  classroom must be dispatched to provide nonresponsive monitoring NRM,  in which they completely ignore the student while staying  physically present  to keep them safe. While these tactics in keeping students safe may be necessary, they are not  DLOs! They are merely the necessary means of keeping students safe. When  another person has to be dispatched to restrain, follow, ignore, or use nonresponsive monitoring on your student, this should trigger, at a time in the  future, massive, overwhelming DLOs see below. Behaviors that cause other  people besides the classroom teacher to have to deal with behaviors must be  crushed as quickly as possible, because a school is not structured to have other  adults having to put out fires for teachers. This simply cannot happen, or the  school will descend into chaos. Again for clarity and emphasis: behaviors that require adults from outside  the classroom to react in order to keep students safe must be crushed through  massive, overwhelming DLOs. Three Kinds of Learning Opportunities There are only three kinds of learning opportunities for humans in this Universe: 1.	 Natural Learning Opportunities NLOs

Delayed Learning Opportunities     233 2.	 Problem-Solving DLOs 3.	 Practice DLOs Fortunately for you, only two of them, Problem-Solving and Practice DLOs, are under  your control. Before these two kinds of DLOs are described and taught in depth,  though, it is necessary to learn how to best interact with NLOs. Natural Learning Opportunities NLOs are not taught by humans. NLOs are taught by the Universe or God,  depending upon your religious orientation. Lets use the Universe for our purposes  in this book. The Universe is set up to deliver Natural Learning Opportunities to humans  when they step out of the bounds of what is naturally good for them to do: 	 A human grabs a snake. The snake bites the human, causing pain or death. 	 A human runs into a lake without being able to swim. The human drowns. 	 A human runs into the woods at night to explore with no weapons or tools. The  human is eaten by a bear. The Universe has organized itself to teach humans lessons. One of two things will  happen: humans learn the lesson and change their behavior to make choices that will  allow them to survive and have a chance to thrive, or they never learn the lesson, they  die, and the genes that may have led them to making such bad choices die out, leading  to humans as a species being more able to make good choices that will allow them  to survive and thrive. The fact that all of the examples above could have happened  today or 10,000 years ago illustrates how they are all Natural Learning Opportunities  inherent to being human. There are also Natural Learning Opportunities in schools: 	 A 2nd grade student eats too many cupcakes at a birthday celebration. The student throws up. 	 A middle school basketball player forgets her basketball shoes at home and cannot participate in basketball practice. 	 A 5th grade student does not study for a test and gets a failing grade. 	 A high school freshman runs in the hallway, fails to notice a door opening in  front of him, runs into the door, and hits his head on the floor. In every one of these examples, the Universe has already given the students the  opportunity to learn from their mistakes. NLOs are gifts to teachers, because the 
The Classroom Behavior Manual lesson has already been taught for them. Teachers should pray for nonlethal, nonpermanently damaging NLOs to befall their students. Allow the Universe to be your  coteacher: allow it to educate when it can. When NLOs befall students, your responsibility as the teacher is to not destroy the lesson already taught by the Universe. There  are, however, three things you must do in this case. 1.	 Use your Calm Signal and empathize. Use your Calm Signal immediately; this  will help you to avoid doing hurtful actions of 2. Feel free to empathize in any  way that does not contradict 3. Make sure the student who fell in the hallway  is not injured and, if necessary, refer him to the nurse. For the student with the  failing grade, whisper, Let me know if you need help, as you hand back the  quiz with the F. Give the student who just threw up five cupcakes a pat on the  back when she returns from the bathroom. 2.	 Refrain from using anger and lectures to say, I told you so. Students who have  just been taught a lesson by the Universe may not be in a thinking state. One  of the best parts of an NLO is that the student has no one to blame but themselves. Many students will be looking for someone besides themselves to be  mad at. Dont volunteer yourself for this job by attempting to reteach the lesson  that was just taught by the Universe. The Universe is a better teacher than you.  The lesson is done. Stay out of it. Dont yell at the injured student about what  he already learned about running in the hallway. Dont lecture the student  who got the failing grade about working hard. Dont lecture a basketball  player about how she cant participate in basketball practice without shoes, as  the player is already not participating. Students will actively unlearn a lesson  taught by the Universe just to spite the teacher who lectured them immediately after their lesson provided by the Universe. 3.	 Dont save your students from the lesson. Unless you are preventing death or  serious injury, never save a student from an NLO. You should never allow a  parent to bring the shoes or the missing permission form. You should never  give an extra chance to earn a passing grade. Doing this breeds irresponsibility  and the unrealistic expectation that someone will always be there to shield  students from the Universe and its lessons. Saving students from their own  actions hurts them in the long run. Allow the Universe to be your coteacher. Allow the Universe to teach life lessons. There are only two remaining lessons that you will have to teach and only two  kinds of DLOs that you will use to teach them.

Delayed Learning Opportunities     235 The Creation and Implementation of DLOs Unfortunately, Natural Learning Opportunities and Procedural Learning  Opportunities will not present themselves every time students use a serious negative behavior. When they dont, it is time to create a Delayed Learning Opportunity  and deliver it when it is convenient for you. Remember, teachers own later. Later  is when you are in the drivers seat. Once you have avoided trying to implement a  learning opportunity immediately, you have the freedom to choose when and how to  administer it. This section is split into two parts: how to create DLOs and exactly how to implement them with students. While you are learning how to create DLOs, you will probably develop some burning questions about exactly how to implement them; these  questions will be answered during the implementation part. Two Lessons, Two DLOs There are only two lessons that students need to learn about using positive  behaviors: 1.	 To solve problems that are caused by their negative behaviors 2.	 To become proficient at using positive behaviors The DLOs used to teach these lessons, accordingly, are called Problem-Solving DLOs  and Practice DLOs. Both lessons involve requiring students to strive to become people who do not  cause problems for others and who solve the problems that they do cause. When DLOs  are executed correctly, students will learn that these lessons are inevitable. Students  know that their nonacademic lives will stop or be severely limited until they have  solved all problems caused and achieved mastery of all the behaviors with which  they have previously struggled. Reminder: This section covers how to create and give  DLOs. The next section will show exactly how and when to implement the DLOs,  keeping in mind every possible eventualityincluding student refusal. When students cause a problem for another person in the school not themselves, they are required to solve that problem. Put another way, they have a responsibility to solve the problem. Look at the word responsibility for a moment. The two words that are at the  root of the word responsibility are response and ability: the true definition of  the word responsibility is to have the ability to control ones own response to stimuli.
The Classroom Behavior Manual The world is full of constant stimuli. The world is stimuli. The goal of this book is  to train students to be able to control their responses to the world so that they are able  to respond in ways that make the world better instead of worse. The word discipline, after all, means to become ones own disciple: to lead  ones self. The effective definition of the word discipline can be construed as to  be able to control ones own responses to stimuli so that those responses do not cause  problems for others. Therefore, responsibility is not part of disciplineit is discipline. To be responsible is to be disciplined. Students must have the ability to respond to the world in ways that dont cause  problems. If they are unable to do this, it is the job of the educator to train them to  do so. Thus far, this manual has shown how to prevent negative behaviors and how  to gently mitigate the use of slightly negative behaviors through the use of GGIs.  The Procedural Learning Opportunities within the procedures will do much of this  training and will become part of the daily fabric of your classroom. You have also  learned how to not destroy the lessons of the Universe and its Natural Learning  Opportunities. These PLOs and NLOs create a healthy terminal destination for negative behaviors, in that the negative behaviors do not get the student what they want.  The final piece of the puzzle to address negative behaviors that cannot be dealt with  through any of these means is through Delayed Learning Opportunities. Problem-Solving DLOs There are two kinds of Problem-Solving DLOs: Situational and Destressing.  Situational Problem-Solving DLOs are used when students cause problems for other  people and there is a realistic way that the student can solve the problem by taking action. These are DLOs that seem more or less obvious to most. It is likely that  experienced teachers will have already used many of these, though without proper  instruction, most teachers use them ineffectively. Remember that these should  never happen immediately after the negative behavior: They are Delayed Learning  Opportunities. You must get to later the proper way before giving the DLO. Some  examples follow: 	 DLO-worthy behavior: A 2nd grade student has a temper tantrum in art class and  knocks over her tables art supplies. Problem-Solving DLO: The student must pick up the art supplies that she  knocked over. 	 DLO-worthy behavior: A high school junior threatens to beat up a classmate.

Delayed Learning Opportunities     237 Problem-Solving DLO: The student must create a comprehensive, written  plan for how he is going to make that student feel safe while on school property, including, if applicable, the bus. The student is held back from being in  close proximity of the threatened student until this plan is completed. He will  be excluded from all situations where the two students would be able to cross  paths. This could include proximity in a classroom, changing classes, lunch,  recess for younger students, the bus, or participation in activities or sports  where the students may be near each other. The threatening student should be  fully restricted from these situations until the plan is completed. The plan could involve self-imposed rules for avoiding the student while in  the same room or area, such as staying at a lunch table away from the threatened  student, being restricted to a certain bus seat, or taking a certain route between  classes. There might be an agreement that threatening the student while at,  for example, basketball practice, would result in a five-game suspension. The  threatener should not be forced to write an apology into the plan, though this  can be included. Once the plan is completed, the threatener should present it to the threatenee by reading it to them. If the threatenee says that the plan makes them feel  safe, the threatener may come back into the mainstream of the school under  the conditions of the plan. If not, the threatenee can request through a conversation, moderated by you, that certain requirements be added or taken away.  If all parties threatener, threatenee, and teacher agree to the appropriateness  of terms, the threatener may return to the mainstream of the school. If the  threatener does anything even mildly threatening to the threatened student, he  should be immediately isolated, just as he was before. At a time that is appropriate and convenient, the threatenee and the teacher  can meet and revisit the terms of the plan. The threatenee can be asked if any of  the terms of the plan can be relaxed or eliminated. The teacher can notify the  threatener of any changes to the plan. 	 DLO-worthy behavior: A 5th grade student destroys school property. Problem-Solving DLO: Destroyer and teacher do research together regarding  the cost of destroyed property. The price should be the current cost for replacing whatever was destroyed. Destroyer should be introduced to the concept of minimum wage and can  even do research on what minimum wage is in their state. The student could  do work for the school until the destroyed item has been paid off. Duties can be 
The Classroom Behavior Manual anything that can be safely done that benefits the school. Custodial duties, often  monitored by a school custodian, are appropriate in this case. This can also be done when a student destroys the property of another  student. These jobs can be even more targeted: carrying books for a student or  cleaning out lockers or desks for a student during recess could be part of the  DLO. 	 DLO-worthy behavior: An 8th grade student has a tantrum and destroys a classroom. She refuses to clean up the mess, and since class must go on immediately,  the teacher and other students are forced to clean the room so that class can  continue. Problem-Solving DLO: Tantrumer must come back during noninstructional  time and be in charge of cleaning the classroom for a certain number of days.  Students and teachers, during this time, are allowed to not clean and tidy up  their areas, as they know that the tantrumer will be tending to it. You will be able to create many other Situational Problem-Solving DLOs. As you do  so, use these four as a guide and remember that pain is not the point. Though the  DLO may incidentally cause suffering by being boringmonotonousannoying, the  learning is the point. Destressing Problem-Solving DLOs While untrained teachers often have no trouble coming up with ProblemSolving Situational DLOs, they are usually at a loss when a student uses a DLO-worthy  negative behavior but there doesnt seem to be an authentic Situational ProblemSolving DLO that logically corresponds with the behavior in question. For example,  there is an obvious Situational Problem-Solving DLO when a student makes a mess  during a tantrum they have to clean up the mess they made. But what if a student  constantly interrupts you? What if a student is whining habitually in such a way that  it makes you want to choose another profession? What if they are always invading the  personal space of other students? In every one of those cases, the problem that the  student is causing is that they are totally stressing people out! Make no mistake, this is a major problem. You cannot teach when you are  stressed out, which means that your students cannot learn. They also cant learn if  they are stressed out. Therefore, students cannot be allowed to stress out people at  school. These behaviors need DLOs. But what does that look like? The simple answer is that the student in question will solve the problem of stressing people out by taking away their stress or destressing them. All Problem-Solving 

Delayed Learning Opportunities     239 DLOs that are not Situational are Destressing. While each Situational ProblemSolving DLO has its own unique characteristics, all Destressing Problem-Solving  DLOs have the same description: the student is required to do things for the person  or people whose lives were made more stressful because of their behavior. What that  student does for the stressed-out person or people will depend on what would best  improve the lives of the stressed-out party. 	 DLO-worthy behavior: A student constantly interrupts the teacher. Destressing Problem-Solving DLO: The student is required to enter data and  grade papers for the teacher, thus lowering the teachers stress level back to  normal after it was raised by the behavior of the student. 	 DLO-worthy behavior: A student whines habitually at the PE teacher. Destressing Problem-Solving DLO: The PE teacher requires the student to  deep-clean the equipment closet because cleaning the closet is stressful. While the person who most often needs to be destressed is the teacher, students are  also often stressed out by repeated or major negative behaviors. For example: 	 DLO-worthy behavior: A student habitually does not respect the personal space  of another student. Destressing Problem-Solving DLO: The close-talking student cleans the other  students desk, turns in their work for them, and delivers work materials to  them. When you have both Situational Problem-Solving DLOs and Destressing ProblemSolving DLOs at your disposal, any behavior can be given a DLO to allow students to  learn that they must solve the problems that they cause. Practice DLOs The concept behind this final type of DLO is as simple as it is logical: if students  are not experts at using particular positive behaviors, they will be required to practice  using these positive behaviors until they are experts. This can be a great equalizer for  students who have not used many positive behaviors at home throughout their lives  when compared to their peers who have been trained at home to only use positive  behaviors. This DLO gives these students the opportunity to catch up to their peers in  terms of positive conduct. Just like the Destressing Problem-Solving DLOs, the Practice DLOs can be used  for any behavior, because if a student needs a DLO, it means that they are presently  struggling to use a positive behavior, so they need to practice that behavior. To 
The Classroom Behavior Manual illustrate this, lets look at every DLO-worthy behavior mentioned in this chapter in  terms of a corresponding Practice DLO. Reminders: These learning opportunities are delayed to a noninstructional time  of day. All logistics and details of how to deliver these DLOs will be described later in  this chapter. 	 DLO-worthy behavior: A 2nd grade student has a temper tantrum in art class  and knocks over her tables art supplies. Practice DLO: The student is required to sit next to neatly arranged art materials for 45 minutes without knocking them to the floor. 	 DLO-worthy behavior: A high school junior threatens to beat up a classmate. Practice DLO: The student is required to sit next to a teacher, pretending  that he is the threatenee, while he practices not threatening the threatenee. 	 DLO-worthy behavior: A 5th grade student destroys school property. Practice DLO: The student is required to sit next to said school property and  not destroy it. 	 DLO-worthy behavior: An 8th grade student has a tantrum and destroys a classroom. She refuses to clean up the mess, and since class must go on immediately, the teacher and other students are forced to clean the room so that class  can continue. Practice DLO: The student practices doing things that the teacher asks her  to do: clean paintbrushes, wash tables, stack chairs, and so on. 	 DLO-worthy behavior: A student constantly interrupts the teacher. Practice DLO: The student sits and practices not interrupting the teacher. 	 DLO-worthy behavior: A student whines habitually. Practice DLO: The student practices not whining. This can be done by  simply sitting at a desk and doing anything besides not whining, or practicing  having a conversation with the teacher without whining. 	 DLO-worthy behavior: A student habitually invades the personal space of other  students.

Delayed Learning Opportunities     241 Practice DLO: The student is required to stay out of the personal space of the  teacher, while pretending that the teacher is the student who has been habitually physically crowded by the student who is practicing. Remember, the Practice DLO is a DLO, not a punishment. Students can read books  or do activities while practicing. They can enjoy themselves. Pain is not the point.  Learning is the point! Students can learn and enjoy themselves at the same time.  Any behaviors that students struggle with can be practiced until students attain  proficiency. DLOs for Failure to Use Mindfulness   Centers Correctly As the alternative to highly destructive tactics that contribute to the schoolto-prison pipeline, it is essential that students are able to effectively use  Mindfulness Centers. Without them, schools will revert to the catastrophic countermeasures detailed earlier. Therefore, students behaviors cannot be allowed to interfere with the effective, efficient, and faithful use of  Mindfulness Breaks. Common negative behaviors that occur related to the use  of Mindfulness Breaks include students refusing to go to a Mindfulness Center  and talking or being disruptive while in the center. Now that you have learned  about the two kinds of DLOs, simple DLOs that would be appropriate for these  behaviors may be obvious to you. Just in case they are not, the following are  the possible Problem-Solving and Practice DLOs for students using negative  behaviors instead of properly utilizing Mindfulness Breaks.  Problem-Solving DLO Simply use a Destressing Problem-Solving DLO for any and all DLO-worthy  negative behaviors that are related to Mindfulness Breaks. Practice DLOs Students who cause problems while in a Mindfulness Center should get  extensive practice sitting, standing, or doing mindfulness activities nearby a  Mindfulness Center. The student should not be made to sit or do yoga, or medNote that when one student needs to practice a behavior that caused a problem for an innocent student,  the innocent student should never be called upon to be the dummy to be practiced on. Instead, the  teacher can stand in, getting work done while ignoring the practicing student. For younger students, a  large stuffed animal or cardboard cutout can be a stand-in for a wronged student. When two students need  to practice a behavior around each other, both students can practice not causing a problem for the other  by being in close proximity successfully.
The Classroom Behavior Manual itate forced mindfulness misses the point!. They should be, as always, given  the choice to use the center in any way that does not cause a problem. Students who refuse to go to a Mindfulness Center should practice going  to a center over and over again. After that, they should practice sitting at the  Mindfulness Center for an extensive period of time. Similarly, students who  attempt to talk to or bother students in the Mindfulness Center should practice  not bothering others in the center. The amount of time andor effort required for these DLOs should be substantial, because taking away from the effectiveness of Mindfulness Breaks can  create a catastrophic environment and chaos. Delivering DLOs Here is where the rubber meets the road! You should have a tremendous number of questions about DLOs. Thus far you  have only seen instructions on how to delay learning opportunities and what the  learning opportunities should be. Exactly how to deliver these DLOs and make it  inevitable that your students learn these essential lessons will be the focus of the  remainder of this chapter. We will go into detail about how long to delay the learning  opportunity, how to decide upon the amount of practice or problem solving needed,  how to give the DLO, how to handle student attempts at argument, how to give away  healthy control while giving DLOs, how to monitor and scaffold while present for  DLOs, when and how to schedule the DLO session, and how to create and use inevitability logistics for when students experiment with refusing to take part in a DLO. The central goal in the delivery of DLOs is that you are able to create a feeling of  inevitability within your students. They need to understand that from the moment  you utter your Calm Signal and DLO Delaying Script, the fact that they will be experiencing a DLO sometime in the future is 100 percent inevitable. How Long Should I Delay Learning Opportunities? There are three considerations when determining how long to delay the DLO.  They are listed here in order of importance: 1.	 Developmental appropriateness. It is best to deliver the DLO while the student  is able to remember their DLO-worthy behavior keep in mind that the vast  majority of the time that students say they forgot it, they are merely attempting to get out of the DLO. To decide whether it is likely that a student has  forgotten the DLO-worthy behavior, use the ice cream test: if you think the 

Delayed Learning Opportunities     243 students would remember you saying you would get them ice cream  days  ago, they can remember their past behavior for at least that long. And if students do forget, you can remind them! Still, it is optimal for students to be able to recall the behavior. The following statements are given with the understanding that the age of students  is in reference to regular education students. Special education teachers know  best what is appropriate for their students. These are also very generalized  guidelines. Students above 1st grade can have DLOs delayed for several days; students  in middle and high school can have DLOs delayed for weeks. Kindergarten and  1st grade students should usually have DLOs delivered within 48 hours of the  behavior. It can be slightly longer for more advanced students or for students  near the end of 1st grade. PreK students should usually not have DLOs delayed  for more than 24 hoursin other words, not longer than when the behavior  happened the previous day. Remember that a learning opportunity delayed for  five minutes perhaps just long enough to transition from painting to discovery play is still a Delayed Learning Opportunity. 2.	 Honeymoon period generation. As a principal, I once delayed a middle school  students DLO for two weeks just because his teachers reported that this  exceedingly difficult student had been perfect since I had informed him of the  DLO. Often the mere introduction of the DLO will stop not only the triggering  behavior but also other negative behaviors, as the student is concerned with  what the DLO might entail. The delay can cause a honeymoon period that  you should not be in a hurry to end. 3.	 Whether inevitability has been achieved. Students who have come from classrooms taught by teachers who have not read this book, either the previous year  or during the same year after transferring schools, will likely not understand  that it is inevitable that the terminal destination for their repeated or serious  negative behaviors will be a DLO. When this is the case, it may be a good idea  to not wait too long to give the DLO. Before the DLO delivery, the student may  have the mistaken impression that you wont actually give a DLO when you  say you will. In this case, its a good idea to make the DLO a priority. However,  dont give it so soon that the student and you are still not in a thinking state. If you are at a school where teachers have all read this manual, DLO inevitability will already be programmed into students. While students may test  you at the beginning of the year, the only students who dont understand the  inevitability of DLOs will be transfer students.
The Classroom Behavior Manual If you get students each fall from teachers who have not read this book, you are  likely to get an entire roster full of students who dont comprehend DLO inevitability. This will cause a bit of stress in that, no matter what grade level you  teach, you usually will not want to delay for more than 48 hours for the first  several weeks, until your students develop this understanding. How Do I Decide upon the Amount   of Practice or Problem Solving? There are three issues to consider when deciding upon how much problem solving or practice needs to occur for a DLO: 1.	 Developmental appropriateness. Use your best professional judgment of what  constitutes developmentally appropriate problem-solving or practice tasks,  but err on the side of the tasks being too challenging. We live in a culture that  believes children are weak and incapable. Make the DLOs challenging from  the start. 2.	 Number of learning failures. When a student keeps using the same behavior  over and over, even after a DLO or multiple DLOs, it does not mean that the  DLOs arent working. It just means that the student has, thus far, failed to  learn the proficient use of the behavior. Each time you give another DLO,  turn the knob up on the amount of practice or the amount of problem solving,  rather than changing tactics. 3.	 Whether the DLO-worthy behavior is a hot button for you. Again, put yourself  first. If there are certain behaviors that cause you to lose patience particularly  quickly its smirking and whining for me, you need to train students to not  use those behaviors, and you need to do this quickly. Simply use bigger DLOs  for these types of behaviors than you do for your non-hot-button behaviors. When Do I Schedule the Delivery of a DLO? The possible times to deliver a DLO are as follows: 	 Before school 	 Lunch 	 Recess 	 After school 	 On a weekend

Delayed Learning Opportunities     245 	 As a behavioral Now activity see Chapter 8 and the Real-World Workshop  procedure Notice that these are all noninstructional times. Your school rules, your schedule, or your own personal value structure or priorities may prevent you from using all  of these options, but you must use some of them if you are going to be able to successfully train students to use positive behaviors. Choose the times that work best for you.  A student can, and often will, do DLOs over multiple time periods. If recess is all that  is available, it may take 10 recesses to solve a problem or practice a behavior, especially  if a student refuses to learn during the first DLO implementation. Keep in mind that the more outlandish these times appear to be, the more effective they are. For years, I planned on coming into work for one Saturday in August  and one Saturday in early September for about three hours each day to deliver DLOs.  Even though I donated just six hours for the year, my students knew that I lived at  school and that I was perfectly happy to spend all my free time helping students solve  problems and practice positive behaviors. Similarly, DLO delivery after and before  school can let students know that no matter how long it takes for them to solve problems and practice positive behaviors, you will be there to help them do so. After-school activities may be missed in order to take part in a DLO. This supercharges the lesson that when you use negative behaviors, your life gets worse. Just  remember that the pain in this scenario must be incidental, not the point. If it is the  point, then it is a punishment, not a DLO. Never couch a DLO in terms of You backtalked me, and now youre not going to football practice! Hah! Thats a punishment,  not a DLO. If the student happens to miss football practice, just let the pain of that  reality do the teaching, instead of piling on and pouring lemon juice on the wound. How Do I Deliver a DLO? Once you have thought through your DLO, including making sure it follows DLO  guidelines no punishing, chosen a noninstructional time to deliver it, and worked  out all of the logistical issues, you can deliver your DLO. During DLO delivery, act as a  friendly person who is going to teach something, not an angry dungeon master who  is there to inflict pain. Act exactly as you would if you were having a student come in  to learn about algebra, division, or keyboarding. Concentrate on being nice. For now, lets assume that all students will be cooperative many will not; see  below for how to use proper inevitability logistics for students who, at first, refuse  to learn lessons. Whether you are picking up a student or they are coming to your  room, greet them as though you are going to teach them a lesson because you are.  You can engage in small talk, especially if you are picking them up from another 
The Classroom Behavior Manual room and have some time to interact before you arrive at the location for the DLO,  optimally a place free from the presence of the students peers or unfamiliar adults. Sitting down in an assertive position will show the student that you are relaxed  and in charge of the situation. It will also tell your brain the same thing. To sit in an  assertive position, sit in a chair with your legs extended out in front of you, heels  down, toes up. Lean back in the chair. Put your hands behind your head, elbows out,  with your fingers interwoven behind your head. Once you are situated, use your Calm Signal to make sure you are emotionally  regulated and to increase the odds that the student is emotionally regulated. Draw  the Calm Signal out: start with a very deep inhale and then say the Calm Signal especially slowly as you exhale. It may help to rub your eyes or face or stretch out your  arms toward the ceiling the way you might when you wake up in the morning. You are ready to speak. For a Practice DLO, you may say something to the effect of the following: Hey. You are really struggling with not running out of the room when you  get frustrated. Im not mad at you. Its just important that everyone in the  classroom become an expert at staying in the room. Since you presently  struggle with this, Im going to give you the chance to become an expert  at staying in the room. I am going to simply have you sit, stand, or lie  down somewhere in the room and practice not leaving. You can read or  do work, or just stare at the wall and think your thoughts. Whatever you  want to do that doesnt cause a problem is fine, just as long as you are in  the room. For a Problem-Solving DLO, you may say something like this: All righty, dude. I gotta tell you, you really caused a problem for me last  week when you kept interrupting me during algebra class. Im not angry  about it, and I know you get excited to answer questions. While I love  that you get excited, it just stresses me out when I cant teach. I have  been so stressed out that I have not had it in me to put together the class  homework folders for next week. Im going to ask you to do it in order to  destress me. At this point, it is time to systematically give away control to the student. Do this for  every consequence. For the Practice DLO above, you can give the student a choice on  how long they need to practice: How long will it take you to become an expert at staying in the room: 20  minutes or 45 minutes?

Delayed Learning Opportunities     247 For a Problem-Solving DLO, give a choice on how they will destress you, within the  parameters that you already set up: Feel free to either put the homework papers in the folder one at a time or  stack them all up and put them all in a folder at once. Either way is fine. If the student refuses to choose one way or the other, choose for them. Feel free to give  as many choices as you would like; the more, the better. Optimally, its best to include  at least one choice. If you have time and are in the mood, you can give the student the opportunity  to solve a problem in a way that they wish to solve it, or they can decide exactly what  behaviors they need to practice and for how long. The more healthy control you give  away, the better. Even when allowing for this higher level of control, make sure that  you have your own DLO ready to go if, at any point, you feel that the student is beginning to bargain or the discussion is simply taking too much time. How Do I Avoid Arguing with a   Student When I Am Giving a DLO? A student cant get you to argue with them without your consent. The minimum  amount of people it takes to argue is two; just dont be one of those two people. If a  student attempts to argue with you in the middle of your instructions, ignore this  attempt and steamroll through it as you keep delivering the DLO. If the student  continues to try to argue, use your Argument Shield see pages 4547.  If the attempts  at argument become a real problem, say your DLO Delaying script and then ignore  the student. Students who have achieved the understanding of inevitability will stop  the argument attempts. If they have not, keep in mind that the forthcoming DLO will  involve more and more practice or problem solving the more they attempt to argue. How Do I Monitor, Scaffold, and Reinforce Positive  Behaviors During the Completion of the DLO? Your first priority when overseeing completion of a DLO is to take care of yourself. If you are working hard to monitor or scaffold a DLO, you are doing it wrong.  Monitor while ignoring the student as much as is appropriate see below. Get work  done or eat your lunch or stare off into spacewhatever you want to do. Scaffold by  using any GGIs that are appropriate, preferably without looking up from what you  are doing. As is always true with scaffolding, give as little help preferably none as is  necessary for the student to be able to be successful in completing the task. If a student is able to complete a DLO but, in your professional opinion, is choosing not to, allow that student to suffer by having their noninstructional life placed on 
The Classroom Behavior Manual pause, perhaps for a very long period of time. This is time well spent for the student.  They may be learning that any number of negative behaviors dont work with their  teacher. Behaviors like whining, playing dumb, or working slowly all will be revealed  to be nonfunctional for the student. The simplicity of tasks involved with Practice and Problem-Solving DLOs makes  both monitoring and scaffolding easier. Situational Problem-Solving DLOs may be  slightly more involved. A 6th grade student making a plan for another student to feel  safe may take more involved scaffolding, but again, always err on the side of students  suffering through work that is difficult instead of offering more support than is  needed. Prioritize your work ahead of that being done by the student. If you feel that a student is causing serious problems for you and your stress level,  rub your eyes. Perhaps groan about how you are getting stressed out and say your  DLO Delaying Script. Then ignore the student. Let the student suffer. In this case, the  student is imposing the suffering upon themselves by using negative behaviors. If  you stay sad and empathetic enough, the student may be able to connect their use of  negative behaviors with their own suffering and realize it is inevitable that continued  negative behaviors will not get them what they want. The DLO will occur later. One highly effective way to scaffold for a Practice DLO is to treat the DLO like a  video game, using difficulty levels. This can be especially effective for students who  you feel are not yet skilled enough to practice without more intensive scaffolding. For  the 1st grade student who has trouble not running out of the room, for instance, you  can add onto the script above by saying the following: Right now, you are struggling so much that Im not yet sure if you could  stay in the room without some help. This is going to be like a video game.  We will begin on easy, where I will sit and do my work while sitting in  the doorway. This will help remind you to stay in the room. Since you  picked 30 minutes, easy level will be for 10 minutes. Then you can get to  medium level. On medium, I will move from the doorway to be next  to the doorway for another 10 minutes, and this may still remind you to  stay in the room. Then will be boss level, when I will go and sit down  at my desk and leave the door wide open. If you can stay in the room for  the entire 30 minutes, you will have said to me with your actions, I can  stay in the room! I am an expert! Then you will be all done, and you can  move on with your life!

Delayed Learning Opportunities     249 What Do I Do When the Student Is   Done Practicing or Solving a Problem? Act the same way you would if your student just mastered an academic standard. Be happy and excited. For a Problem-Solving DLO, thank them for solving the  problem or perhaps for destressing you or other students. For a Practice DLO, ask if  the students are experts at their new positive behavior. In both cases, feel free to use  another Strategic Noticing and give a high five, handshake, hug, or class handshake,  whatever is appropriate for you. Congratulations, you have built your relationship  with your students through their negative behavior! What Are Inevitability Logistics? The most common anxiety that teachers have when trying to hold students  accountable through DLOs or punishments, for that matter is the worry that the  students will refuse to take part in whatever accountability procedures the teacher  creates. They will worry, for example, that a student will refuse to clean up a mess  that they created, or practice a behavior, or destress a teachers aide. What then? The irony is that, when handled correctly using the methods detailed below,  student refusal of DLOs will be the means through which students will learn the  most important lesson of their entire lives: the refusal of a reasonable request from an  authority figure will not absolve you from responsibility for your actions and will not get  you what you want. It is virtually impossible to lead a happy, healthy, positive life without learning  this lesson. A person who never learns this is not likely to be able to successfully complete elementary school, let alone high school. A person who never learns this will  not be able to become and stay employed. It is common for a person who never learns  this to end up in prison or suffer an early death. Remember that by using the DLO Process within the context of all of the other  procedures and strategies, we have systematically removed all obstacles that we possibly can that would stop a students brain from being able to learn this lesson. If the  manual you are holding were a book of fiction, this would be the climax. While the  books other procedures and strategies help to create a positive classroom environment, all roads lead to the inevitability of the DLOs. Either students will be cooperative and prosocial, or they will have to learn to be cooperative and prosocial. They  have no choice in the matter.
The Classroom Behavior Manual DLO inevitability logistics create this essential paradigm for students. Once  inevitability is achieved, students will be cooperative when they are asked to solve  problems they caused or practice a positive behavior. In addition, creating inevitability will cause the student to stop their negative behavior when you use your DLO  Delaying Script. Whats more, if DLO inevitability is consistent, the mere use of the  Calm Signal will be enough to stop the behavior.  Furthermore, once inevitability is achieved, GGIs will be significantly more  effective. The power of each one will be supercharged, allowing you to control behaviors in ways that you could not previously. Inevitable DLOs act as a vaccine that works  its way back up the continuum of the procedures and strategies in this manual, making them all more effective. Eventually, students can concentrate on learning while  feeling safe and happy at school.  Unfortunately, not establishing DLO inevitability and allowing students DLO  refusals to get them out of responsibility for their actions has the opposite effect. It  acts as a cancer that spreads to everything in this manual, making it all less effective  in eliciting positive behaviors from students. How Do I Actually Create DLO Inevitability for Students? Creating DLO inevitability first involves a teacher paradigm shift. Instead of  dreading a students refusal of a DLO, you should hope that it occurs. When a student  refuses, they are saying to you that they have not yet learned that the refusal of a reasonable request from an authority figure will not absolve them from responsibility  for their actions and will not get them what they want. This is the most important  learning opportunity they will ever have, and you have the honor of being a part of it.  This is where you can save a life; they will not be happy or successful in life without  learning this lesson. The essential understanding of DLO inevitability logistics is that, as long as you  have the logistics set up correctly, every moment that a student refuses to be cooperative is a positive learning experience for the student. During DLO refusal, a student is  constantly attempting to get out of responsibility for their actions. As long as the tool  of refusal doesnt work, the student is learning that it doesnt work. When they are  belligerent or even violent, they are using tools to the same end, with the same result.  In this way, the worse the behavior gets, the more they are learning, and the more  important the lesson becomes. The purpose of DLO inevitability logistics is to make  sure that, no matter how long it takes, the student will continue to learn their most  important lesson.

Delayed Learning Opportunities     251 Now to the logistics. If a student refusing to be cooperative with a DLO is learning, nothing needs to be done because the lesson is in progress. This is the optimal  scenario. The student is learning while you get work done, eat lunch, check your  phone, and so on. The student is learning, and you are taking care of yourself.   Ignore and monitor the student simultaneously, but theres no need for teaching   or scaffoldingthe student is teaching themselves. Use Strategic Noticing if positive behaviors occur. For instance, imagine a student who is supposed to be practicing staying seated and listening, but is instead  choosing to run around the room screaming. When the student takes a break to catch  their breath in their seat, notice this positive, although perhaps nearly accidental,  behavior: I noticed you sitting in your seat. Then immediately state, I am starting  the clock on your practice time30 minutes to go. Ill keep counting as long as you are  silently in your seat. Do not praise the student. If the student starts running around  again, ignore them. If they continue to sit silently, notice it again, exactly the same  way: I noticed you sitting in your seat. Notice every few minutes. Slightly decrease  the noticing as the student gets nearer to the behavioral goal. By ignoring the negative, belligerent behaviors and noticing the positive, you will make positive behaviors  more likely and negative behaviors less likely. Remember that students who are refusing are students who are learning! I once  had a student refuse to sit and be kind to me for five recesses in a row. Every other day,  he experimented with sitting in his seat, which I noticed. On the sixth recess, he sat  from the beginning. He practiced perfectly for 17 minutes that recess and 3 minutes  the next recess. He became an official expert at sitting silently and being nice to me  and maintained expert status for the rest of the year. As long as the refusing student remains in the DLO location, the student is  learning the lesson we want them to learn. This is even more true if the student is  destroying property or yelling, if we deal with it properly see below. What we want  to avoid, if possible, is the student leaving the DLO location. Once the student leaves  a DLO location, the mere act of not being in that location anymore reinforces the  refusing behavior. If an adult gives attention to the student, that reinforcement is  significantly more destructive. Put another way, the student is learning cooperation  while in the DLO location. If you are concerned that the student may leave the DLO location, you should  sit in the doorway while working and using the above ignoring, monitoring, and  noticing strategies unless your school has rules that specifically prohibit this. Be  nonchalant, and do not warn the student about leaving the room. Only a tiny fraction 
The Classroom Behavior Manual of the students who would walk out of an unobstructed door will actually push past a  teacher in a doorway. However, some will. If you have school or district rules regarding this eventuality, follow them, but none of those rules should be used to supplant further DLOs.  If the student attempts to get past you, do not grab or hold them, and do not get into  any type of physical altercation to stop them from leaving. If they do leave the DLO  location, use your DLO Delaying Script. Further DLOs can be arranged that involve  the parental notification and legal considerations being addressed that would be necessary to close doors and use safety locks to create further inevitability. Crushing Behaviors with DLOs If you are reading carefully, you may notice a small gap between the DLOs and  the parameters put forward by most schools and districts and what they require for  keeping students safe with restraint and seclusion. What if, you may ask, a student  is belligerent and stopping all learning, and even perhaps destroying school property,  but is not posing an immediate physical threat to themselves or others? What then? When a student uses behaviors that create this type of chaoschaos that disrupts the entire grade level or schoolthe behaviors need to be crushed with DLOs.  This does not mean that the student should be crushed; it means that the behavior  must be crushed. Remember, DLOs are the end of the line. They are the dead end  whereby even the most extreme negative behaviors must be made nonfunctional:  they cannot be used by the student to get what they want. In response to these behaviors, the students nonacademic life must be put on hold as much as possible until  they have learned the lesson that belligerent defiance is an inherently nonfunctional  behavior that will not get them what they want. This response might require both  Problem-Solving DLOs and Practice DLOs; it might require DLOs being scheduled and  staffed by a grade-level team using such tactics is preferable to giving suspensions,  which train students to think that belligerent behaviors get them vacations. Still, all of this is done later. What about now? Now is the time to prioritize keeping students safe. There are GGIs for this, such as Mindfulness Breaks and Reverse  Mindfulness Breaks, that can occur before or after you use your DLO Delaying Script  as an intervention for keeping all students both calm and safe. However, even when  you have done everything possible to prevent such an outburst by following the content of this manual, there is still the possibility that it may happen. Keeping students safe is the province of the procedures and policies created by  schools and districts, which may be helpful, hurtful, or both. There are ways of keeping students safe that minimize or neutralize making belligerence functional. The 

Delayed Learning Opportunities     253 less inhibitive the policies are regarding restraint and seclusion for instance, allowing belligerent students to destroy property, the more significant the DLOs will have  to be to counterbalance the functionality of those belligerent behaviors. Ideally, districts and administrations will use crisis response training to implement policies that keep students safe while minimizing the functionality of negative  behaviors.  How Do I Work with Other Teachers and   Staff to Share the Burden of DLOs? Whenever possible, you should give and administer DLOs yourself. From an  organizational standpoint, it is advantageous for as many DLOs as possible to be taken  care of by the educator directly involved simply to cut down on the need for extra  communication. From a teaching and learning perspective, it also shows students  that their teacher is the ultimate authority figure in their lives at school. While it is  optimal for you to implement the DLO process on your own, you should always feel  comfortable getting advice on DLOs from your fellow educators. Oftentimes, one  teacher ends up being the go-to person for the best and most effective DLOs. The  delayed nature of DLOs lends itself to being able to get advice on the best Practice and  Problem-Solving DLOs at a time when all is calm in the school usually when students  are not present. Many schools, grade levels, or departments have weekly meetings to  talk about appropriate DLOs for students. Again, being able to delay the DLO allows  for this. While it is optimal for educators to completely handle the DLO process on their  own, it can also be highly useful for educators to lean on each other when implementing the DLO process, as long as it is done correctly. The educator who implemented  the DLO must always take the lead role in the DLO process. This trains all students to  understand that the main authority figure in their lives at school is always the adult  standing in front of them at any given time. This means that the adult who gives the DLO Delaying Script must be the person who gives the student the instructions for their DLO. It does not mean that that  educator must be with the student while they are solving problems or practicing.  Schools, grade levels, teams, or departments can work together to staff noninstructional locations to schedule perhaps daily times that can be used for DLOs. Working  together, educators can create that all-important feeling of inevitability in students:  I might as well do what is expected, because having to solve the problems that I  caused or practicing doing what is expected doesnt work out as well.
The Classroom Behavior Manual Some educator teams make a schedule for noninstructional times often before  or after school or for several hours on the weekend in which everyone on the team  will take a certain period of time every week. For instance, Mr. Colvin may take every  Monday afternoon from 3:00 to 4:00, Mr. Sears may take every Tuesday afternoon  from 3:00 to 4:00, and so on. Some educators work with only one or two other educators in a rotating schedule to create these consistent DLO sessions. During these times, educators can bring their students to their rooms to practice  or solve problems. The educators who gave the DLO do any and all communication  with home if necessary, and they are there at the beginning of all DLO sessions to  give students their instructions or to create the instructions with the students. Once  the student knows how they will solve the problem that they caused or knows what  behavior to practice, the educator can leave the student with the teacher who is monitoring the DLO session. If you wish to implement DLOs on the same day as the negative behavior, it is  usually best to do it during lunch or recess, as these times will not require parent communication. This is fine. Make sure that, if you use a lunch period, the student always  gets lunch and enough time to eat said lunch; never withhold food. Unless you can find a way to make it convenient for you, dont put an emphasis  on communicating with parents in order to facilitate doing after-school DLOs on the  same day as the behavior. You usually wont have time to arrange it. Besides, implementing the DLO the next day, or even a week later, can create a honeymoon period  as the student anticipates the coming consequences. One final way that educators can coordinate with one another to help with DLOs  is by batching them. You will see many of the same negative behaviors from a number  of students in your schoolfor example, being disruptive, repeatedly talking in the  hallway, or antagonizing a certain student. When these behaviors occur, it can be  helpful for educators to batch DLOs. All of the students that antagonized a particular student can go to the same room to destress that student by cleaning and arranging their things for them. All of the hallway talkers can go to a hallway to practice  being silent. All of the disruptive students can report to one room to practice sitting  silently in class. These DLO sessions can occur on the same day or on successive days,  and can happen during any noninstructional time. It is important to note that when educators put effort into DLOs in the first two  months of school, behaviors will become more and more manageable and will result  in very few, if any, DLOs once spring rolls around. Do your DLOs in the fall when you  have the energy. The goal is to use lots of DLOs early so that you eventually dont need 

Delayed Learning Opportunities     255 them. Create and enforce limits early so that your students dont spend the entire year  trying to figure out where the limits are! When It Feels Like DLOs   Are Not Working If it seems as though you are repeatedly using DLOs to address the same behaviors  over and over again, here is a simple checklist of questions to ask yourself to make  sure you are not making some common mistakes: 1.	 Am I trying to use DLOs in a vacuum? If you are trying to use DLOs without  using the rest of the procedures and strategies in this book, they wont be very  effective, because there wont be enough prevention or mitigation going on.  Similarly, if you are using only a few parts of the book, DLOs will tend to pile  up. If this is the case, concentrate your efforts on just two or three procedures  or strategies you cannot neglect Strategic Noticing and be successful, for  example. 2.	 Am I remembering to delay my DLOs? Remember that students wont be likely  to learn anything and may react with explosive behavior if you attempt to  institute a learning opportunity immediately after a DLO-worthy negative  behavior. 3.	 Am I always using my Calm Signal when I delay and when I give a DLO? If not, the  student will not be as calm as they could be, you wont be as calm as you should  be, the student probably wont be able to learn anything, and you probably  wont be able to teach anything. 4.	 Is my DLO a logical learning opportunity that teaches, or is it a punishment that  just causes pain? If you have accidentally created a punishment, a student is  likely to dig in and be endlessly resistant because they feel that they have lost  what they will perceive as a power struggle. 5.	 Has the student learned enough? This is the most common mistake educators  make. Usually, very difficult students will use their old negative behaviors  over and over in multiple failed attempts to get what they want. That is who  difficult students are: they have gotten what they wanted for a long period  of time through repeated negative behaviors, so they will continue to make   these attempts for longer than other students would. These students will need  to see a pattern of behavior from you that shows them not tells them that  when you say you will hold them accountable, you will. Remember that the 
The Classroom Behavior Manual lowest number that denotes a pattern is three. For even relatively difficult students, take for granted that they wont even consider changing their behavior  until they receive a DLO three times for that single behavior. For these students, whether or not they see these patterns that are necessary to hold them  accountable can be a matter of life or death. And whether or not you can establish this inevitability in the first two months of the school year will determine  whether or not you can do and enjoy your job for the rest of the year. What Is the Role of School  Administration in the DLO Process? In the DLO process, administrators do not initially deal with disciplinary issues in  response to the negative behaviors of students. Having an administrator take a primary role with discipline in a school is an inherently dysfunctional arrangement  that, by definition, actively encourages negative behaviors. Students who attempt  to get what they want through negative behaviors are almost always trying to get  some combination of control, attention, or avoidance of a person or a thing, and that  thing is usually work. What does a student get when a teacher sends them to an  administrator as a reaction to their negative behaviors? Some combination of attention, control, and avoidance. The behavior is reinforced. When this dynamic plays  out every single day for 180 days per year, the result is some level of chaos accidentally  created by well-meaning people who have had no instruction or guidance on changing this dynamic. Of course, this manual is that instruction and guidance. It doesnt matter if you  are the only teacher in your school using this manual. You dont need anyone else.  As someone who did not call on help from an administrator even once in a decade of  using these procedures and strategies, I can tell you that if you explain to your administrator that you will be handling all of your own discipline, they will tend to love  that arrangement, and they may even be very flexible in not asking you to enforce  the systems that others may be required to use that are far less effective than the  contents of this book. Administrators reading this book should keep reading for ways to support teachers in their efforts to create a positive, prosocial school. Strategic Noticing Difficult students, almost by definition, have had great success using negative  behaviors to get attention, control, and avoidance. Traditional discipline puts school 

Delayed Learning Opportunities     257 administrators in the unenviable position of reinforcing those negative behaviors  by reacting to them, systematically, giving students attention, control, and avoidance. Instead of reacting to negative behaviors by reinforcing them, administrators   can flip the script and use consistent Strategic Noticing to systematically prevent  negative behaviors. Therefore, the most important job of an administrator is to move throughout the  school and use Strategic Noticing 600 times per day to recondition the school in this  regard. Six hundred instances of Strategic Noticing may sound like a lot, but it is not.  Most administrators, especially ones that work with at-risk populations, react to negative behaviors with warnings, lectures, and threats far more than 600 times a day.  Therefore, the choice is whether the administrator is going to systematically prevent  negative behaviors or react to and thereby reinforce negative behaviors.  Supporting Teachers When Parents Complain Using the contents of this manual will put teachers in a good position for dealing  with parents for obvious reasons. These are best practices that dont involve anger  or punishment. Still, there will always be parents who complain about teacher practices, even when they are best practices. The most common complaints will be from  parents who do not understand DLOs and view them as punitive. Even after an initial  parent communication letter and corresponding conversations about the contents   of this book see Chapter 8, they may not fully understand the instructional and   nonpunitive nature of DLOs. Often, parents fill in the blanks of their nonunderstanding with the memories of their own school experiences, which probably  involved punitive measures. If a parent has a complaint and is unsatisfied with a  teachers answer, administrators should support the use of DLOs, using the same  techniques as the teacher. Coordinating DLOs Administrators can help teachers coordinate with colleagues regarding DLOs.  Batching DLOs or scheduling times and locations for DLO sessions can be a helpful  and very much appreciated service that administrators can manage. Acting as a DLO Location Substitute Similarly, teachers should staff DLO locations if possible, so that they have an  opportunity to build relationships with students and families and demonstrate that  they are the ultimate authority figures in the lives of these students at school. If the 
The Classroom Behavior Manual logistics of staffing prevents teachers from being able to do so, however, administrators can help by taking on this responsibility. Delivering Students As a part of a plan for DLO implementation, administrators can participate  by delivering students to a DLO location. This should be done in a friendly way.  Remember, DLOs are not punishment; the administrator is just escorting the student  to a lesson. The administrator does not need to know anything about the nature of the  DLO or the DLO-worthy behavior, nor should they discuss it with the student. The  administrator should give a friendly ESPN Greeting and engage in friendly conversation, and an Argument Shield should be used to deal with any students attempts at  argument. The administrator is not in charge of this situation; they are merely acting  as a delivery service for the educator receiving the student. Attending DLO Meetings and The Classroom   Behavior Manual Book Club Meetings Administrators should be firmly aligned with staff by attending DLO meetings,  but they do not need to lead the meetings. In fact, it is often most helpful for them not  to. Having another staff member in charge allows for a leader to arise naturally from  the staff. This also makes it less likely that the parties involvededucators, students,  and parentswill feel that an administrator is in charge of discipline when they  should not be. Doing Their Own DLOs When DLO-worthy behaviors happen away from teachers and in front of an  administrator typically in a common area, the administrator is now the primary  authority figure. It is their responsibility to delay and then give the DLO. What If Students Seem to   Be Enjoying Themselves? A common sign that you are using the DLO process correctly is that, due to the lack  of anger, lectures, and threats, students may remark that they enjoy the solving of a  problem or the practicing of a behavior. This is a wonderful outcome! Educators who  are used to using anger and punishments may feel uncomfortable about this. They  may have, deep in their bones, a feelingnot even a thought, but a feelingthat 

Delayed Learning Opportunities     259 students should be in pain if they do something they shouldnt do. If this happens to  you, let that feeling go! Students may or may not feel that a DLO is painful or boring,  or that they would rather be doing something else, or they may not. The pain is not  the point: the learning is the point! If students are enjoying themselves, use the circumstances to further build relationships with them. For example, if you have  a student who purposely broke pencil  leads sharpen 30 pencils for you, and she mentions that she loves sharpening pencils,  tell her that you are happy to hear that and that you have hundreds of pencils that she  could sharpen during noninstructional time. If she agrees, great! You will get lots of  pencils sharpened. Make a huge deal about it when she is done. Shake her hand and  go on and on about how helpful shes been! If she declines the offer, it is highly likely  that she was just trying to manipulate you by implying that she is not affected by this  DLO, and you have called her bluff in a kind, calm way. Either way, you have handled  the situation with calm empathy. How and When Do I Communicate   with Parents About DLOs? Because we are teaching instead of punishing, and because parent communication  is an extra thing that takes time and energy, parent communication about DLOs  should be kept to a minimum. Treat DLOs as the learning situation that they are. You  would not need to tell parents about every single struggle their child is having with  trigonometry, and you should not and could not tell parents about every struggle  their student is having with walking through the hallway silently. For reasons that  have already been discussed, students should be able to participate in multiple DLOs  without notifying parents. Parents should be notified about learning regarding their childrens behavior for  the same reasons that parents should be notified regarding their childrens learning  of academics: when they are beginning to fall behind the rest of the class in a significant way. This should be done in a way that does not ask the parent for help but is  merely informative: Hi, Mr. Kiely. Its Mr. Jones from school. I pet your dog two weeks ago  in your front yard. I want you to know that Im not going to make this  a problem for you, and I dont need you to do anything, but Charlie has  really been stressing me out by talking to his friends while Im trying  to teach. I get stressed out because its my job to teach my students, and  I just cant when hes talking while Im teaching. As you know, I dont 
The Classroom Behavior Manual punish kids, and I dont get angry. He has been spending his recesses off  and on for the last two weeks taking away the stress that he created by  doing work around the classroom for me. This solves the problem of me  being stressed out, which I appreciate. Im sure he is going to mature into  someone who stops causing this problem. I just wanted you to know that  hes falling behind the rest of the class in his ability to not cause problems.  I would want to know this as a parent, but theres nothing that you need  to do about it. Im sorry to take your time, and I know Charlies going to  get the hang of this! If it fits in with your or your teams plans, and if it is convenient for you, this may be a  time to ask if it is convenient to arrange for before-school or after-school or weekend  DLO time. Many teachers complain of parents not being flexible in this regard. In the  context of anger and punishment, this is understandable; most parents do not like  to inconvenience themselves so that their child can be angrily punished. Look at the  suggested script for communicating with parents above. Would you be amenable to  work with a teacher who used the DLO process and explained it that way? Probably.  Most parents will gladly agree to the calm teaching of positive behaviors by a kind,  loving adultand to getting an hour of free babysitting to boot! Putting It All Together: A Scenario The following DLO process was used with two high school students who got into a  fistfight during the teachers fifth period class. They were removed from the school  for safety reasons. The DLO took place the next day as an alternative to further   out-of-school suspension. This is how the teacher delivered the entire DLO, from  start to finish.  Note that such a DLO involves planning, and it should only be done after approval  from a principal and all appropriate school administrators, and perhaps even a school  lawyer. It may seem like a good deal of work, but implementing this DLO versus punishing students with suspension or expulsion could circumvent the school-to-prison  pipeline and be the difference between life and death. The teacher is in a seated assertive position as the principal calmly  delivers the two high school juniors to the teachers classroom. It is 30  minutes before school is to begin. Hey, fellas, the teacher greets them. It is good to have you back.  I was so sad to see you guys punching each other yesterday. I was sad to 

Delayed Learning Opportunities     261 know that you had to leave and go home so we could keep you guys and  the other students safe. Right now, you two are really struggling with  being peaceful and calm around each other. Since you are in four of each  others classes, as well as a study hall and lunch, this is an important  skill for you to master. I dont know whats going on with you guys, and  frankly, its none of my business. All that is my business is that you learn  this skill for the sake of everyones safety. I am going to have you guys  practice being safe and peaceful around each other. You will be able to  rejoin the schools general population as soon as you have mastered this  skill. Feel free to hate and despise each other as much as you would like.  All you have to do is not be violent. How long do you need to practice not  hurting each other, two days or three days? Two days. OK, two days it is. The way that you will practice is that you will sit  next to each other for two days. If you can manage to not hurt each other  for those two days, you will have shown me that you are experts at not  hurting each other, and you can go back to living your lives. The problem  is that right now, Id be crazy to just have you guys sit next to each other,  because every indication leads me to believe that you are not experts at  being peaceful, and Id rather you two not hurt each other. So Im going  to have you practice this like you are playing a video game, with levels,  starting with  easy level, then  medium level, then  difficult level, and  ending with  boss level. Heres how this will go: The easy level will involve you guys sitting  next to each other on either side of a brick wall. In a minute, we are  going to go over to the elementary wing. I have arranged for you guys  to sit on either side of a wall between two 2nd grade classrooms. Please  understand that I am not trying to embarrass you or imply that you were  acting like 2nd graders or anything like that. Actually, the opposite is  true: Im taking you guys over there because I didnt want to embarrass  you by having you do this around your friends. The easy level will take  all day today. As long as you can pass the easy level today by not causing  any problems or hurting each other or trying to break down the wall to  get at each other, you will report here tomorrow for instructions on the  medium, difficult, and boss levels. You can do old schoolwork, read, stare  off into space, or whatever you want to do that involves silently practicing  being nonviolent while seated in the back of a classroom. You cant do  
The Classroom Behavior Manual any other work that you are missing until you get back to your classes,  though. No sleeping, because you cant sleep and practice at the same  time. No one will talk to you. You will be left to practice with no distractions. Your lunch will be delivered to you. Im going to walk you over to  2nd grade now. The teacher walks the students over to the elementary wing while  building relationships by chatting and relaxing with the students. If  either student has any issues, he repeats the easy level while the other  student temporarily goes back to class, since this DLO is a two-person  practice situation. If both students have issues, they both repeat the easy  level. If both pass the easy level, they report the next day as planned. Every 40 minutes or so, an adult should notice the positive target  behavior by saying, I noticed you being peaceful. This should continue  throughout the levels. If the students are successful with the easy level, at the end of the  day, the teacher should congratulate the students for passing the level  and instruct them to report back the next day. The next day, they will be  greeted with the following: OK, easy level cleared! Today you have an opportunity to clear the  medium, difficult, and boss levels. The medium level involves you both  sitting in Mrs. Shaws office, on opposite sides of the room. You will  practice being around each other, this time without a wall between you.  The difficult level involves you sitting in her office but next to each other.  These levels are completed just like the easy level: do whatever you want  without standing, sleeping, napping, or talking. Before I tell you about  the boss level, you guys need to decide how long you need to spend on the  medium level: three hours or four? Three. Three it is. OK, the boss level will be different. The boss level will  only be 30 minutes in which you will be sitting next to each other in the  assistant principals office while he completes some work, and you wont  be allowed to do work. You can sit silently, or if you want to challenge  yourselves, you can talk to each other. You dont have to, though, as long  as you can sit silently, talk pleasantly, or both. If you fail at the medium or  difficult level, you wont get to the boss level, and youll redo whichever  levels you failed tomorrow. If you succeed, you will be showing me that 

Delayed Learning Opportunities     263 you are experts at being peaceful with each other, and you can get back to  real life tomorrow. Its all up to you guys. The teacher holds the students accountable by allowing them to fail  or succeed at practicing effectively and reapplying practice time if and  when needed. Once students have passed the boss level, the teacher says  the following: It looks like you did it! Youve completed the boss level. Are you guys  experts at being peaceful with each other? Yes. All right. I did notice how peaceful you guys have been over the  course of the last two days. Shake students hands. I am glad to have you  guys back in school! Ill see you tomorrow. This DLO and the planning for all of the necessary logistics allows the teacher to  build relationships with students through their negative behaviors, instead of instituting a punishment that will inevitably hurt their relationship. When Do I Use a GGI and   When Do I Use a DLO? The answer to this question might surprise you: it isnt tremendously important, so  dont get stressed out about which one you choose in any given situation. The reason  for this is that, regardless of whether you choose a GGI or notify a student of a DLO,  you have done no harm, and any harm or unfairness that you might cause in the  future can still be reversed if necessary. This is by design. Imagine you are teaching in a 7th grade classroom and, arriving at a Power  Position, you see what appears to be two students, seated next to each other, playing  tug-of-war with an unidentifiable object. It appears that they are both trying to discreetly pull the object from the others grip below desk level. What you do not know is that Student A had been rooting around in Student Bs  desk while you were at another Power Position, from which you could not observe  this activity. Having found a stress ball, Student A started to remove it from the desk  of Student B. At that point, Student B realized that he was being robbed, and you are  now witnessing the ensuing tug-of-war. You now have a choice to notify the students of a DLO or use a GGI. Lets say that  you use a GGI. You keep teaching while using GGIs 5 and 6: Reactive Movement  and Hover. Lets say, just for the sake of the scenario, the tug-of-war stops, and life 
The Classroom Behavior Manual goes on. Of course, if the behavior continues or starts up again, you can pick another  GGI or go to a DLO. Notice that, if you had all of the information, you would probably use your  delaying script in order to inform Student A that there would be a DLO coming in the  future. The fact of the matter, however, is that teachers often dont have all of the necessary information, which causes traditional discipline to put teachers in impossible  situations more on that in a moment. Even though most teachers would want to give a DLO, the use of a GGI stopped  the behavior without you having to stop teaching: the GGI accomplished its goal! In  addition, later, during noninstructional time, you can always get more information  and enact a DLO if necessary. You can also make sure stolen property is returned. Conversely, if you notify both students of a DLO and move on with teaching, it is  likely to stop the behavior, even though you have made what could be called a mistake  by notifying an innocent student of a DLO. That student may request due process,  or not, and then this can be worked out later during noninstructional time. Either  way, the use of a GGI or DLO does not require you to stop teaching and allows you to  fix it later if your assessment of the situation was incomplete or wrong. This is just  another example of how GGIs and DLOs can make your life far less stressful. Lets use this scenario to compare the GGIDLO model with the traditional discipline model involving verbal demands and immediate punishments. While both  GGIs and DLOs are good options, having to choose between demands or punishments  puts educators in an impossible situation. A demand such as Stop messing with each  other! is almost guaranteed to inspire understandable arguments or explosive  behaviors and is 100 percent certain to stop instruction. If an immediate punishment  is used, like sending one or both students to the principal, it is possible that you could  be convicting an innocent person! Traditional discipline fails once again. The second, perhaps more helpful answer to the question of when to use GGIs  and when to use DLOs is that GGIs should be used with small behaviors that arent  making it significantly difficult for students to learn and for you to teach. This means  that whether you choose to use a DLO or GGI will depend upon you and what you are  able to tolerate. It will depend upon what your hot button behaviors are. If a certain  behavior drives you crazy, it needs to earn that student a one-way ticket to a DLO.  A behavior that gets a student a DLO in your class may not get one in mine, simply  because that behavior doesnt bother me as much as it does you. For instance, note  passing may drive you crazy. It happens to not bother me very much. Therefore, you  would use a DLO, while I would use a GGI. This is another example of taking care of 

Delayed Learning Opportunities     265 your sanity so you can take care of your class. If a behavior makes it too difficult to  teach at an optimal level, you need to train it away with a DLO. While note passing may not be particularly bothersome to me, if I have used four  or five interventions over a two-day period for note passing, it is probably a good idea  for me also to move to a DLO. Any behavior that you feel is very serious or is causing  any type of major problem for other people including you should generate a DLO.  Remember, though, that the PLOs woven into the Real-World Workshop procedure  provide learning opportunities for students refusing to do work, so there is no reason  to ever use DLOs for this!

Individual students may arrive at school with profoundly different experiences.  The Michaels of the world have had profound trauma. The Mykeshas have had none.  The Mykeshas of the world have been taught and trained by their parents and caregivers to use positive, prosocial behaviors. The Michaels of the world have not. While the demands and punishments of traditional discipline perpetuate inequity, the use of Gentle Guidance Interventions and Delayed Learning Opportunities  creates equity, making them essential elements of this manual.
Conclusion:   It Starts with You You are the hero of this story. Heroes are those who know that there is a job to be done and set themselves to do  it. The job is not seen as a job at all, but as a higher calling, a responsibility: something  that must be done. A heros life will feel incomplete if that calling is left unheeded. That is why whether it is possible to do the job that needs to be done is irrelevant  to the hero. Indeed, if someone is called to do something, they will get the job done  or die trying. At the start of a teaching career, teachers rarely know how they will be  successful. They just know that they are called to help students. They think, Ill have  to figure this out. I have no choice. This book is for the heroes who just need the right support and the right tools to  heed their calling. I wrote it because it is the tool that I needed but did not have at the  beginning of my career. Heroes know that change starts with them. Teachers know that it is their behavior, what they do, that can mold their students into people who can be successful,  happy, and healthy. This book is simply a manual for exactly how educators should  behave so that they can be the best hero that they can be. You now have the tool and the power to change your behavior.  Once you change your behavior, you can change the behaviors of your students. Once your students change their behaviors, they can change the world. It starts with you . . . right now.
Acknowledgments There is no possible way that this book would have ever been completed without my  wife, Jessica Ervin. Her talents as a teacher of children, an editor, a collaborator, a  critic, a mother, a thinker, a problem solver, and a person who always knows where I  left my keys made this book what it is. She put at least as much effort into the creation  of this manual as I did. I love you, Jess. We couldnt have written this book without our daughter, Violet Ervin. She was  always understanding when we had to work long hours on this book and was patient  when conversations at the dinner table would drift to work, to editing, or to the books  content. I love you, Vi, and I am inspired by who you are and who you will become.  Bob Sornson, your wisdom knows no bounds. Your mentorship guided me  before, during, and, hopefully, after publishing this book. Our conversations led me  to greater understandings of what it is that I am working toward and what this book  should be.  To my mentor, Jim Fay. All I ever wanted to be was a teacher and a dad. Without  you, I wouldnt have been very good at either. This book could never have been written without you because, without you, I would not have survived my third year of  teaching. When they write about the most important people in the history of education, anything without your name will be incomplete. Bill Pflaum, your singular genius enabled you to see an actual book within my  original angry manifesto. Your insight, advice, selfless hard work, brilliant ideas, 
The Classroom Behavior Manual and wisdom transformed this manual from something barely readable into something a publisher would be interested in.  Chris Dendy is a fantastic editor and author who understood our work and made  it so much better. Thank you, Chris. To Genny Ostertag, Allison Scott, Megan Doyle, and the entire team at ASCD for  seeing the value in the book, for your expertise, for your know-how, your hard work,  and your enthusiasm. I value our partnership, and I know that we will change the  world together! To my mother, Anice Ervin. Mom, you told me once that I had to be great. I heard  what you said and understood what you meant. You inspire me to be a better person,  which made this book possible. To all K12 educators. This book was not just written for youit was written by you. I created these strategies and procedures from watching other teachers best practices that worked but were not written down anywhere. I improved  them, systematized them, and created something new and comprehensive in scope.  Teachers are the experts. Behavioral leadership is a trade: something that you do, not  something that you merely know about. This is a trade manual, created by and for  educators.
References American Academy of Pediatrics. 2014. Adverse childhood experiences and the lifelong  consequences of trauma. Retrieved from https:www.aap.orgen-usDocuments ttbacesconsequences.pdf Balfanz, R., Byrnes, V.,  Fox, J. 2014. Sent home and put off-track: The antecedents, disproportionalities, and consequences of being suspended in the ninth grade. Journal  of Applied Research on Children: Informing Policy for Children at Risk, 52, article 13.  Retrieved from https:digitalcommons.library.tmc.educhildrenatriskvol5iss213 Brehm, S. S.,  Brehm, J. W. 1981. Psychological reactance: A theory of freedom and control.  New York: Academic Press. Eley, T. 2009, October 13. One in ten US high school dropouts incarcerated. World Socialist Web Site. Retrieved from https:www.wsws.orgenarticles200910drop-o13. html McCombs, B. 2010. Developing responsible and autonomous learners: A key to motivating students. American Psychological Association. Retrieved from https:www.apa  .orgeducationk12learners Public Safety Performance Projects. 2009, March 2. One in 31: The long reach of  American corrections. Pew Trusts. Retrieved from https:www.pewtrusts.orgen research-and-analysisreports20090302one-in-31-the-long-reach-of-americancorrections
Index The letter f following a page number denotes a figure. Act Like a Butler, modeling, 57 adverse childhood experiences ACEs,  89 Afternoon Meeting activity choices, 177182 Afternoon Prompt, 174 Celebrations, 176 Daily Schedule Review, 176177 reasons for, 173174 student responsibilities, 176 Team Captain responsibilities,  175176 Team of the Day TOD responsibilities, 175 Afternoon Prompt, 174 Allow Yourself to Not Know Things  strategy, 6162 Apologies in relationship-building,  5758 Applause, Class, 8688 appointments, Human Alarm Clocks for  meeting, 121125 appreciation, Class Applause to show,  8688 Are you OK? intervention, 200 Argument Shield, 4547, 247 Ask MBI Mindfulness Break Interventions, 215 Assumption of intelligence intervention, 198199 Attendance Keeper job, 125126 Bad Kid Cycle, 4344, 4849, 187188 Behavioral Ceiling strategy, establishing  a high, 5455 behavioral issues, reasons for, 89 behavior charts, 2324 behavior leadership defined, 12 procedures, 105 reasons for, 1213 setting up the classroom for, 2627 behavior management advice given for, 67 breaking points, 1415 effective techniques for, discovering, 912 ineffective, effects of, 89 in movies, 16 nothing works, 56, 15 possibility for, 12 behavior management scenarios classroom terror, 101104 Its a fight, 12 kindergarten rage, 25 out-of-control, 231232

Index    271 violence against others, 185186 behavior Nows procedure, 158 Bonding strategies, 5862 bullies and where to put them, 30 bus riders ESPN Goodbyes for, 98 sitting with on a parked bus, 67 Butler, modeling Act Like a, 57 Calm Signal DLO Delaying Script, 228230 Firing Procedure and the, 108 strategy, 4246 car riders, ESPN Goodbyes for, 98 Celebrations, 151, 176 Change the students location intervention, 200 character education, 144, 151 choice, the magic of, 177179 Choice MBIs Mindfulness Break Interventions, 214215 Class Applause procedure, 8688 Class Greeter job, 126128 Class Handshake procedure, 8889 Class Nickname procedure, 7577 Class Pledge procedure, 9597 classroom environment, Comfort Keepers, 125 classroom management Attendance Keeper, 125126 Class Greeter, 126128 Executive Assistant, 126128 nothing works, 56 setting up for behavioral leadership, 2627 classroom terror scenario, 101104 Class Rules procedure, 8995 Close Down School procedure, 160161 Coachs Gambit intervention, 218219 Comfort Keepers job, 125 Common Ground, Authentically Finding strategy, 6061 Confused Eye intervention, 193 Confused eyepoint MBI, 214215 Confused eyequick head shake intervention, 197 Contraband removal intervention,  200201 Contraband tap intervention, 196 control attempts to attain, 4344, 46 sharing, 20 Control-Sharing procedures. See also  Afternoon Meeting; Morning Meeting procedure; Real-World Workshop  procedure; Student Jobs procedures benefits of, 104105 classroom terror scenario, 101104 introduction, 101104 Lock-It-In, 129136 reasons for, 137138 Silent Work, 171173 Control-Sharing strategies introduction, 185189 Mindfulness Breaks, 203204,  207211 purpose of, 188 violence against others scenario,  185186 cooperation, attaining, 21 Crazy eye intervention, 193 Curious eye intervention, 193 Curious eyequick head shake intervention, 197 Czechoslovakia Boom-Sha-Boom game,  180 Daily Schedule Review, 176177 date, Morning Meeting report, 144 declarative statements, the problem  with, 191 Delayed Learning Opportunity DLO common mistakes with, 255256 crushing behaviors with, 252253 failure, questions to ask with,  255256 goals and subgoals of, 227 introduction, 221 Mindfulness Break refusal, 218 out-of-control situations scenario,  231232 parents, communicating with,  259260 punishment vs., 223, 225 refusal, 249252 safe and uncomfortable during,  226 scenario, 260263 school administration, role of,  256258 sharing the burden of, 253255 students enjoying, 258259 suffering is incidental to, 224225 to think and learn, 223224 Delayed Learning Opportunity DLO,  implementing behavior management scenarios  continued
The Classroom Behavior Manual actions after the student finishes,  249 arguing, avoiding, 247 delaying, reasons for, 242244 Delaying Scripts, creating and  delivering your own, 227231 delivering, 242250 differentiation in, 230231 inevitability, creating, 249252 letting students know about,  226227 Mindfulness Centers, using correctly, 241242 monitoring, 247248 notifications, 119 scaffolding, 247248 when to use, 263265 Delayed Learning Opportunity DLO  Inevitability Logistics, 249252 Delayed Learning Opportunity DLO  locations, 257258 Delayed Learning Opportunity DLO,  types of Practice, 239242, 246 Problem-Solving, 236239, 246 Desk tap intervention, 196 Destressing Problem-Solving Delayed  Learning Opportunities, 238239 differentiation Delayed Learning Opportunity,  230231 Real-World Workshops, 154157,  161163 Directive-choice MBI Mindfulness  Break intervention, 216 Directive MBIs Mindfulness Choice  interventions, 214217 discipline sensory rooms, 204, 206 traditional, 203204, 256257 trips to the principals office,  204205 Does that cause a problem? intervention, 200 dropouts, 9 due process, 9495 encouragement without force, 75 End of Day Prompter, 112, 174 ESPN Goodbyes Extreme Manners, 5657 Extreme Respect, 5556 physical contact in, 63 procedure, 97100 ESPN Greetings Extreme Manners, 5657 Extreme Respect, 5556 physical contact in, 63 procedure, 7275 reasons for, 138 Evil eye intervention, 193 Executive Assistant job, 126128 Extreme Manners modeling, 56 Extreme Respect modeling, 5557 eye contact, 7273 Eye Interventions for Lock-It-In, 130 types of, 193 Factual statement intervention, 199 failure, Firing procedure for, 108 fear as management technique, 89 Firing procedure, 108 first three weeks of school schedule,  100f Friendly, Loving Alpha FLA physical  contact, 55 Friendly, Loving Alpha FLA Silliness,  61 Friendly, Loving Alpha FLA teachers,  34, 61 Gentle Guidance Interventions GGIs Eye Interventions, 193 Question Matrix, 199202 Reactive Movement, 193195 Real-World Workshops, 170171 Stop Matrix, 195199 when to use, 263265 Good Kid Cycle, 48 Go Out of Your Way strategy for Individual Students, 60 for Your Class, 5859 Hand on chair intervention, 194 Hand on shoulder intervention, 194 Handshake, Class, 8889 handshaking, 7475 Head shakeeye interventions, 197 Helping intervention, 198 high-control need child HCNC, 101 105, 109 Hiring procedure, 107, 127128 home visits, 64 homework, Real-World Workshops, 157 Hover intervention, 193 Human Alarm Clocks, 121125 Delayed Learning Opportunity DLO,  implementing continued ESPN Goodbyes continued

Index    273 ignorance strategy, admitting, 6162 ignoring, the problem with, 191 intimidation as a management technique, 89 Is Now the right time for that? intervention, 199200 Its a fight scenario, 12 job charts, 106107 kindergarten rage scenario, 25 Laters, Real-World Workshops, 150154,  157, 159 laziness, 148 Learning Opportunities, Natural,  233234 Listening strategy, 6263 Lock-It-In procedure, 129136 Silent Sustained Reading SSR,  172173 Look at studentstop intervention, 195 Look to the middle distancestop intervention, 195 lunch, eating with students, 67 Lunchtime Prompter, 111 mindfulness, teaching, 206207 Mindfulness Break Interventions MBIs Choice, 214215 Directive, 214217 Mindfulness Breaks common negative behaviors  during, 241242 goals, 210211 introducing, 207210 purpose of, 203204 refusal, 217220 reverse, 219 Mindfulness Center Alcove, 212 Mindfulness Centers DLOs for correct use failure,  241242 elements of, 211212 in-room, 212 reciprocal room, 212 using correctly, 213214 Mindfulness centerstop intervention,  195 Mindfulness Room, 212 Modeling Lock-It-In procedure, 130131 Silent Sustained Reading SSR, 172 strategy, 5458 Morning Cleanup Prompter, 110111 Morning Meeting procedure getting started, 143145 Quick Start Activity guidelines,  139140 reasons for, 138139 Tagging, 145146 Tagging Taggers, 146 Team Captains, 140 Team of the Day TOD, 140143 Mr. Ervin Dodgeball game, 181182 music, allowing choice in, 166167 Mystery Later, 151 names, using, 73 Natural Learning Opportunities,  233234 negative behaviors declarative statements, the problem with, 191 ignoring, the problem with, 191 Strategic Noticing to discourage,  4753 successful, 4344 terminal destination for, 222 Nickname Ceremony, 81, 8285 nicknames Class, 7577 Student, 8086 Team, 7780 nothing works, 56, 15 Noticing misdirect intervention, 197198 Not Knowing, Allowing for relationship  building, 6162 Nows, Real-World Workshops, 149150,  157159 Nows and Laters Board, 78, 154155 out-of-control situations scenario,  231232 ownership Class Applause to build, 8688 Class Nickname and, 7577 Class Rules to build, 8995 in relationship-building, 7071 Team Nicknames for, 7780 parents communicating with about DLOs,  259260 relationship building strategies,  6465 responding to about DLO complaints, 257
The Classroom Behavior Manual team and seat change requests,  3637 physical contact abbreviated for secondary students, 74 bonding through, 63 in ESPN Greetings and Goodbyes,  63, 73 Friendly, Loving Alpha FLA, 55 hand on shoulder intervention, 194 safe, Class Handshake for, 8889 shoulder drum intervention, 195 strategy, 63 Plan a meeting intervention, 201 Pledges Class, 9597 Morning Meeting, 144 Point down intervention, 194 Point to the side intervention, 195 positive behaviors behavior charts and, 2324 eliciting, joys of, 1617 the Good Kid Cycle, 48 modeling, 5458 reporting to parents, 6566 Strategic Noticing to encourage,  4753 positive behaviors, setting the environment to elicit Power Positions PPs, 3335, 34f,  35f teams, 2833, 31f, 32f, 3637 Power E, 35, 35f Power Positions PPs instructional, 3334, 34f Power E, 35, 35f Power V, 3435, 35f secondary SPPs, 34, 34f secondary, identifying, 34 power struggles, 20, 148 Power V, 3435, 35f Practice Delayed Learning Opportunities, 239242, 246 praise, 4950 Preventive Charge for negative behaviors, 54 Preventive helping intervention, 198 Preventive Movement PM Real-World Workshops, 170 SSR combined with, 173 Preventive Movement PM strategy strategy, 5354 Preventive strategies,  relationship-building Argument Shield, 4547 Bonding, 5862 Modeling, 5458 Preventive Movement PM, 5354 Strategic Noticing, 4753 Preventive Sweep for negative behaviors, 5354 Problem-Solving Delayed Learning  Opportunities, 236239, 246 Problem stimuli removal intervention,  201 Problem stimuli tap intervention, 196 Procedural Learning Opportunities  PLOs Prompt for Quiet, 114121 transitions, 133136 voice level PLO, 163169 procedures consequences within, 21 pacing when implementing, 22 for positive student-teacher relationships, 1819 Prompt for Quiet failure, PLOs for, 114121 for pledges, 144 procedure, 112113 prompts consequences for ignoring, 114115 End of Day Prompter, 112, 174 Lunchtime Prompter, 111 Morning Cleanup Prompter,  110111 Prompt for Quiet, 112121, 144 student-created, 113114 psychological reactance, 191 punishment, DLO Delayed Learning  Opportunity vs., 223, 225 Question Matrix Interventions, 199202 Quick Start Activity guidelines, 139140 Reactive Movement Interventions,  193195 Real-World Workshop procedure behavioral Nows, 158 Close Down School, 160161 differentiation, 154157, 161163 during indoor recess, 159 easy assignments, using, 159160 Gentle Guidance Interventions  GGIs, 170171 Laters, 150154, 157, 159 Nows, 149150, 157159 parents continued

Index    275 Nows and Laters Board, 154155 Preventive Movement PM, 170 reasons for, 146147 Recess Work, 158 Strategic Noticing, 170 success, experiencing, 159160 Team Nickname, 7980 trusting the, 149 versions, 149 voice level PLO, 163169 recess, indoor, 159 Recess Work, 158 Red Ball game, 179180 regret, expression of, 228229 relationship-building, ownership in,  7071 Relationship-building procedures Class Applause, 8688 Class Handshake, 8889 Class Nickname, 7577 Class Pledge, 9597 Class Rules, 8995 ESPN Goodbyes, 97100 ESPN Greetings, 7275, 138 first three weeks of school schedule, 100f introduction, 6971 Student Nicknames, 8086 Team Nicknames, 7780 Relationship-building Strategies Argument Shield, 4547 Bonding, 5862 Calm Signal, 4246 Listening, 6263 Modeling, 5458 for parents, 6465 Physical Contact, 63 Preventive Movement PM, 5354 Strategic Noticing, 4753 Time Outside School, 6367 Request thinking intervention, 197 Respect, modeling, 5557 responsive strategies, relationship-building, 4245 Reverse Mindfulness Breaks, 219 rule-choice MBI, 215 Rules, Class, 8995 rule-statement MBI, 215 safety, student, 252253 schedule, Morning Meeting report, 144 School, Giving Your Time Outside,  6367 school-to-prison pipeline, 9 Seating interventions, 194195 sensory rooms, 204, 206 Shake It Out game, 181 Sharing Your Life Authentically strategy, 6061 Shoulder drum intervention, 195 Silent Sustained Reading SSR, 172173 Silent Work procedure, 171173 Silliness, 61, 8283 Sit at a student desk intervention, 194 Situational Problem-Solving Delayed  Learning Opportunities, 236238 smiles, 7273 sneaky bully SB, 30 sporting events, attending, 6667 Statement of fact intervention, 199 Stop intervention, 195 Stoplook at student intervention, 195 Stoplook to the middle distance intervention, 195 Stop Matrix Interventions, 195199 Stopuse a mindfulness center intervention, 195 Strategic Noticing by administrators, 257 Real-World Workshops, 170 strategy, 4753 strategies choosing, 2223 learning and using the, 23 Stretch the classroom intervention, 194 Student Jobs procedures Attendance Keeper, 125126 Class Greeter, 126128 Comfort Keeper, 125 Executive Assistant, 126128 Firing, 108 Hiring, 107 Human Alarm Clocks, 121125 Procedural Learning Opportunities PLOs, 114121 Student Prompter, 109114 Training, 108 Student location intervention, 200 Student Nicknames procedure, 8086 Student Prompter, 109114, 143 students encouraging without force, 75 liking, results of, 50 names, using, 73 prompts created by, 113114 student-teacher relationships. See also  Relationship-building Strategies eating lunch together, 67 Real-World Workshop procedure  continued
The Classroom Behavior Manual physical contact in, 63 positive, building, 1819 procedures for, importance of,  1819 sharing control within, 20 suspensions, 9 Tagging, 145146 Tagging Taggers, 146 teachers, both good and evil, 4041 Team Captains Afternoon Meeting responsibilities, 175176 Morning Meeting, 140, 143144 team clusters, 31f Team Nicknames procedure, 7780 Team of the Day TOD Afternoon Meeting responsibilities, 175 Morning Meeting, 140143 team rows, 32f teams bullies and where to put them, 30 changes within, 28, 36 color-coding, 37 configurations, 3133 creating, process for, 2830 motivating, 79 reasons for, 28 seat changes, 36 seating within and among, 31f,  3233, 32f testing the seating configuration,  33 threatening bully TB, 30 Time Outside School strategy, 6367 Training procedure, 108, 127128 transitions, Lock-It-In procedure,  129136 trauma, teaching students with, 185188 violence, noticing to increase, 4753 violence against others scenario, 185186 walkers, ESPN Goodbyes for, 98 weather, Morning Meeting report, 144 What now? intervention, 199 What should you be doing? intervention, 199 Whats next? intervention, 199 Where should you be? intervention, 199 work ethic, 148 work hard, rule of, 93 Work tap intervention, 195 work time, traditional, 147149 student-teacher relationships. See also  Relationship-building Strategies  continued teams continued
About the Author Scott Ervin has worked with kids for more than two decades.  Most of his experience has been spent working with extremely  difficult, at-risk, abused, and neglected kids. For the last 11 years  of his teaching career, he requested that all of the most difficult  kids in the grade be placed in his classroom as a teacher and in  his building as a principal and superintendent. For the last five  of those years, he worked at one of the largest primary schools  in the United States and requested that all of the most difficult kids out of 400 3rd  graders be placed on his class roster. In addition, students in other classrooms whose  behavior made it impossible for others to learn in their assigned classrooms throughout the year were all moved to Scotts room.  Scott has served as a principal, superintendent, and discipline specialist. The  classrooms in which he has worked had poverty rates between 84 and 98 percent. As a  consultant and founder of Ervin Educational Consulting, Scott has traveled the country teaching parents and educators alike how to be calm and assertive with children. Scott has a Bachelor of Arts in political science and a masters degree in education.  He has taught classroom management as an adjunct professor at Antioch University  Midwest and as a visiting lecturer at Ohio University, University of Dayton, and  Wright State University. He also writes a syndicated newspaper column, Ask the  Kid Whisperer. To hire a behavioral consultant or for more information, go to www  .ervineducationalconsulting.com or email supportervineducationalconsulting  .com.

Related ASCD Resources: Classroom Management At the time of publication, the following resources were available ASCD stock numbers in parentheses.  Print Products Better Behavior Practices Quick Reference Guide by Dominique Smith, Nancy Frey,  Douglas Fisher, and Lee Ann Jung QRG120049 Better Than Carrots or Sticks: Restorative Practices for Positive Classroom Management  by Dominique Smith, Douglas Fisher, and Nancy Frey 116005 Building a Positive and Supportive Classroom Quick Reference Guide by Julie Causton  and Kate MacLeod QRG120098 Discipline with Dignity: How to Build Responsibility, Relationships, and Respect in  Your Classroom, 4th Edition by Richard L. Curwin, Allen N. Mendler, and Brian  Mendler 118018 From Behaving to Belonging: The Inclusive Art of Supporting Students Who Challenge Us  by Julie Causton and Kate MacLeod 121011 Motivating and Managing Student Behavior with Dignity Quick Reference Guide by  Allen N. Mendler and Brian Mendler QRG119048 So Each May Soar: The Principles and Practices of Learner-Centered Classrooms by Carol  Ann Tomlinson 118006 We Belong: 50 Strategies to Create Community and Revolutionize Classroom Management  by Laurie Barron and Patti Kinney 122002 For up-to-date information about ASCD resources, go to www.ascd.org. You can  search the complete archives of Educational Leadership at www.ascd.orgel. ASCD myTeachSource  Download resources from a professional learning platform with hundreds of  research-based best practices and tools for your classroom at http:myteachsource  .ascd.org For more information, send an email to memberascd.org; call 1-800-933-2723 or  703-578-9600; send a fax to 703-575-5400; or write to Information Services, ASCD,  1703 N. Beauregard St., Alexandria, VA 22311-1714 USA.

HEALTHY Each student enters school  healthy and learns about and  practices a healthy lifestyle. SAFE Each student learns in an  environment that is physically  and emotionally safe for  students and adults. ENGAGED Each student is actively  engaged in learning and is  connected to the school and  broader community. SUPPORTED Each student has access to  personalized learning and is  supported by quali ed,  caring adults. CHALLENGED Each student is challenged academically and prepared  for success in college or  further study and for  employment and participation  in a global environment. 1 2 3 4 5 WHOLE CHILD  TENETS The ASCD Whole Child approach is an effort to transition  from a focus on narrowly de ned academic achievement to  one that promotes the long-term development and success  of all children. Through this approach, ASCD supports  educators, families, community members, and policymakers  as they move from a vision about educating the whole child  to sustainable, collaborative actions. The Classroom Behavior Manual relates to the safe and  engaged tenets. For more about the ASCD Whole Child approach,  visit www.ascd.orgwholechild. Become an ASCD member today! Go to www.ascd.orgjoinascd or call toll-free: 800-933-ASCD 2723

www.ascd.orgel 1703 North Beauregard Street  Alexandria, VA 22311-1714 USA If you belong to a Professional Learning  Community, you may be looking for a way to get  your fellow educators minds around a complex  topic. Why not delve into a relevant theme issue  of Educational Leadership, the journal written by  educators for educators.  EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP D O N  T  M I S S  A  S I N G L E  I S S U E  O F  A S C D  S  AWA R D W I N N I N G  M A G A Z I N E ,  Subscribe now, or buy back issues of  ASCDs flagship publication at  www.ascd.orgELbackissues. Single issues cost 7 for issues dated  September 2006May 2013 or 8.95  for issues dated September 2013 and  later. Buy 10 or more of the same  issue, and youll save 10 percent. Buy  50 or more of the same issue, and  youll save 15 percent. For discounts  on purchases of 200 or more copies,  contact programteamascd.org;  1-800-933-2723, ext. 5773. To see more details about these and  other popular issues of Educational  Leadership, visit www.ascd.org ELarchive. If you b Commu your fel topic. W of Educ educato

Behavior expert Scott Ervin calls on his two  decades of experience to share the most effective  strategies and procedures to foster positive,  prosocial student behavior that supports  learning, including ways to  Organize your physical classroom to support  positive classroom management.  Build positive teacher-student relationships.  Share control with students in a way that  best fosters their autonomy. The Classroom Behavior Manual is a resource you  can return to again and again, packed with more  than 100 strategies and dozens of procedures and  tools. Learn how to respond to negative behaviors  in nonpunitive ways so that you can ensure all  students school days are as calm, engaging, and  educational as they possibly can be. Positive student behaviors are desired outcomes, but this  manual concentrates on inputs. How do you respond to  difficult behavior in the moment when you know that punitive,  compliance-based behavior management is so often ineffectual?  Whats the best way to prevent students from acting out in the  rst place? The path to success requires behavioral leadership,  in which teachers strategically model and affirm the behaviors  they want to see in students.  Education