ADVANCE PRAISE FOR Classrooms in the Real World Dr. Scott Mandel is an accomplished teacher. His new book  allows him to combine his experiences, insights and humor  in a manner which permits him to share an array of practical  suggestions for classroom teachers. Most memorable among  his tools, tips and timesavers: 	 Be an advocate for your students

Correct the behaviornot the student

Leave your ego at the door These and other tips are interwoven with personal obser vations and memories. A valuable resource for both veteran  and novice educators! Peggy Taylor Presley, Director, Human Resources  Division: Teacher Support and Development Program The best way to know where youre headed is to understand  where youve been.  In this volume of lively anecdotes, Dr.  Mandel sends us snapshots of his experiences in the class room, and then delves into how what hes learned applies to  teaching today. Veteran teachers will nod their heads and grin  as they think, We really used to do that, didnt we? For educa tors just joining the ranks, this book has even more valueDr.  Mandel provides a roadmap for what to do and what not to do,  but more importantly, he shines a guiding light on what is pos sible in the future of education. Brian Muller, Specialist, Peer Assistance and Review  Program; Former Advisor for District Intern Program; Former Secondary Teacher

With a collection of relatable and applicable stories, Classrooms  in the Real World  illustrates the delicate balance between  following ones instincts as an educator, and meeting the  modern requirements of the job. Dr. Mandel shows that a  good teacher does what she believes will excite and inspire  students. This book is invaluable to a both novice and veteran  teachers who find themselves being pulled in different  directions by students, colleagues, administrators, district  officials, researchers, and their own guts. Amanda Corr, Second Year Teacher Dr. Mandels latest offering is a must-read. Whether you are  a veteran teacher, wet behind the ears, or somewhere in  between, this is the book for you! His sound and practical  advice, wrapped in layers of skillfully spun memories from  his long career, will make you laugh, think, and probably come  away with at least one ah ha! moment for your own practice.   Abigail Abbott-Perez, Veteran Secondary Teacher Dr. Mandel presents snapshots of his most authentic teach ing moments and experiences. He takes you on a journey into  what teaching is really like. As a veteran educator, Mandel  gives you practical advice and insider tips to help navigate  through the complex and unpredictable nature of the teach ing profession. This book is an insightful read for new teach ers and anyone wondering what its really like to be a teacher.  Leila Shapiro, Veteran Elementary Teacher

Classrooms in the Real World

Classrooms in the Real World Practical Advice  from a Veteran Teacher SCOTT MANDEL GORHAM, MAINE

Copyright  2020  Myers Education Press, LLC Published by Myers Education Press, LLC P.O. Box 424, Gorham, ME 04038 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced in any  form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter  invented, including photocopying, recording, and information storage and re trieval, without permission in writing from the publisher. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data available from Library of  Congress. 13-digit ISBN 978-1-9755-0335-2 paperback  13-digit ISBN 978-1-9755-0334-5  hard cover 13-digit ISBN 978-1-9755-0336-9 library networkable e-edition  13-digit ISBN  978-1-9755-0337-6 consumer e-edition Printed in the United States of America. All first editions printed on acid-free paper that meets the American National Stan dards Institute Z39-48 standard. Books published by Myers Education Press may be purchased at special  quantity discount rates for groups, workshops, training organizations, and  classroom usage. Please call our customer service department at 1-800-2320223 for details. Cover and interior design by Sophie Appel Visit us on the web at www.myersedpress.com to browse our complete list of  titles. Myers Education Press is an academic publisher specializing in books,  e-books, and digital content in the field of education. All of our books are  subjected to a rigorous peer review process and produced in compliance with  the standards of the Council on Library and Information Resources.

vii Acknowledgments	 ix My Motto of Life and the Dedication Associated with It	 xi IntroductionWhy Am I Writing This Book?	 xv Setting The Context for All of This	 xvii 1. 	 How It All Started	
2. 	 These Aint the Good Ole Days	 3 3. 	 How My Students Saved My Life and the School Year	 9 4. 	 Let the Kids Know You Can Have Fun, Too	 13 5. 	 Kids Dont Care How Much You Know  as Long as They Know You Care	 17 6. 	 If I Dont Talk about Discipline,  You Wont Read This Book	 23 7. 	 Public School Kids Deserve the Same  as Private School Kids	 31 8. 	 Have Heroes 	 35 9. 	 Get Rid of Your Ego	 39 10. 	Support Your Home Team	 41 11. 	Take Curricular Chances	 45 12. 	Administrators Want You To Succeed	 51 Contents

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD viii 13. 	Beware of Smoke Machines	 57 14. 	Why I Refuse to Use an Online Grading Program	 61 15. 	Numbers Dont Always Add Up And Fair Grades Take Some Effort	 65 16. 	Dont Fill Your Car Trunk  with Your In-Service Class	 71 17. 	Special Ed Kids Are Like Everyone Else	 75 18. 	So Are Non-English Speakers	 81 19. 	Leadership as a Student Trait	 87 20. The Multiple Intelligences Really Work	 93 21. 	Make em Laugh	 99 22. 	Parents Are Your Greatest Allies	 105 23. 	Keeping My Sanity All These Years	 111 24. 	My Retirement Plan	 117 25. 	What Have I Learned?	 119 References	 125

ix Acknowledgments I ts impossible to put together a successful book without  the assistance of a lot of talented people. First, I need to  thank four awesome teachers who donated their time to  read, edit, comment, and lead me through these pages: Carl  Dugas, Melodie Bitter, Dr. Rob Schuck, and LoriAnne Denne.  Thank you allI couldnt have completed this book without  you. Second, I want to thank the wonderful people at Myers  Education Press, starting with Chris Myers, who invited  me into the Myers publishing family, as well as Stephanie  Gabaree and Emily Janson. 

xi My Motto of Life  and the Dedication  Associated with It E veryone should have a mottosomething that exem plifies their basic concept of life and the world. As a  teacher, it also helps to have one that guides your daily  life in the classroom. Mine came from a very good friend and  one of my heroes: Love is Good. Hate is Bad. See you tomorrow. This book is dedicated to John Jacobson, the founder of  America Sings! and a life-long educator in the arts. Jewish legend says that when the world was created, God  placed ten tzaddiks, the ultimate righteous, specially good  people, on the earth. And that throughout time, as one passed  away, another took his place. As long as ten tzaddiks remained  on earth, evil would be kept at bay. I believe that John Jacobson is one of those tzaddiks. For over twenty-five years, John has provided the  America Sings! experience to students around the world. His  goals, as stated on the americasings.org website, are: 		 To educate young people about the joys of philanthropy  and their opportunities for charitable service and giving.

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD xii

To provide high-quality, non-competitive performing  opportunities for young singers and dancers from  choral organizations.

To make direct contributions on behalf of these young  choral performers to established childrens charities,  especially donations for disadvantaged children.

To promote throughout the nations schools and the  national media a positive image of American youth  involved in public service to needy children through  the performing arts.

To promote and stimulate interest in choral music  as an art form among young people and the general  public as a whole. My singers have participated almost every year since Festival  10. But Johns influence goes well beyond that. He inspires  kids. He inspires teachers. For anyone who has met him, or  participated in one of his festivals, or read one of his books,  he makes all of us want to improve the world through our  music. He tries to enable us to use our talents, and the talents  of our students, for the betterment of society. In his final talk of the day at a recent John Jacobson  Choreography Workshop, an annual summer event that I  attend with my choreographers, he related how his father reg ularly shared this special philosophy of life: Love is Good. Hate is Bad. See you tomorrow. It struck me as the ultimate philosophy of life. Accentuate the  positive, avoid the negative, and know that we will see each  other again. That day, I fell in love with the saying.

My Motto of Life and the Dedication Associated with It xiii And so, when I was formulating this book of stories from  my lifes experiences, I could think of no better way to begin  explaining my philosophy.  I hope John doesnt mind that Im using it. To close, and most appropriately for those who know me,  I want to quote some of the most famous words ever used in  a musical. Adapted from the climax of the Broadway show  Wicked: Who can say if weve been changed for the better, but  because we knew John, our lives have been changed,  for good.

xv Introduction Why Am I Writing  This Book? W hen I started my thirtieth year sigh in a Los  Angeles classroom a number of years ago, I looked  around my school and asked myself, What have I  done with my life? A very frightening question.  I understood my professional worth as I watched my  students grow throughout the yearespecially my eighth  graders, whom I knew as little babies when they started  sixth grade. Thats my favorite part of teaching middle  schoolbeing able to watch my kids grow. But why sit down and write a book about it? Actually, the idea came to me over the past year. Ive  taught teacher salary point classes every year, and I regularly  present professional development workshops. Now, in my  Saturday teacher classesand Im sure you will notice this  tendency as you read this bookI go off on tangents quite reg ularly. Mostly I tell stories: examples from my teaching over  the past 3 decades. Sometimes I share specific teaching curricular ideas that Ive learned over the years, stuff that is  not normally found in teacher education books. Most of the  participants enjoy these anecdotes and teaching tipsusu ally more than the curricular material Im presenting! And 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD xvi for those who are incredibly focused, this behavior obviously  drives them crazy. Its kind of like a Barry Manilow concert where, just before  the twenty-minute medley of his greatest hits, he says to the  audience, Those of you who have enjoyed the music over the  years, youre going to love this medley. Those of you who were  dragged here tonight, this medley is going to be agony. Recently I read the evaluations from my last class and was  surprised that many of the participants put down in writing  that their favorite part of my class was the stories I tell! I then  sat and reflected on my presentation. I realized that more  than thirty years in the classroom gives you a lot of stories.  And what good is having stories if you dont share them? Hence, the reason Im writing this book. Most people think that when theyre going to hear  teacher stories, theyre going to hear a bunch of funny anec dotes about weird kids. That is not what this book is about.  This is a book of stories of a teachers lifegood, bad, and  strangeover an entire career. Its a retelling of things Ive  lived through and a sharing of things Ive learned as a teacher.  Some funny, some sad, some informative. But all of it is very  personal, and will, I hope, affect the teacher reading this  book.  For those of you who are not teachers, maybe it will give  you some insight as to what being a teacher really meansa  contrast to the negative view of us that is presented by the  media. Besides, you, too, may see some aspect of yourself in  the book: as a parent or as anyone who deals with kids. Or  bureaucracies.  And for those who still ask me, Whats a nice Jewish boy  with a Ph.D. doing still teaching in the classroom? I hope this  book will answer the question.  And I hope my mom will finally get off my back about it.

xvii Setting the Context  for All of This I  grew up in a suburban public school district in Cleveland,  Ohio, and received my teaching degree and creden tial from The Ohio State University. I moved out to Los  Angeles, California, for my graduate work, and earned a  Ph.D. in Curriculum and Instruction from the University of  Southern California.  My first formal teaching experience was in private edu cation, and by the age of 26 I was the principal of a private  school. That lasted one year, after which I went over to the  public school system, where theyre more sane. My first teaching experience in public education was  eight years in elementary school. I then transferred to a per forming arts magnet middle school where Ive been for over  thirty-five years, teaching musical theater, English, and  history. As a National Board Certified teacher, I regularly present  teacher salary point classes and professional development  workshops. And looking back, theres nothing I would have changed  in my entire career.
How It All Started 1 I  consider myself a born teacher. Ive never wanted to do  anything else. Most teachers can remember when they  first started teaching. When did I start? Believe it or not,  I did my first teaching in sixth grade, when I was twelve years  old. It wasnt a formal class, obviously, but it was my first  teaching experienceand I was hooked. It was in elementary school. I was really into science and  had just discovered how to grow penicillin from moldy bread.  I can still remember the dining room cabinet where I hid the  wet, smelly bread in darkness, away from my mothers eyes. I  would then look at the mold under my microscopefor which  I already had a fairly large collection of premade slides of bug  parts, spores, and other yucky stuff to adults, but fascinating  subject matter for a twelve-year-old boy. My brother was in the first grade at the time, and his  class was learning something about science. He wanted me  to bring my experiment to his class to show his friends. I  asked my teacher for permission, which I received probably  just an excuse to get me out of her class that day. My brothers  teacher also agreed, but she insisted that I teach a complete  science lesson to the students, not just conduct a show and 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 2 tell session. So I did, and it was so successful that I went in  there to teach science once a week for the next month.  I was hooked. My first real class actually came only two years later,  when I was fourteen. I taught a class at my temple Hebrew  school. For anyone who doesnt know what a Hebrew school  class is like, its two hours of subjects that the students often do  not care about, taught after their full school day and Sunday  morning, and which they are forced to attend, preventing  them from playing outside with their friends. To say that the  students lack motivation is an understatement. I was given a class of about fifteen rejectstwelveyear-olds who basically got kicked out of their other classes.  Somehow the principal thought I could relate to them. So I  had this class three times a week for two hours at a shot. I had  to make lesson plans, grade their papers, and teach the class.  And I got paid for it!  I quickly learned the joy of getting paid for doing what  you love! It was a great feelingstill is. And Ive been teaching ever since, with one year off for  my junior year of college abroad. So, in reality, Ive been for mally teaching classes for over forty-five years now! Sigh.
These Aint  the Good Ole Days 2 W hen I first started teaching in public school, I  could brainstorm a lesson driving to school and  incorporate it immediately into my teaching. If  a student had a rough day, I could give her a hug. I could give  a parent my phone number, provide advice when she called,  and get a thank-you for my time. Community members reg ularly expressed their appreciation for what the school and  teaching staff meant to their neighborhood. Testing was  limited to a multiple-choice, standardized test over two or  three days in Mayand those scores meant little more than  subsequent student placement. College graduates enthusias tically went into teaching and looked forward to spending a  twentyto thirty-year career doing what they loved. Those were the good ole days. I have watched things change considerably in education  over the past thirty-plus yearsunfortunately, not for the  better. As a result, it takes more determination than ever to  choose to go into the teaching profession, let alone be success ful in it. More than once, my wife and I have had to sit down  and remind ourselves why were in this professionand why  we stay.

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 4 Since early in this century, there are those in our soci ety who have done their best to destroy public education.  Starting with the horrific No Child Left Behind Act NCLB  in 2002, testingand, more important, test scoreshave  become the sole determinant for judging the quality of  education. Teacher creativity has been hampered, if not  destroyed. Politicians and policymakers have tried to make  teachers into robots. I once had a principal, during the time  of NCLB, who directed the staff: If its not tested, you are  not to teach it. Teaching as an art, as a profession, was now  on life-support. As a result of this attitude toward education, weve raised  a new generation of young teachers who have no concept  of what it is to teach outside the box. Teachers today are  instructed that teaching means following a specific standard,  timeline, or established curriculum. In other words, they  dont know how to be creative as teachers or to use their per sonal professional judgment in planning for their students. I am often asked, as an experienced teacher, how I per sonally deal with this anti-teacher environment. The answer  is that I regularly use the most important teaching tool I have  in my classroom: the door.  When my door is shut, I do what I know is right for my stu dents. Im the professional, and its my classroom. Ultimately,  Im responsible for what goes on with my studentsnot an  administrator who doesnt know my class, my curricula,  or my teaching style. So I teach my way, the way my years of  experience, training, and education have led me to. That is the number-one piece of advice I can ever give to a  new teacher, and probably the overall theme of this book. As  a trained professional educator, do what you know is right for  your students.  Overall, parents have also changed considerably over  the years. Though it is a generalization, when I first started 

These Aint the Good Ole Days 5 teaching, our greatest problem with some parents was that  they tried to be their childs friend, rather than the adult.  Then we moved to helicopter parentsthose parents who  hovered over the teacher and school questioning or trying to  observe everything that they did.  Unfortunately, we now have a number of parents who  act as their childs agent.1 These are parents who demand  special treatment for their childeven at the expense of the  other students in the room. And its pervasive: Ive heard  numerous reports of parents going in to see their childs uni versity professor to discuss grades! The ultimate example was  the report of the parent of a first-year teacher who went in to  see the principal when her child got a poor evaluation. So, how do I deal with this phenomenon? I use the same  techniques I talk about in Parents Are Your Greatest Allies  Chapter 22 in this book. I sell my program to the vast major ity of the parents. The challenging parents? Those I judge on  a case-by-case basis. I ask myself, is this parent someone I can  work with, someone who will be somewhat reasonable? Or is  it a parent for whom I have no hopethat nothing I do will  make this parent happy. If its the former, I use whatever logic  and strategies I can to make the parent into a partner. If its  the latter, I face the limits of my influence and cut my losses.  It may be that I only correspond with the problem parent in  writing; it may be that I only meet with this parent with an  administrator present; it may be that I demand the child be  transferred from my class. Each case is different, but I will do  whatever I need for the sake of my professionalism and san ity. And no matter what, I keep a log of all contact and corre spondence with a problem parent. Keeping a detailed log can  be critical later on, if the parent ever reports you and youre  called in to defend yourself. 1	 See S. Mandel. 2007. The parent-teacher partnership: How to  work together for student achievement. Chicago: Zephyr Press.

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 6 Ultimately, teachers need to accept the fact that students  have also changed considerably over the years. In this age  of instant gratification with social media and on-demand  entertainment, I have found that a good number of kids today  simply dont care anymore about standard school opportuni ties. Theyd rather play video games or hang with their friends  in person or, most often, on social media. High schools in my  area have been cancelling proms and other dances for lack of  interest. One local high school made it mandatory for any stu dent in organized fall sports to attend the Homecoming Dance.  That was the only way they could drum up participation.  This unfortunate phenomenon has even affected my per forming arts group. My Pacoima Singers are usually the most  popular magnet production group for which students audi tion. We perform around the country and are known for our  quality performances. A couple of years ago, I had seven out  of seventeen eighth graders quit in the middle of the year! I  hadnt had seven students quit in my previous twenty-plus  years with the group. Their reasons? Not that they were upset  with me; not that they didnt get solos. They quit because they  didnt want to attend afterschool rehearsalsthey wanted to  hang out with their friends. They had absolutely no desire to  fulfill their commitments or put in any significant effort. Even  worse, their parents allowed them to renege on their personal  commitment to the group. What kind of life lessons are these  parents teaching their children? One has to wonder what they  will be like in the real working world one day. How do I deal with this phenomenon? I keep my stan dards high. I dont lower them to meet these students expec tations in the hope of appeasing them so that theyll stay in  the group. And I concentrate on the other twenty-seven kids  in the group who do want to be there, who do want the positive  experiences I can provide. I may not affect as many kids as I  used to, but I affect many kids as much as I ever have. 

These Aint the Good Ole Days 7 Still, through it alleven with the changes in society,  parents, and studentstheres nothing I would want to do as  much as work with kids, educate them, watch them grow and  develop. As times change, I obviously have to adapt to those  changes. But the core reasons why I have devoted my life to  teaching are still there.  Thats what makes it still worthwhile, and its my message  to you, the reader. Be the professional, do what you know is  right as a teacher, and adapt to the changes youll experience  over the years.  And thats why Ill keep going on this job as long as Im  physically able to do itor until that coffin my personal  retirement plansee Chapter 19 in the corner of my room  gets put to use. Now that youve learned how I started this long teaching  career and have been brought up to date with what teaching  is like in todays times, its time for me to fill you in on all of the  middle yearsthe experiences, ideas, thoughts, and fun Ive  had as a public school teacher for the last thirty-some years. Read on!
How My Students  Saved My Life  and the School Year 3 A bout nine years ago I was diagnosed with cancer I was actually rushed to the hospital the night  before school began in September. Luckily, I had  a very rare form of lymphomaonly a thousand men in  their 50s get it each year, and its 100 curable. As my doc tors said: If I were going to get sick, this was what I should  have. After a week, when they finally figured out the exact diag nosis and treatment, I went back to school. I eventually had  this new chemo that comes in a pump with a pic-line into your  arm that you wear in a fanny-pack for one week. It doesnt  make you sick; you dont lose your hair; and you can work  while you wear it. Unfortunately, the chemo also kills your immune system  to a point where you are left quite susceptible to infection. My primary job at school is Director of the Pacoima  Singersa production class in our performing arts magnet  that performs widely. Now, having our first major Singers  show of the year in mid-October, I insisted on going back  to work for rehearsals while trying to avoid any significant  contact with the kids. Not my smartest decision.

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 10 My doctor always likes to point out that doctors and  teachers are the worst patients. If I had been a lawyer,  accountant, engineer, etc., I would have had no problem  taking the two or three months off I should have taken. No doctors and teachers feel a need to get back to work as soon  as possible. Two weeks later, I was in the hospital, literally dying from  an infection. I spent two-and-a-half weeks there before I  came home. The nurses and doctors said it was nothing short  of amazing, since someone as sick as I was should have been  in the hospital for two or three months. I believe that my students, and obviously God, pulled me  through it. Its amazing, when youre alone at night in a hospital bed,  the things you pray for and the deals you make with God for  getting you through it. I know it sounds corny, and I always  believed that it was TV-ish. But when you go through it your self, you find its very true. I found myself not bargaining that I didnt want to die.  Rather, my primary argument was that I had to recover: I had  too much good left to do in the world for my students. I still  had many young lives to mold. Obviously God agreed, because  here I am today. After going home from the hospital, I was able to return to  school in two weeks, right after Thanksgiving break, for the  last three weeks of schooland for our Winter Show.  This experience was also an example of what life can be  like for a teacher when you have a great principal. Many prin cipals would say that you cannot come back to work until you  are 100 better and able to completely fulfill your duties.  My wonderful principal gave me permission to come and go  as I needed. I could come in late if need be, or leave early if I  had to, all depending on how I was feeling. My classes were  always covered.

How My Students Saved My Life and the School Year 11 All in all, from September through December, I missed a  total of eight weeks of school a testament to the wisdom of  saving up your sick days. What about my singing group? Luckily, we had a one-day workshop the last week of vaca tion in which the students were provided with most of their  music for the fall semester. Additional material was given to  them when I was in class, along with basic directions on how  choreography should be designed and how the songs should  be blocked. In my absence over the eight weeks, my student  officers assistant directors and choreographers literally  ran the group and every class period while the substitute  teacherwho was not a music teacherwatched and sup ported them. The students created the choreography, taught  it, and ran all of the rehearsalsall the more remarkable  when you remember that they were 12, 13, and 14 year-olds.  During Winter Show, I literally sat and watched my kids  perform. I found myself leaning over to my wife on more than  one occasion, saying, Ive never seen that before! It was  truly one of the proudest moments Ive had as a teacherthat  I was able to get my kids to a point where they could work so  incredibly independently and cooperatively, that everything  could function even without me there for an extended period  of time. The only significant problem we encountered occurred  in January, when I was completely recovered and back to  work full-time. My officers and I had a number of battles  over the direction of the group. They didnt want to give up the power they had enjoyed  during fall semester.
Let the Kids Know  You Can Have Fun, Too 4 T his chapter is about having fun as a teacher. Its one of  the most important qualities you can developand its  directly tied to your classroom success. Over my twenty-five-plus years at my school, Ive acquired  a reputation as perhaps the hardest, strictest teacher in the  school. I probably give more Ds and Fs than any teacher, and  I continuously hold the students accountable for their behav ior. Im proud that my sixth-grade students often refer to me  playfully as evil or mean and rotten. But a strange thing  often happens in parent conferencesno matter how bad a  students grades have been, or how much trouble hes been in,  when the parent asks the student if he wants to switch from my  class to an easier one, the response is always an emphatic NO! I cant get rid of these kids. Sarcastic smile. Whats the secret? My students have too much fun in my class plain and simple. As tough as I am, as much work as I give them,  I keep it fun. And that starts with me having fun in front of them. Basically, I love my job, and I show it. Ive always been one  of the only ones among my friends who professed to love their  jobs. I cant understand how anyone can spend eight hours a  day at a job they dont like.

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 14 There are numerous situations that simply lend them selves to teacher comedy. Spelling tests are always a great  opportunity for humor. For example, the month before report  cards come out, each spelling sentence I create is about whats  going to happen to them when their parents see their report  cards. And its usually not pretty. In class, we regularly joke around, and Im quite obnox ious within reason, of course again, sarcastic smile. In  fact, I generally dont yell or get upset. Instead, I get sarcas tic, which the students sometimes appreciate more. Or, as one  student once admitted: its not all the referrals I give out that  bother him, its the fact that Im always smiling when I do it!  More on that strategy later, when I talk about discipline.  Whereas I never recommend to new teachers that sarcasm  be used as a normal classroom management techniqueits  a refined skill literally developed over decadesteachers  can still start showing their fun side in other ways. Humor,  whenever appropriate, should be regularly used by the  teacherappropriate to the grade level, of course.  The most important way to demonstrate your fun side is  by always participating in school activities. Special dress-up  days, special sports activities, special programsthe more  you as a teacher participate, the more the students can see  how much fun you can be. They see your human side.  Even how you set up your room affects the way in which the  students view you. My room is decorated in Cleveland Browns  and Ohio State memorabilia, and we talk some football every  Monday during the autumn season. And, of course, I always  wear a special Browns shirt to school on Mondays after a win.  Unfortunately, it hasnt gotten a lot of wear in recent years. However, Halloween probably provides the best oppor tunity to show the students that you can have fun. To this day, I  cannot understand teachers who hate Halloween and refuse  to dress up, even minimally. The students notice immediately 

Let the Kids Know You Can Have Fun, Too 15 whos cool and participating, and whos not. And it often  affects their perspective of that teacher. Then again, I dont advocate for teachers to go to the  extreme that I do. I have a reputation for usually dressing  like a woman on Halloween. Literally, dozens of students  and staff quiz me for a week before the holiday as to what  Im going to wear. My singing group always dresses together  as a theme i.e., Disney, TV characters, or superheroes, and  I join in. Over the years Ive appeared at school dressed as  Tinker Bell, Mary Poppins, Elsa, Lucy, or Annie, and theyre  still talking about the day I came in as Wonder Woman.  Showing that you can have fun, or being human in the  students eyes, is critical to earning their respect and cooper ation. It helps the students stop doing your work because they  have to, and begin doing it because they want to please or con nect with you. But as I stated at the beginning of this chapter,  being a fun teacher does not take away from being a strict  or hard teacher.  However, being human in the students eyes is not equiv alent to being their friend. There is a line that I never let  them crossthe one that separates me as their teacher from  them as my students. There is a certain level of respect that  I demand. For example, I never let them call me by my last  name only, as they do with their friends. I tell them, You can  call me Dr. Mandel, Mr. Mandel, sir, your honor, my lord, my  liege, or anything like thatbut you cant just call me Mandel.  Its a fundamental line of respect. Its your basic personality and how you relate to your  students that determine more than anything how they will  respect you and relate to you. I once had a principal whose pet  peeve was insisting that the teachers dress in a professional  manner. Even though he could not enforce it, he wanted male  teachers to dress in ties, and women in dresses or skirts.  He insisted that dressing that way would increase student 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 16 respect toward the teacher. We laughed. It just so happened  that particular year that some of the least respected teach ers on staff all wore ties, whereas four of the most respected  teachers regularly came in t-shirts and jeans. Of course, some  highly respected teachers wore ties, tooIm not labeling all  tie-wearers!. I kept trying to convince the principal that its  not the clothes that get kids respectits how you treat those  kids, respect them, and let them know that youre human and  can have fun, too. Then again, having fun with the students can sometimes  backfire, as I have discovered more than once. The personal ity of my singing group varies from year to year. One year, the  boys in my group were very macho. They played basketball  every lunch period, and we continually talked sports together.  During one of our Washington, D.C., trips, we were all fooling  around on the grass near the Washington Monument, where  we were celebrating our performance that day, and one of the  boys tackled me from behind. It was not meant maliciously,  but as fun horseplay. I went to the ground on my shoulder and  immediately knew it was injured. The boys were all laughing  hysterically that they had gotten me. Obviously, I could not  just allow this assault on the Alpha Male to go unpunished,  so although I was in significant pain, I got up, chased the per petrator, and tackled him back. Obviously, this was back in  the day when teachers and students could physically interact  in harmless horseplay. Of course it was all in funand the  boys actually felt bad when the bus had to drop me off later at  the hospital to tend to my separated shoulder. But I was con tent. The groups Alpha Male had held his position though  to this day my wife hasnt let me live down this incident. No matter how hard a teacher you are, no matter how  difficult your course is, let the students know that you can  have fun, too. It lets them see youre human, and their respect  for you will grow.
5 Kids Dont Care How Much  You Know as Long as They  Know You Care O ne of my favorite educational quotes comes from  former president of the NEA National Education  Association Reg Weaver: Kids dont care how much  you know, as long as they know you care. And when you show  them that you know how to have fun, that you can laugh and  have a good time with them, its one of the best ways to show  them that you care. But I need to elaborate more on what this  philosophy means to the everyday teacher. Once upon a time, many, many years ago even before I  started teaching, teachers were professionals who taught  lessons; students went home to a stable traditional nuclear  family; and parents and community supported the edu cational professionals of the neighborhood public school.  Wow, have things changed! Now teachers not only teach, but  we have become pseudo-parents, counselors, psychologists,  social workers, medical personnel, and who knows how  many other things. Im not saying that this is right or wrong Im just saying that it is the state of our educational profession  today.  I believe that we need to take a holistic view of the stu dentthat in order to reach the child, we need to consider 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 18 all aspects of the students life. Many years ago the govern ment began to feed kids at school in the belief that a hungry  child cannot learn. In todays society, this concept must be  expanded to embrace the concept that a troubled child will  not learn. This does not mean that we as teachers are expected to  solve the students outside problems. We are not equipped  to do that. However, sometimes the best thing that a student  needs to know is that you care. And nowadays, we are too  often the only ones who really care. We have the opportunity to demonstrate to our students  every day that we truly care. The following are a number of  practices that I regularly implement when dealing with my  students with problems. Establishing a relationship. I always call my new sixthgrade students at home the weekend before school. I welcome  them and their parents and ask if they have any questions. It  makes them feel more secure and less stressed about begin ning their middle-school experience. Establishing contact. I regularly give my parents my phone  number and e-mail. And noin over thirty years of doing  this, it has been abused only once. I have discovered over the  years that the majority of problems Ive had with parents are  related to communication issues. Through a phone call or  e-mail, problems can often be taken care of immediately before they fester and get worse. At the same time, I have  limits. I inform parents that its inappropriate to call me or  e-mail me for homework help or because their child forgot  the assignment. And they cant call me during Browns games. I also do not friend any student or parent on social  media. Thats where I draw a line. Theres too much of my per sonal life to which I do not want them to have access. I will 

Kids Dont Care How Much You Know as Long as They Know You Care 19 only friend parents, or see them socially, after the student  leaves my class and graduates from middle school. I will only  friend former students on Facebook after they graduate  from high school. Divorce. Many of our students parents are either going  through a divorce during the school year or have already been  divorced. Im going to address these two situations separately. Students whose parent are going through a divorce regardless of their ageare deeply affected. I always let them  know that they can talk to me at any time if they feel the need,  or I can arrange for them to talk to a counselor at the school.  This is especially important when the divorce is nastier than  usual, or the parents are using the children as pawns. This can  lead, at times, to very traumatized students. If the students are  missing work some days for those students who rarely miss  work, I will often give them a break and allow them more  time.  More than anything else, these students sometimes just  need a hug. Yes, I know with todays child-abuse mania we as  teachers are not supposed to hug kids. But if one of my kids is  crying because of trauma at home, Im going to let them hug  me. However, I always take a couple common-sense pre cautionsI make sure its done in public, and I let the child  initiate the hug, with my hands out, a couple of inches away,  not actually touching the student. But sometimes nothing  lets a child know you care more than a hug when he or she is  traumatized.  For students who live with divorced parents, the prob lems may not be as traumatic, but theyre still serious. First,  for those students who live in a shared custody arrangement,  I make sure they get two sets of textbooks. This way they dont  have to deal with leaving books at one of their homes when  they are at the other. Second, I insist that both parents come 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 20 to conferences preferably together, and I work with them to  get them on the same page and to reduce the chance of the stu dent playing one parent off the other. Recognizing that theyre kids. This point is especially true  for kids between the ages of 11 and 15, when their hormones  and peer relationships affect their decisions more than any thing else. Sometimes you need to show some compassion and  give them a break when they do something dumb for lack of  a better descriptor. For example, in the case of sixth graders,  if during spring semester two students are having a problem,  the first question I usually ask is Who broke up with whom?  Very often that is the cause of the problem. I then tell them to  knock it off, and the matter is usually dropped. But very often  the root of the problem is peer-group difficulty. Being under standing at these times goes a long way with the student. On a more serious note, sometimes students get into a rut  and fall behind to the point where its virtually impossible for  them to catch up. This is especially true for students entering  a new school i.e., sixth or ninth graders or have experienced  some trauma recently e.g., a divorce. Even if they turn the  corner and want to practice better work habits, they cannot  realistically catch up. What I will sometimes do, during a par ent conference, is offer to throw out all of the previous poor  grades and pretend that the student is brand new to the  school. This deal comes with the understanding that this will  only go into effect if all work is now turned in, at an appropri ate level of quality. I have found that, given this chance to start  fresh, about 50 of the time the student turns himself around  and does AB work. In the other 50 of cases, the student does  not change the behavior and ends up with the same grade he  or she would have gotten had I not thrown out the previous  grades. Either way, I recognize that things happen, that they  are kids, and I provide them with an opportunity to succeed.

Kids Dont Care How Much You Know as Long as They Know You Care 21 Youre your students advocate. Nothing lets your students  know you care more than being their advocate. Whether its  with other students or teachers, my kids know that they can  come to me if they feel they have been treated unfairly, and I  will investigate and advocate for them. At the same time, that  doesnt mean that I will automatically take their side. If they  prove to be on the wrong side of an issue, I will wholeheart edly support any consequences they may suffer. But either  way, they know that I care enough to take the time to listen to  them and follow through with an investigation as to the merits  of their situation. When your students know you care, they are so much  more apt to listen to you, do what you request of them aca demically, and get more out of your classroom experience.  More important, you are helping them become better people,  and you truly become a significant part of their overall devel opment, not just their intellectual development.
If I Dont Talk about Discipline, You Wont  Read This Book 6 S tudents in the teacher education department at my  alma mater take six quarters of classes over a twoyear period, culminating in a B.S. Ed. degree and state  teacher certification. This allows the students to take many  more education courses than most Schools of Education offer.  As a result, at the beginning their programs, all education stu dents must take an Intro to Education course that provides  the very basics of teaching. Its a course Ill never forget, but  not for the reasons you may think. I had a wonderful relationship with my professor in this  class, since I was already a fairly experienced teacher when  I attended. Whereas not one of the other students had ever  taught children, I began my career as a paid teacher for after noon religious schools at age fourteen. As I described earlier,  this was one of the my hardest gigs, as the kids really did not  want to attend. And yesthat just reminded me that Ive been  teaching children in some form for about fifty years!. By the time I enrolled in this Introduction to Teaching  class, I already had seven years of teaching experience. As a  result, we were able to discuss more advanced issues about  teaching methodologies and curriculain-depth issues that 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 24 would normally not be presented to students in such an intro ductory class. It was a marvelous experience. The professor and I enjoyed a good laugh together about  certain facets of the intro class, especially on the day that the  topic was DISCIPLINEthe topic about which every new  teacher seems to be obsessed.  On Discipline Day, as we called it, the professor lectured  about discipline in very general terms, about how it should  be adapted, modified to fit the situation, and other, similar  aspects. She tried to stress that good classroom management  alleviates most disciplinary problems, but the students would  not accept this philosophy. They seemed to believe that dis cipline was a subject unto itself, one that needed to be stud ied. As a result, the participants in the class kept pressing her  on specifics, but she wouldnt go there. As the class went on,  the questions on particulars became more frequent, and the  students became more frustrated with her non-answers.  Finally, they pinned her down on how she once handled a  particular event, and as she answered, the pens went flying.  Every student in that room desperately tried to write down  every word she said. That anecdote exemplifies my basic rule about disci pline that Ive developed from my long career in teaching:1 There is no one disciplinary rule that a teacher can  always use. As a teacher, Ive discovered that what works at 9 a.m. is  different from what works at 2 p.m. What works on Monday  differs from what works on Friday. What works on a sunny,  hot day varies from what works on a rainy or windy day. And  I wholeheartedly maintain that an elementary school teacher  can tell its a full moon without bothering to look outside.  1	 For an extensive discussion about the ten aspects of classroom  discipline, see Mandel 2009 in the References section of this  book.

If I Dont Talk about Discipline, You Wont Read This Book 25 My advice to teachers about formulating a discipline pol icy is based on what I wrote in the previous chapter. If the kids  know you care, if they know you respect them, your discipline  problems will be significantly reduced. I believe it really is  that simple. Students today are not like students were even  ten years ago. I dont know if its the proliferation of social  media, or smartphones in every pocket. Maybe its a result of  school policies that no longer allow negative repercussions,  such as suspension for willful defiance. But I do know that  kids today no longer fear teachers, deans, or even administra tors as authority figures. Today, if you yell at a middle or high  school student, the reaction is not a cowering in fearrather,  it may well result in being cursed out by the student, knowing  that there would be little, if anything, the adult could do about  it. Unfortunately, thats the state of our schools today. However,  that doesnt mean teachers are doomed to this fate. Instead,  it means we have to change our tactics. Respect, not power,  needs to be the basis of a good discipline policy. If you talk to  them in a respectful way, students will respond in kind. Two stories illustrate how students react when they feel  that you respect them. The first happened many years ago  when I was teaching elementary school. I was in a set of bun galowsfive rooms connected together by interior doors. We  had a break-in one night, and we knew it was an inside job.  In one room, that of a teacher who was known to be mean  and disrespectful to students, the room was trashed so badly  that the intruders even defecated in her aquarium. The other  three rooms had varying levels of destruction, depending on  the other teachers reputations. My room? They played com puter games and played with my classroom pet rat. I felt a bit  guilty, but I actually felt complimented that I was respected  that much!  Teachers need to understand that students who feel dis respected will get them back, not necessarily to the extremes 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 26 of the above example. But they will do it in other, subtle and  not-so-subtle ways, ranging from disrupting your class, to  a personal work stoppage, to something more extreme like  textbook or desk graffiti. This is especially true in todays  society, as stated earlier. The second example occurred in the back bungalows  of my middle school, where the eighth graders are mostly  housed. Between periods, I was walking by and saw a couple  of eighth graders play-fighting and kicking each other. I told  them to cut it out, and one of them the largest one started  to come my way, yelling a challenge at me. One of his friends  immediately stopped him, saying, Hey man, leave him alone.  Hes cool. Now, I had no idea who either of these kids were,  but I smiled and nodded to them. Now, not everything is perfect in my classroomnot by far and I dont want to give anyone that impression. Occasionally I  need to discipline a student. However, there are certain princi ples that I try to exemplify. First, I always strive to correct the  behavior, not the student. For example, I rarely kick a student out  of my classoften that is what the student wants, and the lesson  is missed, thereby putting the offender behind the following day.  If I need to remove the child from my classroom, Ill send the stu dent and the days work to another classroom to sit and work. If  the offense isnt bad enough to warrant removal, Ill put the child  in a doorway or corner of the room, facing me, in a form of time  out. I let the student know that as soon as he feels he can change  his behavior and rejoin the classroom and lesson, hes welcome  to get up and go back to his seat. If hes in the time out and raises  his hand to participate, I always call on him. I never put a time  limit on the student by, for example, saying that he needs to sit  there for a half hour. Rather, as soon as the negative behavior is  extinguished, the student can rejoin the class. It may take only  five minutes, or it may take an hour. The behavior is always the  issue, not the student personally.

If I Dont Talk about Discipline, You Wont Read This Book 27 One of my favorite stories involves one of my first years at  my school. I was teaching an eighth-grade history class, and I  had the class clown on my roster. He was small, with a very  slight build. He was the kind of kid that one would expect  would be picked on in an eighth-grade class. What saved him  socially was that he would act up and get himself kicked out  of class virtually every day. Well, the second day in class, as  I was beginning my lesson, he made a really loud, obnoxious  comment to me that cracked up the class. Not even waiting for  me to react, he started to put his backpack together, expect ing to be kicked out of class. Instead, I made a sarcastic com ment back at him. He stoppedthere was silence in the room,  no one knew what was happening. He looked at me, and made  another crack at me. I smiled and made a sarcastic comment  back at himand the class started to giggle. Embarrassed,  the boy said something to me, and I came right back. Now the  class was starting to outwardly laugh, and the boy was get ting really frustrated. He made one more attempt to rile me,  and I came back, one, two, three obnoxious cracks before he  could react. By this time, the class was rolling in laughter, and  he was speechless. I walked up to him and said, Im better at  this than you. Are you done now? He nodded, and sat down. I  never had another problem with him all year. Two codas to this story: First, about six months later, the  boy made a sarcastic crack, immediately caught himself, and  apologized profusely. I laughed and told him it was okay, that  his line was actually funny. Second, toward the end of the  year, his other teachers approached me and invited me to a  meeting with his parents, because they were finally going to  get him. I informed them that they didnt really want me at  that meeting, because I was having no problem with him, and  that he was getting a B in my class. The teachers were upset   at me! They felt that my giving him a good grade was going to  make them look bad!

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 28 Now, I do not recommend that you take this type of  approachusing extreme sarcasmwhen dealing with cer tain problematic students. Its taken me many years to know  what I can and cannot say, and to develop my reputation. And  its also doubtful that in todays society I would use this extreme  approach again. But my point is that its important to understand  where kids are coming from, their background, andespecially  in secondary levelstheir social standing. Starting around fifth  grade and continuing through high school, the students social  group is much more important to them than any teacher relation ship. If you come across as a threat to their rep, they will act out  in a form of social self-defenseeven if they know that there  will be negative consequences to their behavior! Understanding  and respecting a teenagers social standing is key to a positive  classroom relationship. In their eyes, their social standing is  more important than anything you can do to them.  I will never forget the year that I taught eighth-grade  English. I had a major gang-banger in the class. He was about  250 pounds, shaved head, gang-type clothes. He had a perpet ual scowl on his facenever smiled, never participated ver bally in class. He was the kind of student most teachers would  fear. Throughout the year, whenever I handed back one of his  tests or assignments, Id also have a scowl on my facea sort of  of course you did lousy again type of expression, and toss the  paper upside down on his desk. Hed look at it with disgust, and  shove it into his back pocket. What nobody knew was that the  paper almost always had an A grade on it. I played the game  with him to protect his rep, and he responded positively. He  never missed my class, and never displayed negative behav iors. And at the end of the year, everyone was shocked when I  nominated him for the Top English Student awardwhich he  accepted with pride! Besides respect, the other aspect of discipline that I  believe is crucial is striving to be fair. Being fair is critical to 

If I Dont Talk about Discipline, You Wont Read This Book 29 gaining the respect of your students. For example, when a stu dent comes to me to complain that another student hit him,  the first question I ask is, What did you do to cause him to hit  you? We discuss how it is extremely rare for a student to hit  another out of the blue. Inevitably, the hittee admits to doing  something to provoke the hitter. I point out the fact that if  he didnt provoke the hitter, he would not have reacted as he  did. Thereafter, if a negative consequence was to be issued,  both parties would get itthe provoker and the provokee.  The students immediately witness that I am doing my best to  be fairand that goes a long way with them. At the same time, I demand respect from my students. They  can talk to me as an adult, and they can disagree with me vehe mentlybut it needs to be done respectfully. No raising of the  voice; no profanity. And as I mentioned earlier, my personal  peevewhich I do not allowis for them to call me by my last  name only. That, in my view, is a major sign of disrespect. I tell  the students they can call me Dr. Mandel, Mr. Mandel, Your  Honor, My Liege, Oh Great Oneanything but just Mandel. In closing this chapter on discipline, I want to share two  ideas that Ive learned over the years, insights that help me  more than anything else to keep a measure of sane control in  my classrooms. The first is learning how to ignore. Minor inci dents that dont disrupt the class and do little more than annoy  you should be ignored. Otherwise youll become increasingly  frustrated throughout the dayespecially when the students  figure out your annoyance level. This practice also helps you  gain respect from the students, as they observe that you dont  react negatively to every little infraction that they commit.  I practice this all the time at my school. For example, deal ing with cell phones on the campus is a continual problem  and nuisance. The students are not supposed to have them out  during the school day. However, they continually do so during  passing periods, break times, or lunch. Theoretically, as 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 30 teachers, were supposed to take them away when we see them  and bring the phone to the office. Most teachers simply ignore  the phones. However, if I pass a student with a phone out, Ill  often say, Wow, its a good thing Im so old and my eyesight is  so bad and decrepit. If I actually saw that phone out, Id have  to take it. The student smiles and puts it away, getting the mes sage and learning a new vocabulary word at the same time. The critical second insight that Ive learned is never to  show negative emotion when disciplining a student. I may be  livid with the students behaviorbut Ill never let them see it.  If anything, Ill be smiling and laughing as I hand out a nega tive consequence.  Theres actually a logic behind this. Students have lim ited control over what happens in their lives. However, they  know that they can control your emotions. Think about it. As a  teacher or a parent, have you ever seen children get in trouble  and then argue continuously and vehemently about it? They  know theyre not going to get out of trouble, and they know  that most likely, the more they argue, the worse the punish ment is going to be. So why do they do it? Because they know  that youre getting increasingly upsetand in their minds, if  theyre going down, theyre going to take you with them! So  how do you keep this from happening? Do not show negative  emotionno matter how upset you may be. If they know that  they have no effect on you, many of the escalating behaviors  will be extinguished. One of my favorite memories involves a former student  saying to me, Its not all of your referrals that bothered meit  was the fact that you were always smiling when you gave them  to me! I love that commentI was doing something right. Ultimately, if I were to be asked what makes a good disci pline policy, I would say this: Respect and Fairness. Add those  to good classroom management, and everything else con nected to discipline will fall into place.
Public School Kids  Deserve the Same  as Private School Kids 7 M y first assignment teaching in Los Angeles was  teaching fourth grade at a local private school.  The fourth-grade social studies curriculum was  based on California history. As a special treat, the students  flew up to the state capital for a day, where they visited the  capitol building, the Blue Diamond Almond Factory, the  Transportation Museum, and more. It was a great day. They  did minimal fundraising, and their parents paid for the bulk  of the trip. Fast forward six years to my first teaching assignment  with the Los Angeles Unified School District LAUSD, teach ing fourth grade in a nice, middle-class neighborhood in the  Valley. I spoke at length with my principal about how the pri vate school where I had previously taught had taken this oneday trip to Sacramento, and that it was a crime that public  school kids couldnt have the same opportunity.  She agreed, and with her permission, we decided to try  to raise the money for a similar trip with my studentssince,  unlike in private schools, we could not charge the parents for  a trip during the school day. We had weekly bake sale fund raisers. We conducted a California Trivia-Thon, where the 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 32 students learned trivia about the state and solicited spon sors who would donate a certain amount for every question  the students got right. Eventually, we raised the money and  were able to give our public school students the same expe rience students had in private school, without their parents  paying for the experience. After a couple of years of this successful one-day trip, we  moved it up a notch and took a sixth-grade trip to Washington,  D.C. Thats when I developed the fundamental fundraising  philosophy that I later used for my Pacoima Singers trips everyone goes or nobody goes.  To this dayand its been over twenty trips around the  country for my Pacoima Singersnot one student has ever  been left behind for financial reasons. Weve traveled and  performed in Washington, D.C., every other year. In alter nate years, weve performed in Vancouver Canada, Seattle,  Chicago, and at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland.  The way the trip is financed is as follows: Parents donate as  much as they can, and we fundraise the rest. Total cost for the  class for each trip is normally between 35,000 and 45,000.  I have some parents who can afford the entire amount, and I  have some parents who work as day laborers and give me a  20 bill each month. Im the only one who knows how much  each person contributes. We get sponsors and hold fundrais ers for the rest. Alas, were no longer allowed to hold bake  sales or pizza sales.  For about twenty years now, even though my school is in  a low socioeconomic immigrant neighborhood, not one stu dent has ever been left behind from this once-in-a-lifetime  trip because they could not afford the cost. Its one of the  things Im most proud of in my career. And it all started back in my first public school elemen tary teaching position, when I insisted that public school kids  should have the same opportunities as private school kids!

Public School Kids Deserve the Same as Private School Kids 33 Okaynow an embarrassing side-story as to why you  never take anything for granted, and always check the details:  When we went on the Sacramento trip from the private  school, we flew out of Burbank Airport, a medium-sized air port in the Valley. Los Angeles International LAX was twice  as far away in the city, with lots of rush-hour traffic. For my  trip with the public school, I used the same travel agent as the  private school had used. I assumed that everything would be  identical, and even though the ticket said Departing from  Los Angeles, I thought that they were referring to the city, and  that Burbank Airport was implied. People in Los Angeles reading this story are already  laughing because they know whats coming next. We arrived at Burbank Airport early in the morning with  a busload of fourth graders, my principal who was accompa nying us, and her boss, who had a fourth-grade son at another  school and thought this would be a great opportunity for him.  When I got to the counteronly an hour before the flight the agent looked at me in horror and proceeded to tell me that  we were at the wrong airport, that we were flying out of LAX  Los Angeles International Airportthe Los Angeles on the  ticket. We now had one hour to go eighteen miles across the  city, in a school bus, through horrible rush-hour traffic, to get  to LAX. At this time of day, traveling from Burbank to west  Los Angeles would normally take 1 to 2 hours by car. I have never been more appreciative of a bus driver than  I was that day. He took us through every back route possible  through the entire city of Los Angeles and got us there in less  than an hour. As we rushed to the airport, my principal and I  were discussing alternate career opportunities that we might  need, especially since a district official was with us on this  disaster. Luckily, the flight officials at Burbank called their coun terparts at LAX, and they held the plane as 50 fourth-graders 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 34 ran through the terminal to get on board. Thankfully, this was  years before post-911 TSA security! We made it, the trip was amazing, and a tradition of taking  public school kids on trips was born. And my principal and  I kept our jobs.
Have Heroes 8 I n todays world, motivation for success is very differ ent for our students than it was for us, in so many ways. I  believe a lot of it begins with a total lack of realistic heroes  in our society nowadays.  When we grew up those of us over 50 or so, heroes  abounded. We had political heroesJohn F. Kennedy,  Robert F. Kennedy; we had societal heroesMartin Luther  King, Jr., Cesar Chavez; we had heroes of courageNASA  astronauts; we had real-life TV heroesJacques Cousteau;  we had sports heroesathletes who spent their entire  careers with a team before free agency transformed them  into mercenaries. And presidents were revered and consid ered perfect role-models for an American child. When was  the last time you heard a child told, You can grow up to be  president? So whats happened to all of our heroes?  Political heroes? The quality has diminished over the  past few decades. Rarely do you see politicians stand up  for a true system of beliefs. And if they do, they are often  deemed non-electable. How many parents todayeven  if they support a president politicallywould want their 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 36 child to grow up just like him the president? And Im  referring to the years before Obama. Societal heroes? I havent seen one in a long time. Cant  even conjure up a reasonbut what societal figure have we  had for our students to look up to in recent years? Heroes of courage? Name the last NASA astronaut or  space flight. Revolutionary inventors such as Bill Gates and  Steve Jobs are known more for their corporate skills than  past innovative skills. Sports heroes? Do we have to go there? Since free agency,  it is almost unheard of for a player to show extended loyalty  to a team. And the superstars are usually more interested in  their corporate images. Ill never forget Michael Jordans  comment on why he wont take a position to establish himself  as an African American role model: Republicans buy tennis  shoes, too or something to that effect. And presidents? Presidents, and the presidency, were  revered until a cultural event that occurred in 1975. No, it  wasnt Nixon. He was personally disgraced, not the presi dency itself. But until 1975, it was rather rare to hear comedi ans make fun of the current president. What was it that caused us to no longer revere the presi dency? It was Chevy Chase and Saturday Night Live.  Until Chevy Chase frequently portrayed President Ford  as a bumbling klutz, TV did not regularly make fun of the  presidency. After this portrayal on one of the most pop ular TV shows of the time, societal respect for the posi tion changed. In fact, I remember a study that I heard of  years ago regarding Johnny Carsons monologue sorry, I  dont have a citation. It was discovered that in 1975, when  Saturday Night Live debuted, Carson averaged about 22  jokes about the president a month. Ten years later, he was  averaging 22 jokes a night about the president. And things  havent changed since. 

Have Heroes 37 For those of you saying Johnny who?sighhe was the  long-time host of The Tonight Show before Jay Leno, who was a  long-time host before Jimmy Fallon.  So, what is the point of this discussion? We as teachers need  to promote heroes with our students. Who are your heroes?  Share them. One of mine is John Jacobson, the Founder and  Executive Director of the America Sings! Festival. You read  my description of him in the Dedication to this book.  Another one is LeBron James, who has never been in trou ble, never associated with drugs or legal issues, married his  high school sweetheart, and after he left to win a championship  in Miami, he came back home to Cleveland to win a champi onship and raise his kids in his hometown. In addition, even  though he moved on to Los Angeles after achieving his goal, he  continues to operate the LeBron James Family Foundation in  Ohio, an organization dedicated to giving millions to the com munity and neighborhood kids. He even opened a state-of-theart community public school for disadvantaged youth in his  hometown. Thats a modern-day sports hero. I try to share my personal heroes with my students. I will  often talk to them about former teachers and everyday peo ple whom Ive met and who have made an impression on me.  For example, one year I taught English to immigrant adults at  night. I have never admired a group of people so much. Here  they were, after working 810 hours a day, often at difficult  manual labor, with families at homeand they still took the  time and effort to come and learn English. I share with my students the charitable work done by  Bruce Springsteen and the late Harry Chapin. In every one  of their concerts, they stopped the music and personally pro moted a local charity. I still talk about the parent, a day laborer making less than  minimum wage, who made sure that he contributed a 20 bill  every month for his daughters trip with my singing group.

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 38 Why is it important to promote heroes among our stu dents? Because it gives them someone to look up to, someone  to emulate, a goal of behavior for which to strive. It provides  them with the inspiration to become more than they currently  are. It goes beyond preparing our students for the annual test  or a college education. It goes directly toward making them  better human beings. This is one of the reasons I so admire the Character  Counts program of Michael Josephson. He promotes role  models and high moral character among all people, using his  Six Pillars of Character:1 Trustworthiness, Fairness, Respect,  Caring, Responsibility, and Citizenship. Check out his web site at https:charactercounts.org. Ultimately, I try to instill in my students the concept that  they have a personal responsibility to make the world a little  better when they leave than it was when they got here. How do  they do that? By emulating the behavior of their heroes.  We know how important it is to teach our students the  basics for becoming a productive person as an adult. But  we also need to teach them how to be better human beings. I  know its not tested, and its not in our textbooks, but we need  to do it in the discussions that we have, and instill in them the  importance of having heroes to look up to. Its one of the most  essential lessons we as teachers can provide.  And its what good, career teachers do.  1	 Josephson, M. 2002. Making ethical decisions. Los Angeles:  Josephson Institute of Ethics.
9 Get Rid of Your Ego I  had to get over my professional ego years ago with my doc torate advisor at USC. She was wonderful and realistic.  Ill never forget my first dissertation proposal. I worked  on it for months and was really proud of it when I handed it to  her. Ill never forget what she wrote on it when she handed it  back. Sprawled across the front page, in red ink, it said: THIS IS CRAP DO IT OVER My ego flew out the window right there. OkayI know this might be a seemingly hypocritical title  for a chapter in a book that may seem like the ultimate teacher  ego trip. And everyone needs a healthy ego to be successful.  However, the ego that Im talking about refers to the one  in the classroomthe ego that makes a teacher think shes  always right and keeps her from ever admitting to a bad les son or a bad decision. I believe that if you never have a lesson that fails, youve  never tried anything new. None of us has ever been a per fect teachernone of us has lessons that always work. 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 40 Unfortunately, too often your ego gets in the way of that  realization.  As a teacher, we need to keep our egos in check, espe cially when working with kids. Im not talking about humor ous situations such as when I have the word because on my  spelling test, and I use the sentence: To a teacher or parent,  because is a complete sentence. Its a teacherparent ego power thing. You should never be afraid to admit youre wrong to your  students. Sometimes you are. Sometimes you react based on  incomplete information; sometimes you react because youre  in a really bad mood. Either way, when you determine that  youre wrong, its important for your credibility in the stu dents eyes to admit it. This is especially true when the stu dents know youre wrong. Unfortunately, Ive seen too many teachers over the years  be stubborn and never admit to being wrong in front of their  students. Either they felt it was a sign of weakness or their  ego was too big. They would rather stick to their story than  admit anything. And just as unfortunate, their students were  normally the ones who had little respect for their teacher. Ive always gone by the concept that depending on the  size of my personal screw-up, thats the size of my mea culpa.  It may be offered privately to a student, or it may be a public  apology in front of the class. More than once, its resulted in  my purchasing donuts for the class. But the result is that my  students realize that Im human, and that I take personal  responsibility for my mistakes.  Its this type of modeling behavior that teaches our stu dents the adult life behaviors that we want them to learn. More  important, it leads to the type of respect that we as teachers  usually only dream of getting from our students.
10 Support Your Home Team T he first thing you see when you walk into my classroom  is a huge Cleveland Browns flag on the wall. You will  see numerous Browns, Indians, Cavs, and Ohio State  Buckeyes memorabilia around my classroomand no, I dont  give equal time to other teams. Im from Cleveland, Ohio, and  am a die-hard Cleveland sports fan. And thats not an easy thing to admit. During the football  season, I often wear a Browns shirt that says Just One Before  I Die referring to a championship. And I always wear a  fancy button-down Browns shirt the day after they win. And  yes, that shirt is still in almost-new condition.  Luckily, Im not the only one behaving in such a way on  my campus. One of my close friends is from Green Bay and  is almost as much a fanatic as I am. The staff is also split  between die-hard USC or UCLA fans the primary Los Angeles  rivalryand you can tell who is who from their classroom  and dress during football season. So why is this important? All of this home-team spirit  is great for the students to see and enjoy. Besides making us  human, sports often gives us a subjectone outside of aca demiathat we can share with the students. Those students 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 42 who habitually have problems in class, especially adolescent  boys and girls, can often be reached through a discussion  of sports. And once a relationship is established, it is so much  easier to work with them on their academics. Through mutual  sports interest, a trust and camaraderie can be established  between you. Now granted, I always have a couple students who pur posely wear a Pittsburg Steelers or a Michigan Wolverines  shirt to my classusually put up to it by a parent. That always  provides me with a wonderful opportunity to threaten to  abuse my teacher power for their blasphemy.  To promote college awareness at my school, every  Wednesday is designated college-shirt day. We have a uni form policy exemption for wearing a college shirt on that  day. Many students start to personally affiliate with colleges  that are promoted by the home-team spirit of their favorite  teachers.  Supporting your home team in front of the students also  teaches them its okay to promote pride in organizations with  which they identify. It naturally promotes school, classroom,  or school clubteam pride. But it also allows you to get them  to express pride in their work in other areas. At my school,  the last two principals would treat the spring standardized  testing like a school football homecoming celebration. They  organized pep rallies and songs and cheers, all involv ing the test-taking experience. One year, the principal had  t-shirts made for every student with the Ghostbusters logo  and the words I aint afraid of no test on the front. The entire  campaign was meant to get the students to take pride in their  test-taking, do their best, and raise their attendance on the  days of the test.  The students fully bought into the program, and our  scores went up as a result of nothing more than injecting  pride and team-support into their efforts. And this all started 

Support Your Home Team 43 with teachers demonstrating how to take pride in their home  teams.  This type of team spirit can also be extended to the  classroom in the form of fun competitions or cooperative  learning teams when appropriate. Use it to build pride for  the school, for your classroom, and for the students personal  work. The atmosphere you create in your classroom has more  effect on your students academic, social, and emotional  achievement than you may ever realize or witness. Have  fun and run with it. But not to the benefit of the Steelers or  Wolverines, please. 
11 Take Curricular Chances Once upon a time, teachers had the professional free dom to take curricular chances. I  often begin my discussions with new teachers about  the good old days of education with that clichd line.  However, one of the great things about the Common Core,  as written, is that it restores curricular freedom for teachers.  This corrects one of the most serious consequences of No  Child Left Behindthe stifling of teacher creativity and the  demand to teach with pre-made curricula or to strictly follow  a pre-determined pacing plan. Thankfully, this has changed  with the Common Core.  Its unfortunateand at times difficult to comprehend but teachers who began their teaching careers after 2002  have not taught in a climate where teacher-creativity and tak ing chances have been encouraged. Thats a huge proportion  of our current teaching staffs who have never been encour aged to incorporate their ingenuity, inventiveness, and adapt ability to their classroom curricula.  Hopefully, we can get that to change.

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 46 An example: Years ago, supermarkets gave free turkeys to  customers who spent a certain amount of money the week before  Thanksgiving. Having a Kosher kitchen, we couldnt use the bird  at home. But being a teacher, I couldnt pass up a free turkey. During Thanksgiving week we had school for only three  daysoften three virtually useless days due to heavy absen teeism. So I had a brainstorm for putting the turkey to good  usea cooperative learning lesson. On Monday morning, I put the turkey on the front table  and went about taking attendance. The students naturally  asked, Whats that? Me: Its a turkey. Students: Whats it for? Me: Thats up to you. We then began a discussion as to what the turkey could be  used for. Now understand, I had some ideas where this activity  would go, but nothing solidly planned in advance. This was a  spontaneous teaching opportunity. I was going to let my sixthgrade students determine the path that this unit would take.  Hopefully, the experience would be enough to last three days! Ultimately, after a lengthy discussion, my students  decided to hold a Thanksgiving feast rather than donate the  turkey to charity the close second choice. A subsequent discussion then ensued as to the work  groups that they would need to organize for their project. The  class decided on the following groups: 	 Cooking groupResearch how to cook the turkey. 

Side dishes groupDetermine and research side  dishes for the feast.

Research groupResearch the holiday, thereby en suring a curricular context. They would report out  as part of the program.

Take Curricular Chances 47

Decoration groupCreate appropriate decorations  for the classroom and invitations to guests.

Charity groupInvestigate local food banks and  write up some information about them. All guests  were going to be asked to bring a can of food to donate  as admission. This was in lieu of donating the bird to  charity. The groups all worked beautifully for the next two days, and  the feast was wonderful. In addition, there were some unex pected positive learning opportunities that came out of the  experience: 	 A science lessonAs we were cleaning the turkey,  we ended up having a biology lesson investigating the  birds heart, liver, and neck.

A math lessonAs we were discussing cooking side  dishes all of which were required to be homemade,  we discussed adapting recipes for larger numbers.  This led directly to a math lesson on multiplying frac tions.

A cookingphysics lessonAs I met with the cooking  group at 6 a.m. in the cafeteria kitchen, I commented  that it was a pity that gravity caused all of the juices  to sink to the bottom of the bird, thereby drying out  the breast on top and making the inedible back very  moist. One of my students thought about my words,  then suggested, Why dont we turn the turkey upside  down so the juices go into the turkey breast? This ob viously was exactly what I wanted to have done. And  the white meat was juicy and delicious!

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 48 This unexpected, unplanned, improvised unit turned out to  be a fantastic educational experience for my students! And  all because I decided to take a chance with an unplanned  curricular deviation. Another story of a successful, spontaneous lesson devel oped in my car on my way to school: I was planning on teaching the concept of setting to my  English class that day, using the same lesson I had used for  years. While listening to the SiriusXM Broadway station, I  got a brainstorm. I realized that Broadway composers use  their overtures to set the stage for their work. This was sim ilar to an author using the first page of a book to set the stage  for the story. When I arrived at school, I searched for a number of  Broadway CDs that had an overture that musically estab lished the setting of the story. I selected: Phantom of the  Opera, Hairspray, Wicked, Spamalot, Avenue Q, and A Chorus  Line. I played the first minute or so of the shows and then  asked my students what the show was about, based on the  musicinstrumentation the composers chose to promote the  required mood for the piece. They were generally correct for  each example. We then talked about how authors use specific  words and phrases to convey a setting or mood for their sto ries. Ultimately, they wrote their own opening paragraph  for a number of different genres: mystery, adventure, humor,  romance, horror. Using the Broadway musical examples, they  quickly comprehended the concept of literary setting. In todays classrooms, teachers are expected to follow  specific curricula tied to state standards. Earlier I mentioned  the principal who cautioned our staff that if its not tested,  I dont want it taught. However, we as professionals know  what is best for our students; we know the material that the  students need to know to be successful. And sometimes it  may be educational experiences not tested. I can guarantee 

Take Curricular Chances 49 you, if asked by an administrator, I could locate a state stan dard for every aspect of my turkey lesson aboveeven if it  were a spontaneous lesson. The Common Core standards are  that broad and general. I guarantee that you can do the same  for virtually any curricular innovation you incorporate into  your classroom. As a creative teacher, you will get brainstorms. Follow  up on them. Implement them. Take curricular chances. Some  of the best lessons you will ever teach will be the result of  your unique, spontaneous ideas.  And this is what often brings the fun back into teaching.
Administrators  Want You To Succeed 12 T hroughout my career, Ive usually enjoyed excellent  relationships with my school administrators. Ive  always viewed them as allies in the overall educa tional process. In turn, theyve consistently provided me with  the respect and academic freedom Ive needed to do what  I wanted to do with my students. This wonderful arrange ment came as a result of developing a mutual trust between  us, one in which my professional judgment was respected.  My administrators knew that I always had the welfare of my  students, and the school in general, in my heart and head, and  they believed I was good at my job and could accomplish my  educational goals. These relationships have helped make for  a positive and usually fun environment at my various schools  over the years. No teacher could ask for more. As I said to my first principal, Im here for one year,  but Ill stay as long as Im enjoying myself. Here I amthir ty-some years later, still enjoying myself. Now, what I just wrote may cause extreme rolling-of-theeyes among more experienced teachers. Unfortunately, some  teachers do not have great relationships with their adminis tratorseven when they have a good principal and assistant 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 52 principals. But throughout my career I have maintained that,  contrary to the opinion of many teachers, administrators are  not the enemy. In fact, in my work as a teacher union officer,  I would classify as good the vast majority of the principals  in my district. They are respectful of and collaborative with  their staffs, proficient at their jobs, and they create a positive  working environment at the school.  And if youre a new teacher, heres a news flash:  Administrators want you to succeed. Okaysometimes it doesnt seem like it. Ill never forget  my second day at my new school. One of the assistant prin cipals came in to conduct a formal observation of my teach ing. On my second day! Luckily, he was a friend of mine from  before I even arrived at the school, and he said he did it in  order to get a good evaluation on the record immediately. He  sincerely thought he was doing me a favor. Consequently, Ive  kidded him for years about terrorizing me on the second  day of class. This is not meant to make light of the negative princi pals who have problematic relationships with teachers. But  those type of relationships usually take time to developor,  should I say, deteriorate. However, as I stated previously, the  principal really wants you, as a new teacher in the school, to  succeed. Think about it. It actually makes a lot of sense. The princi pal hired you. Your success will make the principal look good;  your failure will make the principal look bad. Therefore, its  in everyones best interest to do whatever is necessary to help  you succeed. My father told me a story about when he was working for  another lawyer early in his legal career. He was required to  become an expert in a specialty related to a trial. Prior to  court, he was making a presentation to his boss. One minute  into the presentation, his boss stopped him and said, I dont 

Administrators Want You To Succeed 53 care about any of this stuff. You have one job to do, and one job  only. Your job is to make me look good. My father realized that  this was the basis of the employer-employee relationship. And its also the basis of a good teacher-principal rela tionship. Your job is to make the principal look good. Now,  some explanation is needed about what looking good  entails. High test scores make a principal look good, but  thats not what Im talking about. Im referring to when your  teaching becomes a source of pride for your principal; when  you are considered a significant asset to the school. Im refer ring to your contribution to having the school be considered a  positive, valuable part of the community. Thats the ultimate  looking good for a principal in the role of the educational  leader of the institution.  When you make a principal look good, that principal  will extend to you more academic freedom and trust to allow  you to do your best and thus accomplish that goal. Its truly  a symbiotic relationship. As a result, in every interview Ive  ever had with a new principal, Ive always said, My job is to  make you look good. The principal has continually appreci ated that position, and has subsequently provided me with  the freedom to do what I have felt is right. This isnt to say  that all of my administrators have been wonderful. But in all  these years Ive come across just one exception to this rule:  one principalperhaps the least effective principal Ive ever  hadwho answered me, I dont need anyone to make me  look good. A good, trusting relationship with your administrator  alleviates a great deal of stress. Teachers too often panic  when an administrator walks into the room. I believe that this  reaction is very misguided. Ive always loved when adminis trators come into my room to observe, as it provides me with a  great opportunity to show off my stuff! And if you have a good  relationship with the person, you can often get some good 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 54 tips on how to improve your lesson. Rememberthe admin istrator was once a teacher like you, and should have both  knowledge and experience to share! For example, there are certain special lessons that I teach  throughout the year that represent some of my best work.  I will often invite an administrator to my class to watch the  lesson, not to critique it, but simply to observe it. These peo ple enjoy good teaching! They enjoy innovative lessons.  Unfortunately, its rare for administrators to get into class rooms to watch their teachers unless its a required formal  observation or to address a problem. Theyre too busy with  paperwork and administrative duties to really take the time  to enjoy their teaching staff. Thats one reason they love to  come in and watch some of my special lessons.  And they mark on their calendar in advance the day I have  my annual International Food Faire, and they skip breakfast. These invited visitations are not evaluative, and are  meant to be fun. However, there was one incident I had that  kind of backfired on me. I invited one of the assistant prin cipals in to watch the special English lesson on setting that  I mentioned above. This is the lesson where I use Broadway  overtures to demonstrate to my students how orchestra tions create the setting for a musical, similar to an authors  word choice on the first page to create the setting for a story.  I invited this administrator because I knew how much she  enjoyed Broadway shows. The next day, she unexpectedly  called me into her office and handed me three handwritten,  legal-size, yellow sheets of notes from what she observed! I  chided her that this wasnt an observation and that she was  simply there to enjoy herself. She reminded me that she was a  habitual note-taker. I always teased her about that event, and  when I was Master of Ceremonies for her retirement party,  I presented her with pages of yellow legal pad notes on her  administrative work. Just for fun.

Administrators Want You To Succeed 55 A good, trusting relationship with your administrator  also serves you well on your formal evaluation, which you  are sure to experience in your first few years of teaching.  These evaluations are highly subjective. As a result, no mat ter how wonderful a lesson may be, any administrator will  find a great deal to criticize, focus on, or suggest what you  could have done but failed to do. However, its important  to remember that the reverse is also true. A good, trusting  relationship with an administrator can also lead to the eval uator actively searching for the positive in an observation.  Remember, administrators want you to be a success, and you  need to work with that in mind. On the flip side of the administratorteacher relation ship, and almost as a contradiction to what I stated above, you  need to always remember that the administrator is not your  friend. You can be on friendly terms with your administra tors: you can socialize with them, go to Happy Hours, dinner,  etc. But always remember that professionally, you have sepa rate, distinct roles. The administrator is your supervisor and  is, in turn, responsible to district supervisors.  Along these lines, its wise to not be friends with adminis trators on Facebook and other social media. Remember that  when you share posts with your administrators, their friends  can see them, tooand their friends often include high er-level district personnel. You dont want to put yourself in  a potentially negative position by allowing them to view per sonal posts you wouldnt want your boss to see. Another bit of advice. Whenever possible, approach your  fellow teachers with questions or problems before you go to  an administrator. It isnt that the administrators do not want  to help you. Its that the district often makes them spend ridic ulous amounts of time getting all of their administrative tasks  completedone reason Im still in the classroom, and not an  administrator. The more you need their attention, the more 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 56 they cannot tend to their own responsibilities. On some criti cal issues, yes, approach themthats why they are there. But  if youre bothering them continuously, thats going to end up  being problematic for you. So whats my overall message in this chapter? Try to enjoy  a good relationship with your administrators. They sincerely  want you to succeed and will do whatever they can to encour age that to happen. Share your good teaching with them,  your innovation, your creativity. Go ahead and show off a  bit. Listen to their advice when you feel its appropriate and  helpful. Its really a simple, basic concept: the more positive your  relationship with your boss, the more youll enjoy your job.  And the various administrators Ive worked with throughout  my career are a significant reason that Im still enjoying this  work after so many years.
Beware of  Smoke Machines 13 I n a previous chapter I talked about taking curricular  chances. And when you take chances, sometimes new  ideas work well, and sometimes they flame out. But thats  not a bad thing, because I also believe that a teacher who  never fails, never tries anything new.  However, I need to add a note of caution. Be careful when  you try something absolutely new or totally out of the ordi nary. Unexpected consequences may result. Sometimes they  work out greatsometimes not so much. I know that Im presenting a bit of a dichotomythat is,  be creative, but always prepare for the unexpected, and learn  how to roll with it. My best stories of unexpected consequences revolve  around two smoke machines. While teaching elementary school many years ago, I put  on a musical theater production where a cat was going to  heaven at the very end of the show. It was very dramaticshe  walks up a ramp lined with colored lights tilted to add perspec tive, and its somewhat dark. The effect was quite impressive.  After the first night of the show, my outside videographer  offered to let us use his smoke machine in order to improve the 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 58 effect. A stage crew student would sit behind the back end of the  ramp and, at the appropriate time, would turn on the machine  and produce a fog that would slowly spread out from under  the ramp like a cloud. We tested it and determined that the  operator would hold the button and count to five and then  release, thus producing the perfect amount of smoke. And soon after, we learned about the unexpected conse quences of live theater. Late in the show that night, when the smoke was to be  turned on, the operator did exactly what she was supposed  to dohold the button down for five seconds and release.  However, the cat at the top of the ramp didnt see any smoke  coming out, since we planned for it to collect under the ramp  and slowly move out. So she whispered to the operator, More  smoke! More smoke! Well, the student working the machine  listened to her, and pushed the button for another five  seconds.  This happened three more times in succession. Needless to say, within 30 seconds, an eight-foot wall of  smoke started to move slowly toward the audience, engulfing  all of the cast members as they sang. Knowing the importance of the teacher reacting quickly  in a crisis, I immediately left my director post and ran through  the smoke to open all of the auditorium doors and calm a cou ple students who were beginning to shout.  The cloud quickly dissipated, the song ended without fur ther incident, and the audience had a good laugh at the end  when I explained what happened. And I swore never to put something that new into the mid dle of a showor the middle of a lessonwithout fully trying  it out under optimum conditions. But sometimes trying something new works out unex pectedly well, though it often cant be duplicated because of  the unique conditions surrounding the first time.

Beware of Smoke Machines 59 Many years after the smoke incident, my Pacoima  Singers were performing the number Defying Gravity from  Wicked. We had our Elphaba, and a manually operated lift  think of a big metal teeter-totter hidden by a curtain. At the  appropriate time, replicating what occurred in the Broadway  production, she was lifted about four feet into the air, as if she  were flying. To add to the effect, we had a smoke machine run ning behind her that enveloped her in smoke that had been  turned green by our lighting. It really wowed the audience.   However, on closing night, the smoke was unexpectedly  different. Instead of enveloping her, it rose and formed a flat  layer across the stage at her feet, as if she were standing on a  green cloud. Watching it later on video, it was a remarkable  effect. When I asked Stage Crew afterward how they did it how they were able to stop the smoke exactly at her feetthe  answer was unexpected. It turns out that the student in charge  of the smoke machine forgot to turn it on to heat it up, and was  actually very late in doing so. The smoke accidently rose only  to that exact height, since the machine was not sufficiently  warmed up. Thus the crew couldnt reproduce the effect even  if they wanted to. Sowhats the theme of this chapter? Be creative, but  beware of trying off-the-wall things with your students. Try  using new teaching ideas, but prepare for unexpected conse quencespositive and negative.  Dont forget: thats part of the fun of working with kids!
Why I Refuse to Use  an Online Grading  Program 14 I f something works for you and your studentseven if its  not popularuse it or do it. It may be old fashioned  or off the wallit doesnt matter. If you, in your profes sional opinion, think that it works for you, incorporate it into  your teaching or classroom. Thats the basis of my justifica tion for why I refuse to use an online grading program. However, a disclaimer is needed before you continue  with this chapter. Many teachers love online grading pro grams. They think theyre easy and helpful, and so swear  by them. If youre one of those people, you may want to skip  this chapter. As youve probably surmised, Im not one of those people. Almost every bit of writing I do at school or at home is on  a computer. Its been that way for decadesever since the  Apple IIc and my 5  floppy disks. That said, the only thing  that I do NOT do on the computer is my grades.  I know, many of you are thinking that that is crazy, espe cially with all of the grading programs available nowadays. In  fact, a couple of years ago, when my district stopped ordering  those blue, half-page grade sheets, I hoarded a couple hun dred of them before they could be destroyed, as I had every 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 62 intention of keeping my archaic black, three-ring roll book as  long as humanly possible. In fact, at a recent union board meeting, I was finishing  my grades, and a number of my peers stopped by to laugh at  me for still doing them by hand.  So why am I still a grading dinosaur? I have more control with my grades in handwritten form.  For example, I will generally throw out the lowest grade if I  have ten or more of the same type of assignment. I have a rep utation of being really hard on my students three times over  the past twenty years my sixth-grade students got together  and produced I Survived Dr. Mandels Class t-shirts. With  my handwritten roll book, if they mess up once or twice over  the course of a grading period, I can compensatewithout  having to reprogram the grading equations! For the sixth grade, I use grades as a positive motivator  and to show the parents where their child truly stands aca demically. If a student is an AB student, I dont feel that one or  two poor grades should change that assessment. Sixth grade  is the beginning of middle school; the students have multiple  teachers, the material is harder, and assignments are at times  difficult for them. As I mentioned in an earlier chapter, as a result of a con ference with the parent of a student with academic problems,  I will make them a deal: If they turn in the rest of his or her  work, at a C or higher level, I will throw out the previous bad  grades. I cant have that freedom with a programmed grade  computer system without spending significant time repro gramming or going into the program and making clickand  delete-type adaptations. For example, last year I had a student who was living with  her mom and brother in a battered-womens shelter. Not only  was it difficult for her to study and do her work at night with 

Why I Refuse to Use an Online Grading Program 63 the crowd there, but this eleven-year-old took three subways  and buses to get to school. She was receiving an F in her  other classeseven though her records showed that she had  been a good student in the fifth grade. I made a deal with her:  If she got 80 of her assignments turned in, and they were  complete, she would get at least a C from me. I cant easily do that with a computer grade program  although Im told that some of the newer programs have  override capabilities that allow a teacher to put in a different  grade than what the system determines; still, for me person ally, its not as easy as using the roll book. My roll book also makes it easier to answer a students  question about grades. I asked a friend who swears by his  online grading program to go through the process of show ing me a students grades. Little did he know I was timing him.  From the time I asked him to see the grades, he had to boot up  the program, do a search, and show me the gradesit took  about two minutes. I then timed myself from the time a parent  asked me about a grade. The time it took me to reach over, get  my roll book, open up to the childs class and show the parent  the grades: 12 seconds. One last, very hot topic about computer grade programs:  There is a big push now to have grade programs post grades  online, thereby making them accessible to a parent at any  time. I am 100 against that procedure. I do NOT want a parent  having that access without speaking to me! I want to retain  the ability to explain the childs progress; to explain why the  grades are the way they are. I want to explain the factors that  are involvedsuch as classroom behavior and work habits and whether the child can make up a grade or not. A B for one  student may be a great grade, but for another its a disappoint ment. This is the whole reason we have parent conferences. A 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 64 parent who has easy access to all grades without putting them  into perspective invites problems for the teacher, and worse,  may feel that there is no need for a traditional face-to-face  conference with the teacher. But what about the parent who doesnt want to wait until  a conference or grade report to come home? Theres a ready  solution to this. Write me a note; send me an email with the question:  How is my child doing? An answer will come either by note  or phone callwith any necessary explanationwithin 24  hours.  So let them laugh at me as I do my grades by hand. Im  actually pretty fast with a calculator. It works for me. And  that is my primary advice to all teachers: If it works for you and your students, do it. 
Numbers Dont Always  Add UpAnd Fair Grades  Take Some Effort 15 G rading is one of the most powerful tools that teach ers haveand its also an abused and misused one.  A teachers grade determination is usually final.  Teachers are often protected by state laws that prohibit  any administrator from changing their grades. On the other  hand, grades are too often the only aspect of the childs edu cation that a parent truly cares about. Thus, the teacher is in  a very advantageous position. But its important to remember  the Peter Parker Principle: With great power comes great  responsibility.1 It was good advice for Spiderman, and its  good advice for teachers. This chapter wont delve into how to figure out your  grades. There are other books dedicated to teaching that  skill.2 Rather, the chapter is going to reflect on the basic con cepts of grading and the ramifications of a teachers actions  concerning grading. And those ramifications can be substan tial and often unknown to the teacher. Unfortunately, there are several ways in which teachers  1	 Lee 1962. Amazing Fantasy 15. New York: Marvel Comics. 2	 See Mandel 2009 for a detailed discussion on how to figure out  your grades.

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 66 abuse or misuse grades. First, when teachers abuse the grad ing process, their rationale is that they are manipulating  grades for a nobler purpose. My school has four ten-week  report cards and a five-week progress report in between.  The purpose of the progress report is to inform the parents  that their child is in danger of receiving a D, F, or U on  a ten-week report U for Unsatisfactory in work habits  or cooperation. Ive worked with teachers whoon princi plewill give 90 of their classes Ds and Fs on the first  progress report for no other reason than to motivate their  students! However, they never see the punishment that many  of these students have to endure as a result of bringing home  a grade of this type. Worse for me personally is when parents  decide to pull their child out of my singing group because they  have determined that their child needs to spend all of his or  her time on tutoring or just working because of the D or F  they received from those teachers! Its a blatant abuse of the  grading system. And, unfortunately, no one can do anything  about it, as classroom teachers have the final say on their  grades. Its gotten so bad that I actually have to warn parents  at my opening meeting to expect that grade on the first prog ress report, so as to not react negatively. Second, there are teachers who do not truly understand  the basic grading process. Too often this happens with rela tively new teachers who incorporate a point system. In many  cases the students receive final grades well below what they  should have earned. And when the teacher is questioned  about the grade, the teacher simply adds up the points the stu dent received, compares the result to the scale, and justifies  the grade that was recorded.  However, theres a fatal flaw in this logic. For example, one  of my students was very frustrated because she was receiv ing a Din her class based on two testsshe earned an A  on one, and an F on the other. The two tests were supposed 

Numbers Dont Always Add UpAnd Fair Grades Take Some Effort 67 to be equally weighted. I asked the teacher about it, and she  showed me that the girl received a 96 on one test and only a 24  on the other. Averaged out, she showed me that they came to a  60, which was a Din her class.  Although I pointed out that logic dictates that an A and  an F should average out to a C, the teacher was adamant  that her math was correct. And therein lies the problem with  using a straight point system to grade: F grades are unfairly  weighted. As to Ds generally have a ten-point spread 90 100 , 8089, 7079, 6069, yet an F has a significantly larger  one 059.  I gently shared this flaw with the teacher and suggested  that she program any F grade lower than 50 as a 50 in  her computer. This is another reason why I dont like online  grade books, as I discussed in the previous chapter. The phys ical test itself can have the numerical mark that was earned the 24 in this casebut when the final grades are calculated,  all low Fs are given the same weight as other grades.  Following this adaptation, the student mentioned above  would have her grades calculated as 96 and 50, which aver ages out to a 73a Cwhich is the grade she should have if  receiving an A and an F. Its really that simple.  And that leads to my primary message about grading: Be  Fair. Children should get the grade that reflects their work,  their knowledge of the material, and the progress they have  displayed in class. My son had what I, to this day, consider an  unfair Algebra II teacher. One-hundred percent of her stu dents grades were based on the tests she gave. My son did  all of his homework, understood all of the material, partici pated in classand had horrible test anxiety. As a result, he  received an F in her class and had to re-take the course in  summer school. We even got him a tutorwho was frustrated  because he continually insisted that my son understood the  material and we were wasting his time. Because this teacher 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 68 only took into account her tests in grading, he still flunked the  class. And there was nothing anyone could do about it. Thats  blatantly unfair grading.  As a teacher, I regularly throw out a single bad test grade  if its an outlier from the students normal achievement.  Everyone has a bad day. Everyone occasionally has a bad test.  If an outlier grade doesnt reflect the students overall prog ress, get rid of it in your final calculations! Do whats right be fair. I also make special allowances for students in rare cir cumstances. For example, I had a fantastic student in my  English class. Her work was well above average in every  aspect of my class, from reading comprehension to writ ing skills. In fact, she was earning As in all of her classes.  However, she couldnt spell no matter what. It had been an  ingrown weakness throughout her schooling. The best she  could do, with studying, was a high D on my weekly spell ing tests. Unfortunately for her, spelling accounted for 25  of the English grade in my class. If I followed the rules, this  straight-A student would receive a B. Therefore, I told her  and her mother during our parent conferences that as long  as she tried and received at least a D on my testsI would  throw out the final spelling grade and she would get the grade  she really deserved. Do whats rightbe fair. Theres a practice I always use when Im done figuring  out my grades. I look over all of the grades that the student has  earned throughout the period, and I do a quick estimation in  my head. This tells me the grade the student probably should  have. I then compare it with the grade I calculated. If they  match, great. If they dont, I recalculate the grade to ascertain  where I was off. I may have been off with the estimationbut  I may have also been off with the calculation.  Finallyand this has assisted me more times than I  care to imagineI look at all Cs, Ds, Fs, and Us and 

Numbers Dont Always Add UpAnd Fair Grades Take Some Effort 69 pretend that the parent has come in for a conference and  is questioning my grade. Can I justify it? If I have the data in  my grade book to justify the grade, fantastic. But if I discover  a flaw in my logic, I go back and rethink and recalculate the  grade I gave that student. Being fair is paramount to both good and bad grades. Ill  never forget my first year in my school district. I gave a fourthgrader four Ds and an Fand his parents thanked me!  Evidently, I was the first teacher to give their son the grades  he actually deserved.  I cannot stress enough the concept of being fair and  giving the grades that the child truly earns. I always say to  my students that they are not to thank me for giving them  an AI wasnt responsible for that grade, the student was.  Simultaneously, Im not to blame for a students D or F the student is also responsible for that grade. All I do is deter mine the grade that best describes the students progress and  that is fair. Nothing more, nothing less. With great power  comes great responsibility.
Dont Fill Your Car Trunk  with Your In-Service  Class 16 A  number of years ago, I purchased a new car and gave  my old one to my college-age son. As I was cleaning  out the car before handing it over, I felt tinges of nos talgia. In the trunk was a collection of handouts and materials  from in-service classessessions I had attended over the pre vious eight years. As I sorted through the material, I remem bered all of the sessions and all of the ideas I was going to try  one day when I had time. It was like revisiting a personal pro fessional development scrapbook.  I sighed as I collected the old material and gently depos ited it in the trash can. Workshopsand especially salary point classescan  be quite helpful, and they can also be horrible wastes of time.  Unfortunately, our educational pay system is one where, in  order to advance up the salary scale, you must take classes  to improve. Please know that this is different from virtu ally every other profession, wherein required in-service is  self-determined and self-reported. The worst classes are the ones where the instructor has a  significant egowhere the homework is nothing more than  busywork, fulfilling whatever requirements that he or she 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 72 deems personally important, regardless of whether or not it  has any relevance to your professional life. Each year, I teach three two-day salary point classes,  along with numerous workshops. The workshops all have  multiple handouts for the teachers, and the salary point  classes all require homework for the participantsexactly  the type of materials I threw out from my old car. The thought of my salary point class material becoming  landfill is troublesome. Therefore, when I give out home work in my salary point classes, I have one important rule.  The project MUST be something that the participant is going  to use that year, or in the coming school year. In other words,  the result of my assignments must be relevant to the teachers  professional lives. That is my one hard-and-fast rule. I dont  care what the project subject is I always teach methodology  classes rather than subject-matterspecific topics, and I  dont care what format they use for their homework. In fact,  I tell them to use whatever format they normally use in their  curricular planning. All I care about is that the material they  create will be incorporated into a classroom and that their  time with me will not be wasted. Grantedtheir frustration  is sometimes amusing as they try to pin me down on specific  formats. When I present my workshops and discussions, I make  sure that the examples I use are taken directly from the par ticipants curricular lives. When I begin a session, the first  thing I do is go around the room asking the participants  grade levels and subject areas. I then adapt all of my examples  to match their various teaching situations.  The key to this philosophy is professional respect. When  you lead your fellow teachers, its critical that you show them  respect for their teaching knowledge and experiences. The  most important way of doing this is to demonstrate to them  that you feel that their time is valuable. Unfortunately, I am 

Dont Fill Your Car Trunk with Your In-Service Class 73 quite aware that few, if any, of the participants are taking my  courses because of my brilliant presentations or to share in  my abundant knowledge. Theyre there to acquire a salary  point and move up the scale. Therefore, I want them to at least  feel that their time with me was somewhat beneficial and not  a waste. We are all so busy as it is. If you ever find yourself a leader  of teacher professional development, make sure that if you  need the participants to produce some work for you, that the  product is relevant and useful to them, so that their time has  been well spent.
17 Special Ed Kids  Are Like Everyone Else M y wife is a special education teacher. She has a spe cial day class of learning-disabled elementary stu dents, grades 4 and 5. In fact, we met when I was  teaching elementary school, and I was the only one willing to  have her students mainstreamed into my classroom. Ive always found it amazing how some teachers look  down on special ed kids. They often avoid them like the  plague and frequently blame school problems on these stu dents. Personally, I have always found that attitude to be hor ribly misplaced.  Special Ed kids are like everyone elsethey simply have  a learning disability. Once that difficulty is compensated for,  they should be able to work on a level comparable to their  peers, and often blossom when treated as such.  I always say that I, too, have a learning disability. I am so  nearsighted I cannot function successfully in a classroom  without some compensationin my case, glasses. However,  glasses are a socially accepted compensation. Most intel lectual difficulties are not.  My favorite story of special ed students being success ful goes back to my elementary school days when I was 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 76 incorporating cooperative learning into my curriculum. I  had four special ed students in my classroom, and all of them  were active, successful participants in cooperative learning  experiences. One day, I had my principal observe the ses sionshe was not a big fan of cooperative learning at the  timeand I challenged her to identify the four special ed stu dents. She sat at my desk for about ten minutes stymied, then  walked around the room observing every group. After twenty  minutes, she guessed one of thembut could not identify the  other three. The special ed students were totally, successfully  integrated into the classroom lesson. As a teacher, you can have a profound effect on special ed  students simply by believing in them and accepting, valuing,  and appreciating them for who they are. Im a strong advocate  of the concept of the self-fulfilling prophecy. Students will  raise themselves upor lower themselves downto the level  that you expect from them. This is especially relevant with  special education students, who are routinely looked down  upon and treated as if they are less valuable and capable  than others. Here are a couple of examples of the benefits of that  self-fulfilling prophecy. At my middle school, in my gifted Englishhistory sixthgrade class, I was assigned a student who had a severe emo tional disturbance. He had a one-on-one aide with him at  all times. I was warned about his behavior at his elementary  schoolhe physically assaulted the principal and necessi tated the police being called on him a number of times. His  father was even banned from the school. The strategy I used with this student was to sit him  down the very first day and inform him that I knew about  his history at his previous school, and that I didnt believe  he was that bad. I explained to him that I expected the  same behavior from him as I did from the other students. 

Special Ed Kids Are Like Everyone Else 77 The compensation I made for his disability was that when  he felt that he was going to explode, he had my permission  to walk out of the classroom, just outside the door, to calm  himself down. He was required to say to me that he needed  private time, and he was allowed to exit and get himself  back to where he needed to be emotionally. In addition, I  would not allow his one-on-one aide to interact with him  in the classroom. He didnt need her for academia he was  the highest-level student in the gifted class, but rather for  behavior problems. I wanted to wean him off of the aide  and to eliminate the middle school social stigma of having  an adult follow him around all day. The result of this plan was that his tantrums became  fewer and fewer, and within a few months the aides time was  gradually phased out.  By eighth grade this student was totally without his oneon-one, and his tantrums were non-existent. He was com pletely written out of special education, and he went off to  high school, just like any other student. Coda to the storythe next year I was assigned another  student considered emotionally disturbed from the same  elementary school. She, too, excelled as a result of being  expected to comply with the same academic and behavioral  expectations made of the other students. It led us to conclude  that the problem was more the attitudes of this particular ele mentary school than it was the students! Okayone more story. I cant help myselfI love special  ed success stories, since normally all you hear about are spe cial ed problems. My first year in the district I taught fourth  grade, and I was assigned to the school about three weeks into  the year. I was given a class that included Student Y. Student Y  suffered from very serious emotional disturbances. The way  the school had handled her up until then was to send her to  the office every day and allow her to hang out there as long as 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 78 she wanted. If she threw a temper tantrum, she was immedi ately sent home. The first week, Student Y left my class and went to the  office without my permission. When I went to get her at  recess, she started screaming and swearing at me inside the  office. The secretaries jumped up to save this new teacher  from her, but I put my hand up for them to stay out of it. I folded  my arms and let Student Y yell and swear at me for about ten  minutes.  When she was done, and crying from exhaustion, I asked  her, Are you done?  She said, Yes.  I replied, Good. Lets go back to class. She followed me  out without another word.  Not once for the remainder of the year did Student Y get  sent to the office, nor did she ever leave without permission.  We developed a system where she came up to me and said,  I need to go out, Im losing control. She would go out of the  room and return within minutes. By the end of the year, she  was behaving as normally as any of the other kids. All of these are examples of the self-fulfilling prophecy. If  you believe that special education students can, and should,  succeed, chances are better than not thatwith the proper  educational modifications, of coursethey will. Special education students are like anyone else. They  simply have a deficiency or discrepancy in some area. Too  often their negative behaviors are the result of the self-ful filling prophecythey are acting as they believe the adults  in contact with them expect them to behave. Whereas the  self-fulfilling prophecy is applicable to all of our students,  I have found through the years that its even more prevalent  when dealing with special education students, who all too  often already have a stigma attached to them. They need our  understanding and acceptance, and our high expectations 

Special Ed Kids Are Like Everyone Else 79 that they can function like anyone else once compensation  has been made for their educational problem.  Once that is done, you will find that special ed kids are  like everyone else, and that theyre some of the most special  students youll ever have.
18 So Are Non-English  Speakers M ost Professional Development sessions are use ful and well taught. However, sometimes there are  clunkers. Occasionally theres one that can actually  rile you. I remember one such episode to this day.  We were attending a mandatory PD session on how to  teach with the new history book because heaven forbid, we  experienced teachers couldnt figure out how to use a new  textbook, he said sarcastically.  The facilitator was introducing us to a supplemental  activity for the Ancient Egypt unit. She was demonstrating  that the students could write postcards home from Egypt to  their parents. She explained how the students can write about  their experiences in Ancient Egypt on one side of the card.  She then went on to point out how our gifted students could  fill up both sides of the cardand that our English Language  Learners ELL students could write a couple of sentences on  one side in their native language. Needless to say, my reaction to this difference in expecta tions was significant. While its true that many ELL students  may have below-grade-level skills in their native language, the  vast majority are proficient in their home tongue. Therefore, 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 82 if ELLs were writing in their own language, the expectations  should be the same as for English-speaking students! To  expect anything less could be considered unprofessional! A small minority of teachers believe that non-English speak ing is synonymous with lower ability and is therefore met with  lower expectations. A non-English speaker is simply that: some one who does not speak English. Nothing more, nothing less.  For those of us who remember Bi-Lingual Education, the  philosophy that ELL students are as intelligent as English speak ers formed the basis of the program. In Bi-Lingual Education, a  teacher teaches non-English speakers in their native language,  in their core subjects, during the two years it normally takes  to learn English. That way, the ELL student doesnt fall behind  academically while simultaneously learning English.  In the previous chapter, I discussed how Special  Education students are intelligent and capable. They just have  different processing issuesa learning discrepancythat  must be addressed. The  cognitive level of ELLs is not related  to their language deficiency. In many ways, a number of the  concepts shared in the chapter on Special Education are  applicable here as well.  For example, ELLs excel in Cooperative Group Work, just as  Special Education students do when you account for their lan guage difficulty.1 This can be accomplished a number of ways:  	 You can pair up a student with a translator. 

You can use Google Translate translate.google.com to  translate materials that the groups will use. 

You can also allow a group of similar speakers to car ry on their discussions and to create their projects in  their native language.  1	 For an extensive discussion on working with ELLs within a  Cooperative Group Work experience, see Mandel 2003.

So Are Non-English Speakers 83 In all three of these adaptations, the students cogni tive participation should be at the same level as the partici pating English speakers once you account for the language  discrepancy. My experience with ELL students began in my first year in  my school district, when I was assigned a fourth-grade class.  I had four ELLs on my roster. Back then they were called  ESLEnglish as a Second Language. One spoke Spanish, one  spoke Hebrew, one was fluent in Chinese, and ones native  language was Korean. I subsequently approached my princi pal and asked her if she could assign English speakers to my  classroom who were also fluent in each of those languages.  Luckily, we had fourth-grade students who fit each of those  language categories. I assigned them as buddies, seating  next to the corresponding ELL learner. The English speaker  was able to translate for the ELL student in everything we did.  Not only did the ELL student understand what was going on in  class, but he was able to fully participate in all group discus sions and activities. After a few days, the translating became  a very normal component of the classroom. And within a cou ple of months, the ELL student was beginning to work on his  own, in English. By the end of the year, the ELL student was  certified as an English-speaker. Whereas this buddy system worked in fourth grade,  I wouldnt try it with either much younger students or with  students older than sixth or seventh grade. Problems often  develop when the students become teenagers, as social  aspects may disrupt the buddy relationship if the two  partners dont move in the same social circle. However, if  the two are friends, and their partnership is entirely volun tary, the buddy system will most likely work in secondary  classrooms. One of my favorite ELL success stories happened quite  by accident. Every teacher develops certain strengths and 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 84 weaknesses over the years. There are certain ages and types  of students you do really well with, and certain ones that  are more of a challenge. This is especially true in elemen tary school, where you have the same students all day, or  in sixth grade, where you have them for extended periods  with block scheduling. Over the years, Ive developed a rep utation as a teacher to whom an administrator could assign  students representing every major behavioral problem in  the gradeas long as they spoke English. My specialty has  always been behavioral-problem students. Unfortunately, on  the other side, I was weakest with ELL students. Ive never  had the extraordinary patience needed to be a successful  ELL teacher. As a result, I always had to work harder with  ELLs in my class, as this wasnt my forte. My ELLs still had a  solid education, as discussed above. But to have an entire ELL  classroom would most likely take me several years in which  to become truly proficient.  My story comes from the one year my district decided to  try to even out the vacation time students experienced. I was  teaching elementary school when they made Winter Vacation  six weeks long, from Thanksgiving through New Years, and  took the time off of Summer Vacation, making it six weeks long  as well. To assist the students with continuity, they created a  three-week Intersession Program, mostly for ELL and Special  Education students. Being a fairly young teacher at the time  and the father of small children, I needed the extra money, so  I applied to teach Intersession. I was given an ELL class. Now,  this was thirty years ago, before No Child Left Behind and the  proliferation of scripted, mandated curricula. In fact, for the  Intersession, I was given no curricula to follow. I was just told to  develop my own in order to keep these students working on their  English over vacation. This was actually the norm back them. Anyway, not being an experienced ELL teacher having  only a few ELL students every year, not an entire class, I took 

So Are Non-English Speakers 85 a very novel approach. I showed my students kid videos in  English every day. These movies contained stories and char acters that they recognized. After each movie, the students  had to draw a picture depicting one of the characters or  scenes from the story. When this was completed, they were  required to explain their picture to the rest of the classin  English. In addition, they were forced to speak English any time they were in class, and out on the yard at recess. My  program seemed to work. I didnt know how much they for mally progressed, because there were no preor post-tests.  However, the students all fully participated throughout the  three-week session and seemed to enjoy learning English.  About a month afterward, I met a couple of their teachers  at a meeting. They were gushingthey couldnt believe that  these ELL students I had had for a three-week Intersession  had become English speakers in such a short time. They kept  pushing me to share my secretand when I did, they didnt  believe me! Granted, in todays educational environment, one cen tered on testing and scripted intervention programs, theres  no way I could ever get away with something that unorth odox. But back then I could be creative, and it worked. The  students readily learned English when the subject matter  involved something in which they were interested and that  they enjoyed. Maybe that concept can still be applied to ELL  students today. Too often, ELL students are kept from participating in  extracurricular activities. This is a huge mistake. Not only  do they have a lot to offer, but extracurricular activities  both encourage English learning and help socialize them to  the school culture. In one of my first years at my elementary  school, I ran a Musical Theater program after school. We per formed an original show entitled Age of Aquarius, and I gave  the opening solothe song Aquariusto an ELL student who 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 86 literally knew no English at all. However, he sang the song  perfectly in English and fully participated in the entire show.  By the end of the school year, he was fluent in English and was  one of the most popular students in his grade level. I guess the reason my ELL students do well is the same  reason my Special Education students succeedI believe in  the Self-Fulfilling Prophecy. I believe that students raiseor  lowerthemselves to the teachers expectations. Students  want to please their teachers. Therefore, they will do what the  Teacher expects, good or bad. If you truly believe that the stu dent will succeed, chances are the child will meet that expec tation. But the opposite is also true. Low expectations will  often lead to poor results. I find this self-fulfilling prophecy  to be especially true with both ELL and Special Education stu dents, who often have teachers with pre-conceived notions  of their abilities, whether they be high or low. Think about my opening anecdote. If you believe that ELL  and Special Education students can and will do well once you  adapt to their personal situationthey will. And thats a criti cal philosophy for any teacher to remember and act upon.
19 Leadership  as a Student Trait A s I stated in my introduction, this book is largely built  on the stories I would tell during my teacher in-ser vice classes. Some of those stories were derived  from my perspective on various teaching methodologies and  philosophies Ive learned over the years. These are mostly  items that are not usually found in most teacher education  books, but come from years of real experience in actual  classrooms. Unfortunately, most teacher education books,  along with district-provided in-service sessions, come  from educators who havent been in an actual classrooms  in yearsand often decades. There is a significant discrep ancy between what they think will work and what actually  will work. Why am I including in this book these next two chap ters centered on teaching methodology? Because they relate  directly to my philosophy of teaching and educational  research: that is, if the material isnt directly applicable to  the classroom, the material is worthless. These two chapters  are meant to share some educational curricular ideas that  you may not have learned in your teacher education classes  or district professional development sessions. Rather, this is 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 88 day-to-day teaching reality that Ive observed and learned  over the years and feel the need to share. Some quick background on the topic of this chapter:  My dissertation research at USC was based on Cooperative  Learning. Cooperative Learning had already been estab lished as a highly successful and worthwhile teaching meth odology. However, up to this point, most Cooperative Learning  work required the teacher to change her teaching style to fit a  Cooperative Learning model. In practice, few teachers were  willing to do that.  As an alternative, my research goal was to discover why  Cooperative Learning actually workswhat are the basic  concepts that the average teacher can take and apply to her  personal classroom and established teaching style. I used a  participant-observation method. In other words, I studied  my own classroom.  One of the most significant findings that came out of my  dissertation research was how the Leadership Variable is  a primary component of our students personality and sub sequent classroomand schoolbehavior. In brief, it was  discovered that every student can be placed in one of three  categories1: LEADERInitiates all discussion and work in groups. FOLLOWERReadily participates, but only after a leader  initiates. NON-PARTICIPANTWill not voluntarily participate; is on  task, but will not offer anything to the group unless asked or  prodded. 1	 See Mandel, S. 2003. Cooperative work groups: Preparing stu dents for the real world. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.

Leadership as a Student Trait 89 Although my research was limited to group work within  the classroom lessons, these findings were easily transfer able to other parts of classroom and school behavior.  Displays of these three types of student leadership behav ior are prevalent throughout the school day. For example, do  you ever have a student who raises his hand for every ques tion you ask? Now, he knows he doesnt have the correct  answer; you know he doesnt have the correct answer. But he  raises that hand anyway. Why does he do this? Because he has  a strong leadership personality trait that requires him to par ticipate, no matter what.  At the opposite end of the spectrum, do you ever call on  someone you think is off-task, who never raises his hand, and  you try to catch him unprepared? And then, to your dismay,  he always fools you and has the correct answer? That student  has a non-participant personality style. He doesnt like to  participate, but he is still on-task. Non-participation does  not mean off task! The implications of this phenomenon are significant. For  example, if you grade for classroom participation, you are  actually grading the students leadership personality. You  are rewarding someone whobased solely on his personal ityhas to raise his hand and be heard, whether or not hes  prepared or even on task. And, conversely, you are punishing  a student whoagain because of his personalitydoesnt  readily volunteer, although he may be completely engaged in  the lesson. Students with a high leadership personality have to lead,  one way or another. Unlike adults who can control the urge,  students cannot. And if the student cannot lead in a positive  manner, then it will be in a negative manner.  I maintain that the vast majority of gang leaders in our  schools are students with strong leadership personalities  who could not find a way to channel that leadership into a 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 90 positive avenue. I further maintain that possibly the best way  to stop the proliferation of high school gangs is to reestablish  formal sports programs in middle and junior high schools so  that these kids can find a positive way to lead and participate  at an early age. An example of this negative leadership personality  stands out from my days teaching sixth grade in elementary  school. We had twin boys who were terrors. Literally every  day in fifth grade, they would be in the office. In sixth grade,  one was in a special education full day class, and the other in  a resource program, mainstreamed into my class.  The special ed teacher and I sat them down at the begin ning of the school year and discussed with them how we  knew their reputation and didnt care. We liked them, rec ognized that they were leaders, and wanted to give them a  fresh start. However, they had to make a decision whether or  not they were going to be positive or negative leaders this  year. They informed us that they would think about it and get  back to us. The next day, the two boys asked to meet with us. They  had discussed it and decided that they wanted to be positive  leaders. That decision affected virtually all their behavior the  following year. They continually made positive choices and  were willing to accept positive roles that we offered them.  As a result, neither one of them was ever sent to the office.  In fact, in my after-school musical theater program, both of  them were such great role models that they became group  officers for the year! It is important that you recognize the Leadership Variable  within your students and its effect on your classroom par ticipation. Those classified as followers will do fine and  participate as needed. For those classified as non-partici pants, you can adapt your expectations knowing that they  are on-task, but too uncomfortable to actively participate. 

Leadership as a Student Trait 91 But most important, you need to use this knowledge to create  opportunities for those who have strong leadership person alitiesto channel that trait into positive ways rather than  negative. Youll be surprised how many discipline problems  will be averted throughout the year.
The Multiple  Intelligences Really Work 20 L ike the last chapter, this is one on sharing some teacher  methodology that I found really works. As teachers, we use every trick in the book to reach  our students. Over the years, we all learn, try, succeed, and  fail with numerous innovations that we come across in our  readings, observations, and in-service sessions. I believe that  one of the two most useful innovations of the past thirty years  is the theory of Multiple Intelligences Cooperative Learning  being the other. The Multiple Intelligences theory shows us  how students thinkwhat is it that energizes their brains.  Howard Gardner discovered that all of us think through  one or more of eight different intelligences1: 	 Verbal-linguistic

Logical-mathematical

Visual-spatial

Bodily-kinesthetic 1	 Gardner, H. 1993. Multiple intelligences: The theory in practice.  New York: Basic Books. 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 94

Musical

Interpersonal

Intrapersonal

Naturalist By presenting curricular material in that intelligence mode, a  teacher can better activate the students brain function. I know it definitely works for me. Personally, Im very  high in the Musical Multiple Intelligence. When Im grading  the same assignments Ive given for years we havent changed  our texts in fifteen years, I like to have music on. The music  energizes me to get through this mundane activity easier.  At the same time, this energization can be a distraction.  I remember attending the Hollywood Bowl for a Tchaikovsky  concert my favorite classical composer, and I was having a  horrible time concentrating on the music. The music was acti vating my brain so much that I kept getting ideas about a new  book I was in the process of writing. I couldnt stop thinking  about it! I finally had to start jotting down notes on my pro gram to get the ideas out of my head so I could enjoy the music. I wont go into a long dissertation about the Multiple  Intelligences herethat could take up a book in itself, and  the information is readily available.2 Rather, I want to share a  couple of non-traditional ways Ive incorporated the Multiple  Intelligences in the classroom. At the beginning of the year, I give my students a simple  test to determine their highest Multiple Intelligence. I mark  the results in my roll book and pull out that information when  2	 For one of the best teacher-friendly books on the Multiple  Intelligences, see Armstrong, T. 2009. Multiple intelligences  in the classroom 3rd ed. Alexandria, VA: Association for  Supervision and Curriculum Development.

The Multiple Intelligences Really Work 95 needed usually when the student is having some difficulty on  some curricular concepts.  For example, lets say a student was having difficulty  understanding the theme of a particular story. Id look in my  roll book to see the students high Multiple Intelligences, and  then I would do the following: 	 If the student is high in Linguistic Intelligence, I would  sit with the book and discuss sections of the story that  directly affected or were evidence of the theme.

If the student is high in LogicalMathematical Intelli gence, I would go to the board and make a flow chart  diagraming how the various aspects of the story logi cally related to the theme.

If the student is high in Spatial Intelligence, I would lo cate a picture or two related to the theme and describe  the concepts using the picture as a guide.

If the student is high in Bodily-Kinesthetic Intel ligence, I would make up an excuse and have the  student walk with me to the office while I explained  the concepts, just to get the student physically  moving.

If the student is high in Musical Intelligence, I would  simply play music in the background while we dis cussed the concepts.

If the student is high in Intrapersonal Intelligence,  I would provide the student with some questions to  think about, relating to the concepts.

If the student was high in Interpersonal Intelligence,  I would assign a buddy to discuss the concepts with  the student.

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 96

If the student is high in Naturalistic Intelligence, I  would go sit outside and discuss the concepts. I know that this is very simplistic, and very time consuming,  and I do not go through the process every time a student needs  help. Its a tool I turn to when other easier and quicker meth ods do not seem to be effective. Most important, its a good  methodology to have at your disposal. The other time I really incorporate the Multiple  Intelligences is a bit unorthodoxbut quite useful. I have  used the information during our annual standardized testing.  Standardized testing has been high stakes for years ever since No Child Left Behind came into existence in 2002.  Its the time we really need our students to do their best, as  the school andor teachers are evaluated to some degree  based on student test scores. Unfortunately, if you believe in  the validity of the Multiple Intelligences, the school testing  environment is essentially contrary to what energizes their  thinking! Unless the student is high in Linguistic or Logical Mathematical Intelligences, a distinct disadvantage is pres ent with the use of standardized testing. For those students  not high in those two areas, this is what I do to energize their  thinking for this critically important task: 	 For the students who are high in Spatial Intelligence,  I put up some pictures of that subject area where they  can notice them, as visual representations stimulate  their thought patterns. Obviously I do not post any thing that would help on the testbut things in that  general subject area. I also make sure that they have  scratch paper to doodle on during the test which is  later collected and turned in.

For the students who are high in Bodily-Kinesthetic  Intelligence, I let them have a squeeze ball or some 

The Multiple Intelligences Really Work 97 other manipulative device at their desk to use during  the test to keep some muscles working.

For the students who are high in Musical Intelligence,  I have music playing during set-up and during breaks.

For the students who are high in Intrapersonal Intelli gence, I have them sit in the corners of the room, away  from others who would distract them simply by their  presence.

For the students who are high in Interpersonal Intelli gence, I have them sit next to their friends. They arent  talking or sharing answers, but the proximity of oth ers has been shown to help them with their thinking.

For the students who are high in Naturalist Intelli gence, I have them sit facing a window, or, if thats not  feasible, have them facing a plant or classroom pet. Some of these practices are a bit unorthodox, and it takes  some explaining whenever an administrator enters the room.  However, its up to us as teachers to use whatever is at our dis posal to energize our students thinking abilities. After all, its  the teacher that too often is held accountable for the students  test scores. Why not use any advantage available to raise stu dent scores? The Multiple Intelligences is a great tool to use in  testing and other endeavors throughout the year in order to  energize your students thinking processes. 
Make em Laugh 21 STUDENT: What time does this class end? ME: When the bell rings. STUDENT: When does the bell ring? ME: At the end of the period. STUDENT: When will that be? ME: When I dismiss you to your next class. T his exchange can go on for another eight-to-ten ques tions before the student gives up. Its one of the reasons  I have few classroom management problemsI can be  more obnoxious than any student in my class, if need be. My point? Sometimes you just gotta use humor to get  through the crap a teacher needs to endure nowadays.  I use humor all of the time when I teachboth with kids  and adults. Sometimes I just feel like giving out signs like  Bill Engvall does in his Heres your sign routine a comedy 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 100 classic every teacher should listen tobut more on that  later.  Humor allows you to keep your sanity in the face of an insane  teaching environment. It often allows you to get your point  across, or deal with an obnoxious student, without getting upset.  I cant count how many times I look at my sixth-grade students  and simply remark to the group, And this is the gifted class?  I find that bringing humor into the classroom makes the  day more enjoyableeven if the work is serious. It allows you  to put things into perspective and, more important, it reduces  a tremendous amount of stress with your students.  From spelling tests to explanations about homework, I use  humor whenever possible. Even when disciplining a student, I  dont get mad. I get sarcastic. As I stated earlier, one of my stu dents once told me, Its not the referrals you give that upset  meits that youre always smiling when you hand them out. One of my favorite t-shirts to wear simply states: DEFINE  NORMAL. Thats the theme of my classroom. If youre crazy  or weird or off the wall in my room, thats considered  normal behavior.  I regularly start off the year by informing my sixth grad ers that Im from another planet. I tell them how the movie  Men in Black was actually a documentary. Whats scary is  that, if I present it well enough, some of my sixth graders actu ally believe me. April Fools Day is a classic in my class. Its become a rite  of passage that the kids remember from year to year. Did  Mandel get you, too? is commonly asked in early April. This  is how I set it up: On April 1, I create a reason to get mad at my  gifted sixth gradersthey havent been putting enough effort  into their work, they did lousy on a homework assignment  I just graded, or something of that nature. I then give them a  surprise test. Ten questions: I take the book and orally select  very obscure items for my questions. I keep reminding them 

Make em Laugh 101 how important this test is going to beand it will require a  parents signature if they fail. By the tenth question, they are  completely panicking. The last question is always What day  is today? I then watch the light bulbs start to go on in their  heads as they realize that they have been had. This past years  group then crumpled up their papers and threw them at me. I know what youre thinkingthis is cruel. How do you  think I get my reputation for being mean and rotten? I  didnt say they had to feel it was funny. I had a good time doing  it. And the seventh and eighth graders share stories with the  sixth graders how I got them in previous yearsit adds to  my legacy. As I wrote earlier, my class is always very tough academi cally, but I try to make it a lot of fun. You, as a teacher, need to  strike that kind of balance. The best, of course, is Halloween, which I talked about  earlier, how I wore very strange costumes every year. I mentioned the comic Bill Engvall earlier. My Pacoima  Singers have actually adopted his Heres Your Sign routine.  As Engvall says, its for people when they do or say stupid  things. Rather than getting upset with them, you give them a  sign pointing it out. Heres an example of how he uses it:  I got stuck behind a big rig that wedged his trailer  underneath an overpass. And me and the trucker  were standing on the side of the road talking. And a  Highway Patrolman pulls up, and he looks at the guys  rig, and he looks at the truckerand says, You got your  truck stuck? And bless this trucker, he says, Nope, I was delivering  this overpass and I ran out of gas. Heres your sign.

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 102 A buddy in the Navyhes waiting to get on his cruise  ship, and hes in full Navy gear and this lady walks up  to him and says, Are you in the Navy? And without missing a beat, he says, No maamthe  Village People are missing a singer and Im just filling  in for the night. Heres your sign.1 Okayyou need to be over 40 to  understand that one. When someone in my singing group says or does something  really dumb or off the wall, the kids all shout out, Give her  a sign! And we give the person an imaginary sign. It makes  everyone laughincluding the offender, and is really a  socializing mechanism that brings the class together through out the year. Invariably, theres one student who seems to  own the sign throughout the year, and it makes her com mentsand hereven more acceptable to the group. More  important, it gives the students experience in laughing at  themselves and not taking everything too seriously. I also use humor whenever possible with adults, espe cially during my in-service and salary-point classes. These  are generally classes or sessions where the teachers are there  involuntarily, or they have to take the class in order to prog ress up the salary scale. As I always state at the beginning, I  know that theyre not there to partake of my brilliance theyre there to get salary-point credit. Humor makes it more  bearable for themand often for me. I always start off my adult in-service sessions with this  story: 1	 Engvall, B. 2004. A decade of laughs. Audio recording. Warner  Brothers.

Make em Laugh 103 A teacher died and went to heaven and met St. Peter,  who said, Were glad to see you here. Let me show you  where youre going to live. So he took her to the first neighborhood, and it was  beautiful. The houses were gorgeous, lawns perfect,  and people were everywhere having picnics and par ties. The teacher was excited and asked, Is this where  Im staying? St. Peter said, No. This is for the doctors. Youre a lit tle farther. So they walked to the next neighborhood, and like  the previous one, the houses were amazing, the lawns  were perfectly manicured, and people were every where having picnics and parties. The teacher asked,  Is this where Im staying? St. Peter answered, Noyoure in the next one. So they went to the next neighborhood, and like the  previous ones, the houses were gorgeous, lawns per fect, but there was one differenceit was deserted.  No one was there. The teacher was despondent, and  turned to St. Peter and asked, St. Peter, dont you get  any teachers up here? St. Peter looked at her and answered, Oh surewe  get a lot of them. Youll meet them tomorrow. Today,  theyre spending the day in hell at another in-service. While laughing, I then start my formal presentation. Always make em laugh. 
Parents Are Your Greatest Allies 22 A s suggested in the earlier chapters, I believe that vir tually every successor failureyou experience in  education is tied to your attitude. This is especially  true when dealing with relationships with parents. Recall the story I told in my chapter on grading: I had a  parent who was very upset with the grades that I was giv ing her elementary school child. Regardless of my logic,  regardless of the facts in my grade book, she was not  happy and was sharing this unhappiness with my principal  and myself in the principals office. Rather than arguing,  rather than getting upset, I handed her a blank report card  and said, Fill this out the way you want, and Ill sign it. The  parent backed off, and I made my point. Teachers need to remember that parents are normally  very protective when their children are involved. Parents  usually spend significant time and care in selecting doctors,  babysitters, cribs, clotheseven who holds their child. To no  ones surprise, the vast majority are naturally concerned with  the care of their child when a teacher is involved. Teachers  need to recognize and acknowledge that fact. We are actively  dealing with the most precious commodity a parent has. It is 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 106 extremely important to understand this point, especially for  teachers who are not parents themselves.  At the same time, parents must remember that teachers  are professionals. They have gone through years of training  and usually have years of experience working in their pro fession. They also have a massive responsibility for the care  of anywhere from 20 to 40 students in their classroom each one deserving of their personal consideration and  time. Seven hours a day, 180 days a year. A total of 1,260 hours  a year. Okaythat thought may be a bit overwhelming. Parents also need to recognize and acknowledge this  fact. Teachers want parents to be supportive of their educa tional program, and parents want teachers to care for their  childrens educational needs. It sounds like a perfect part nership. So why does it sometimes go wrong? Mostly because  of miscommunication and mistrust. For example: From a classroom teachers perspective: 	 A passive parent is often considered one who doesnt  care about the childs education. 

An active parent is looked upon as an aggressive  troublemaker.  From a parents perspective: 	 A teachers negative actions are often looked upon  as the result of not liking my child. 

A teacher who does not excuse the student from some thing is giving no consideration to the childs out-ofschool life.  Both perspectives are incorrect and too often stereo typical. Both sides need to work together toward a common 

Parents Are Your Greatest Allies 107 goal: the students increased academic achievement.1  I believe in a holistic approach to education. We are  responsible for the overall, all-encompassing growth of the  child. And by we, I mean the teacher-parent partnership. I personally welcome parents into my classroom and  strongly encourage them to come to Back to School Night.  Thats when I get to sell myself and my program. Its up to you,  the teacher, to educate parents on how your goal is to enrich  their children, and how youre going to implement that goal.  I always acknowledge their parental role and call what we  have a partnership. We are working together to reach the  same goal, although we each have our own separate roles and  responsibilities.  Here are a few basic concepts I incorporate into my class room in order to make this partnership work: Communication: I insist on two-way communication with  my students parents. As stated earlier, I provide them with  my cell phone number and e-mail address. Most teachers  refuse to give out their numberhowever, Ive done it for over  thirty years and its been abused only once. As I stated earlier,  I do insist on some restrictionsprimarily, it is not to be used  for homework questions. I let them know that I will, at times,  inform them that this is an inappropriate use of a phone call.  I also share with them that if I dont take the call, its because  Im busy with my life. And I tell them never to call during a  Cleveland Browns football game. I also let them know that  e-mail is the best and preferred way to get in touch with me,  and if a follow-up call is needed, Ill get right back to them. In my thirty-plus years of utilizing this policy, I have had  only one parent abuse it, and I had to hang up on her. Once in  thirty-plus yearsthats not a bad record. 1	 Mandel, S. 2007. The parent-teacher partnership: How to work  together for student achievement. Chicago: Zephyr Press.

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 108 I always make it clear to the parents that it is critical that  they inform me if something traumatic occurs in the childs  life. This includes deaths, divorces, and, in the case of those  with behavioral difficulties, a phone call before school if their  child has had a bad morning. By having this information, I can  immediately prepare for potential variations in their childs  normal behavior, from the time they arrive at school. It allows  me to be proactive instead of reactive to problematic behav iors due to the personal trauma. I communicate with the parent regularly throughout the  year. All Ds and Fs on tests must be signed. Every 56 weeks I  send home a list of work that their child is missing or has done  poorly. If I do my communication job correctly, the grade on  the report card is never a surprise. I also make a deal with the parents at the beginning of the  year at Back to School Night: I wont believe half of what their  child says about them, if they dont believe half of what their  child says about me.  Parent Conferences: I have a standard rule concerning par ent conferencesthe student must be at the conference, or I  will not hold the conference unless the child is receiving an  A. The reason is simplethe student cant lie in front of me.  When parents question my reasoning, I explain that if I give a  bad report to the parent, and the parent goes home and con fronts the child, is the child going to say, Mandels rightI  did screw up on that? No!! The child is naturally going to lie  or distort the truth to get out of trouble. Especially with my  gifted studentstheir creativity comes out quite extensively  when trying to justify a negative report. However, the student  cant do that when sitting in front of me at the conference. My second rule is that if this partnership is going to work,  I must make the conference accessible to the parent. Dont  you hate it when the utility company says, Well be at your 

Parents Are Your Greatest Allies 109 place sometime between 8 and 12 on Wednesday morning.  Someone needs to be there with no consideration of the  demands on your personal time? Well, parents cant always  make assigned conference timesespecially those who  work in lower socio-economic jobs that pay hourly. Ive held  conferences as early as 6 a.m. and as late as 6 p.m. If the confer ence is that important and not all aresome can be handled  in a short phone call, Im going to make sure that it happens  at a time when the parent can attend. This is a major aspect of  the teacher-parent partnership. Problem Parents: Unfortunately, not all parents are coopera tive or willing to engage in a real partnership with you. Those  who arent have to be dealt with individually, usually with the  advice and assistance of the administrator. Keep your pro fessionalism high. Its critical that you know when to give in,  when to compromise, and when it really isnt that important  in the grand scheme of things. How many of you are now hum ming the words to Kenny Rogerss The GamblerYouve  got to know when to hold em Know when to fold em Know  when to walk away? Okay, that song may be before your time.  Even those of us with decades of experience sometimes  deal with parents who are exasperating for lack of a better  word. Remember my opening anecdote about the parent to  whom I handed a blank report card and said, Fill it out like you  want, Ill sign it. Sometimes its just not worth the fight. This is  one of the hardest decisions that a teacher has to makewhen  to balance ones professionalism with ones sanity. However, with all parental interactions, I always incor porate one unbendable tenetI do not tolerate any verbal  abuse. This is an important rule for you to follow as a profes sional: If a parent becomes abusive, walk away; end the con ference. Inform your administrator immediately, providing  a written account of the exact language and incident, and the 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 110 actions that the parent took. In subsequent interactions with  this abusive parent, be they formal or informal conferences,  its perfectly acceptable to insist on an administrator being  present in the room.  Fortunately, problem parents are a distinct minority.  Unfortunately, every teacher gets at least one or two every  year. It goes with the territory. However, if you treat your par ents as partners in their childs educational process, they will  prove to be your greatest allies, and you will reduce incidents  of problem parent behavior. Ultimately, the most important component of a successful  partnership with parents is the mutual respect you demon strate through communication, conferences, and dealing  with problems. And once youve established this successful  partnership, you will get the ultimate compliment from par entsnot a nice gift at the end of the year although thats  always welcome, but when the parent demands that younger  siblings be placed in your classroom.
23 Keeping My Sanity  All These Years P eople often ask me how Ive kept my sanity teaching in  my district for over thirty-five years. I tell them I belong  to ten California wine clubs. Now, I dont recommend  drinking wine as a method for teachers to keep their san ity, though it does help. Rather, there are a number of things  I actually do to keep my sanity that Im going to share here.  Whereas each individuals personality is different, many of  these ideas are applicable to all. Use them for what its worth,  while you develop your own methods for keeping sane while  being a classroom teacher. The most important way of keeping my sanity is talking  to someone regularly. I have friends on staff that I talk to  almost every day about things both at school and outside  of school. For a new teacher, this is critical. When I mentor  new teachers, I often pull them out of their classrooms at  nutritionrecess and lunch to have them participate in the  real world. Too often they are so stressed with time man agement and planning that they stay in their rooms during  their breaks to work, thinking that it will be more stressful  if they dont work every minute at their craft. Sealing your self in the classroom with limited or no contact with your 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 112 peers is probably the number-one way to produce teacher  stress in the long term. Talking to others helps in a number of ways. First, you  often find that problems youre facing are universal, and not  just your problems. Be they individual students or admin istrative mandates, when you know others are experienc ing the same feelings as you are, it helps. Second, it keeps  you humanreminding you that there is life outside of the  classroom for other staff members as well. That leads to my next recommendationsocialize with  your peers at faculty-organized activities such as special  lunches, parties, or a staff Happy Hour. A Friday Happy Hour  is an instant stress reducer for the week. It also helps develop  connections and networks among your colleagues. Even if you  dont drink alcohol, you can order a soft drink or water and  join in on the social engagement. Thats whats important. In  fact, if you ever walk into a restaurant bar on Friday afternoon  and see a group of people laughing and having a great time, ask  them where they teach. I maintain that over 90 of the time  they are teachers. Theyre enjoying each others company and  putting their stressful week into its proper perspective. Dont completely compartmentalize your school and pri vate life. Be sure to talk to your significant other or outside  friends about your work. To completely wall off your school  day as your work life turns it into exactly thata work envi ronment that becomes less pleasurable as your mind classi fies it as work, and therefore more stressful and less fun. Another way you, as a teacher, can keep your sanity is to  make sure that you do things you like on a regular basis, and  even integrate them into the school day when appropriate.  Many of my friends on staff go to the gym every day, take yoga,  or ride horses. A group of teachers at my school enjoy jogging  so much that they formed an SRLA Student Run Los Angeles  chapter for the students at our school. Every day after school, 

Keeping My Sanity All These Years 113 they prepare themselves and students to run in the annual  Los Angeles Marathon. Many teachers have a set movie night  or date night with their significant other. And I know when  my principal has gone golfing on a weekend, because shes in  a great mood that Monday morning. Your teaching work can not control your lifeyou cannot spend ten-to-twelve-hour  days and weekends grading papers andor planning. Doing  so will ensure that you burn out. Your attempt to be a Super  Hero will actually make you less effective andor shorten  your career in the long run. Teaching is a marathon, not a  sprint. Do the work you have to do, and play during the time  you have to play. Ohand as of this writing, Im well past level  5000 on Candy Crush. Thats one of my little sanity breaks  during the day. There are a number of other things I do that help me to  keep my personal sanity. For starters, I have a personal wall  by my desk. On that wall I post things that pertain just to me.  These include certificates and plaques Ive been awarded  over the years, pictures that have a personal special mean ing, and just fun stuff Ive accumulated. For example, I have  a posted sign that says, I always wanted to be somebody, but  now I realize that I should have been more specific.Lily  Tomlin. During the week, I spend more waking hours in my  work home than I do at my regular home! I need it to be com fortable and  well  me. By making one small part per sonal, I accomplish that goal. I also have a number of personal touches around my  room. I have a Cleveland Browns flag on the wall, visible  when you walk in. See Chapter 10, Support Your Home  Team, for explanation. I have other Cleveland sports team  paraphernalia around the room. These include a stool that  has a Browns jersey where you sit, and two human legs in  Browns cleats and socks as its base. My wife wont allow it in  the house, so its here at school. 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 114 Of course, I have all of the regular stuff posted that a good  teacher hasstudent work, encouragement posters, and the  like. But also around the room are a number of props that  Ive accumulated as mementos from my Singers shows over  the past twenty-seven years: a mannequin wearing a Singers  shirt, a large turkey leg, King Arthurs Holy Grail, a person alized Wall Drug sign, a six-foot banana, and more. This  classroom is my home away from home for 180 days a year.  Its comfortable and welcoming, and Ive made it mine. You  should do so with your own classroomyoud be surprised  how it helps to relax your mood and disposition. Another thing that preserves my sanity is education jokes.  I love reading them and sharing them with teachers. A num ber of teachers follow me on Facebook just for the jokes I post.  I also love to watch humorous teacher videos on YouTube.  Some of my favorites are those created by Gerry Brooks. Hes  a former principal who makes these hysterical educational  videos for teachers. Google his name and enjoy some of them. Finally, the number-one trick Ive learned for keeping  my sanity is the need to put things into their proper perspec tive. I no longer worry about things I cant change, nor do I get  upset about them, either. There are a number of pain in the  neck types of things we all have to do as teacherspaper work, administrative directives, and repetitive meetings, just  to name a few. I simply deal with them without complaining,  because complaining is only going to stress me out and not  change a thing. The things I can change, I absolutely will act  on, but a lot of teacher stress comes from things that cant  be changed. Dont let those things bother you. Its not worth  it. Keep your focus on your students, in particular on areas  where you can effect change and make a difference. You  should continually ask yourself: Will such-and-such make  a difference to the success of my students? If the answer is  No, then why stress over it?

Keeping My Sanity All These Years 115 The same rule is applicable in situations and interac tions with problematic parents or students that I really cant  change. I once questioned one of my principals as to why she  always gave in to parental requests. Her answer was quite  practical. She explained that in that area, if she didnt do what  the parent wanted, the parent would go over her head to the  local district. The local district would subsequently call her  and order her to do what the parent originally wanted. So  why fight it? I couldnt argue with that logic. Sometimes the  fight isnt worth it, especially when you know its a losing bat tle. Concentrate on those you can win, and limit the energy  you expend on those you know you will eventually lose. Remember the example I mentioned about giving a com plaining parent a blank report card and saying, Fill this out  the way you want, and Ill sign it. It wasnt worth the fight, nor  was it worth getting annoyed over. These are a number of tactics Ive used to keep my sanity over  the years. Every experienced teacher has his or her individual  ways of achieving the same goal. I asked a number of my teacher  friends, How do you keep your sanity while being a classroom  teacher all these years? Here are some of their responses: LALO: I focus on those kids who really want to learn. They give  me energy to be patient with others who are a little lost. MEL: Find balance. Unplug. Make sure you have a circle of  friends outside of teaching. STEPHANIE: I volunteer on weekends with pet rescues, and  playing with dogs and cats is therapeutic. And Starbucks. KRISTIN: I exercise a lot. JENI: Naps are good.

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 116 CHERYL: It really helps if some of your co-workers are per sonal friends. KATIE: As an introvert, I read at my desk during nutrition,  lunch, and sometimes before or after school. It helps me to  re-center myself and get some much-needed quiet time. KELLY: Hang out with friends who can relate and laugh it out.  Actually, thats the best way to get ideas, too, for solutions to  those systemic stressors. DAN: Movies, theater, concerts, books, museumsall of the  time. They make me a little stronger and I almost always come  away with something to share with my students. SEVAN: Breathing. Close your door, turn off the lights, and  breathe for about 510 minutes. EDDIE: Seeking out friends in the profession and forming a  support system of colleagues. ROB: Every year, I teach most topics differently or with a new  approach so as to not become bored. SHAYLEEN: I laugh with the kids every day. There are constantly  funny moments, and we find humor in it all and laugh together. All of these suggestions are helpful in that they work for that  particular teacher. Ultimately, its every teachers responsi bility to determine what to do to keep ones own sanity. Ive  shared just a few of the tricks Ive learned over the years. They  must work, since Im still sane after all these years. Sort of.  Youll eventually discover yours, too.
My Retirement Plan 24 I  sat down with a retirement specialist a couple of years  ago wanting to look into 401ks, and he asked me when  I wanted to retire. I answered, Never. In response to his  dumbfounded look, I explained: 	 I teach my hobby, Musical Theater, all day. I also teach  gifted English and history. I love what I do. 		 My wife and I vacation over 40 days a year; children are  grown and actually financially independent finally.

I dont play golf. My question to him was, What am I going to do in retirement? Over spring break last year I actually spent two days  doing nothing but watching TV and playing video games. I  thought I was going to go out of my mind. So, when people ask me what my retirement plan is, I refer  to an object I have in the corner of my classroom. A real coffin. Many years ago, we were performing the funeral song  from the show Ragtime. The father of one of my students was 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 118 a mortician, and he donated a simple coffin for us to use in  the song. Ive kept it as part of my classroom dcor for over  twenty-five years now. I tell the students its part of my disci pline policy. Weve occasionally used it for haunted houses,  but mostly its a conversation piece. Ive maintained that when I finally go, I want stage crew to  reinforce it and I want it used for my funeral.  Those who know me will get the joke.
What Have I Learned? 25 D uring one of my recent in-service classes, one of the  teachers asked me, What have you learned over the  years? I paused momentarily, as Ive never been  asked that question. Id like to think that Ive learned one or  two things in my forty-plus years of working with kids. Most  of these ideas Ive already discussed in earlier chapters, but  some key, special ideas bear repeating. So, in no particular  order, here are ten of the most important things Ive learned  so far in my teaching career. 1Nothing is more important than knowing  youve affected a childs life. Throughout the years, Ive been the only one among my  friends who has always been able to say that I love my job.  Most days, I cant wait to get to work. I cannot comprehend  how some people can go to a 9-to-5 job they dislike every day.  It would be mental torture for me. I get a special long-term pleasure from many of my former  students with whom Ive stayed in contact. There was a family  of three girls whom I taught in elementary school thirty-some  years ago. Ive gone to all three of their weddings and have 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 120 been in touch with them while theyve all had their own kids.  There are dozens of former students I keep in touch with ten, twenty, thirty years later. In fact, at my wedding, my wife  and I had a full table of former students. But nothing is more satisfyingand more humbling than having a former student write a message on Facebook  saying something to the order of, I am who I am because of  you. That moment makes it all worthwhile. 2This isnt a 9-to-5 job. Were teachers. But were 21st-century teachers. The job has  changed dramatically in the past thirty to forty years. No  longer are we just purveyors of knowledge. Now were also  pseudo parents, social workers, psychologists, and counsel ors. Unfortunately, in todays society, thats what the job has  become. Just this past year, I had a number of my graduating Singers  thank me for being their School Dad. We are whatever our  students need us to be. And good teachers cant just turn it off  when the bell rings. Thats one reason I give my phone number  and e-mail address to parents, and they know that their child  can contact me if its really important. And, to repeat, I do not  take homework questions. I also let the students know they  can contact me at any time if they need a safe adult to talk to,  or if theyre in trouble. About twenty years ago I had a student  run away from home and call me from a rather bad neighbor hood. My wife and I went out to get her. We sat with her and  talked, and ultimately she let us call her parents to let them  know she was safe, and then we drove her home. Now, I know  that this borders on the extreme, and Im not sure Id do it again  in todays climate. But the point is, were here for our students,  and often we have to fulfill necessary roles that go beyond the  8-to-4 time frame, and that go beyond the traditional teacher  roles that we experienced when we were our students age.

What Have I Learned? 121 3It takes a special set of skills to be a middle school  teacher. I love middle school. Okaymany of you think Im crazy to  say that. The majority of teachers like the little ones, so they  become elementary teachers. Or they like the older ones, and  they go on to teach in high school. Few teachers voluntarily  choose to go to middle school. Even among my staffwhich is  a very good staffmany of them would immediately grab an  elementary or high school position if it were offered. I love middle school because I see more personal devel opment in the kids than at any other level. They come in as  babies in sixth grade and leave as young adults after eighth.  Its here in middle school that they develop their social skills  and their personalities. In high school, theyre already set in  their waystheyve already developed their niches. Here, in  middle school, theyre still exploring.  Now, granted, this age often can put them in moods and  behaviors that can drive you crazy. For example, in sixth grade,  spring semester, when a social problem develops between a  couple of kids, the first thing I usually ask is, Who broke up  with whom? And often the middle school girls act as if theyre  auditioning for a sequel to Mean Girls. Usually, though, the  students are absolutely enjoyable as you watch them grow. As a performing arts teacher, Ive actually turned down  a prestigious high school magnet arts job for one simple rea son: in high school, the director works for the kids. In middle  school, the kids work for the director. Its more fun that way,  and I can help them grow holistically. 4Kids dont care how much you know, as long as they  know you care. I talked about this at length in an earlier chapter, but it bears  repeating here, as its one of the most important things Ive  learned over the years. This is not my quote, as you know; 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 122 rather, it comes from the former president of the National  Education Association. Kids today no longer fear adultsany  adults. What drives them is respect. They respect those who  respect them. And nothing shows them that you respect them  more than when you demonstrate that you care about them. You  care about their feelings, their achievements, their personali ties, their lives in and outside of school. You care about them as  human beings. Nothing is more important in their minds.  5Be yourself  be honest. Get to know your kidsand let them get to know you. Let  them know youre humanshare with them ups and downs  to a reasonable extent, obviously. If youre having a bad day,  or dont feel well, tell them. That way they know if you snap at  them or are not your normal jolly self, its not their fault. If you  make a mistake, say so. Show them youre human. Ive bought  many a class donuts the day after I unfairly got on their cases  because I was not in the best place the previous day. 6There are no rules set in stone. This is especially true where discipline is concerned. And  cooperative groups. What works at 8  a.m. may not work at  2 p.m. What works for one class may not work for another. The  kids are different, the mix different. Youre different at various  hours of the day. Rainy or windy days affect the kids. And as I  related earlier, any good elementary teacher will swear to you  that they can tell when its a full moon without looking outside. Roll with it. Have basic principles and guidelines that you  follow. Always have contingencies. And sometimes, just enjoy  the madness. 7Have funenjoy the kids! This goes along with enjoying the madness. Enjoy the kids.  Theyre unique, and usually fun. Enjoy Fridays. My students 

What Have I Learned? 123 know Im in a great mood on Friday, that nothing bothers me  that day. And unless they have a test, its usually a light day.  Its my way of getting them ready for the adult work world  and appreciating Fridays. I always say, Im a teacher; I love  Fridays. 8Administrators want you to succeed. I love when administrators come into my room for a visit. It  gives me a chance to show off what were doing. I dont know  why so many teachers are afraid of their administrators and  panic when they enter the room or sit in for an observation.  It makes no sense for administrators not to want you  to succeed. They do want you to succeed! Having success ful teachers makes them look good, and when you succeed,  youre one less problem for them. If youre doing a special  lesson, invite them in. Ask them for advice. Even if you dont  use it, youll sometimes get some good tips and theyll feel  appreciated.  At every interview Ive told my prospective principal  something my father once taught me: My job is to make the  principal look good. The more I make the principal look good,  the more freedom and support I get to do it. 9Always put things in perspective. With the craziness thats going on in public education, with  the regulations, the rules, the paperwork, the obsession with  and pressure of testing, theres one thing Ive learned that has  kept my sanity more than anything else: Keep everything in  perspective. In other words: Blow off what needs to be blown off.  Do what needs to be done.  Enjoy the rest. 

CLASSROOMS IN THE REAL WORLD 124 Some things just arent important enough to fret over, and you  need to recognize what they are. Sometimes you just have to  do teacher work whether you like it or not, since its part of  the job. Just like any job. Do it and dont stress over it. Once  you get those negative things out of your mind, youre left with  the positives and fun. Concentrate on those. Cause I guaran teeyou aint doing this job for the money! 10Love is good, hate is bad, see you tomorrow. As I wrote in the beginning of this book, John Jacobson shared  this quote from his father, and its become my personal motto.  Even more so now.  Three summers ago I had a massive heart attack while  on vacation this after almost dying from cancer six years  before. The only reason Im alive, Ive been told, is because  there was an off-duty EMT standing next to me who called  his buddies, and they immediately got me to a hospital. Prior  to this, I was at no risk of a heart attack. If I had been home, I  would have lain down and never woken up. I would have been  one of those stories about a guy in great health dropping dead.  It very much put things into perspective for me. And that  especially includes my job. I have no time for negative energy. Since my heart attack,  I enjoy my students more than I have for years. My classes are  more fun. My school is more enjoyable. To this day, after over  forty years in the classroom, I can honestly say that I still love  my job.  Love is good. Hate is bad.  And I know we teachers will continue educating children.  I know well continue being important in shaping kids lives.  Thats what we do. See you tomorrow.
References Armstrong, T. 2009. Multiple intelligences in the classroom  3rd ed. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision  and Curriculum Development. Engvall, B. 2004. A decade of laughs. Audio recording.  Warner Brothers. Gardner, H. 1993. Multiple intelligences: The theory in prac tice. New York: Basic Books. Josephson, M. 2002. Making ethical decisions. Los Angeles:  Josephson Institute of Ethics.  Lee, S. 1962. Amazing Fantasy 15. New York: Marvel Comics. Mandel, S. 2003. Cooperative work groups: Preparing students  for the real world. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. Mandel, S. 2007. The parent-teacher partnership: How to work  together for student achievement. Chicago: Zephyr  Press. Mandel, S. 2009. The new teacher toolbox: Proven tips and  strategies for a great first year 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks,  CA: Corwin Press.