i Classroom Talk Evidence-based Teaching  for Enquiring Teachers

ii

iii Classroom Talk Evidence-based Teaching   for Enquiring Teachers Rupert Knight

iv First published in 2020 by Critical Publishing Ltd All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in  a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,  mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior permission  in writing from the publisher. The author has made every effort to ensure the accuracy of information contained  in this publication, but assumes no responsibility for any errors, inaccuracies,  inconsistencies and omissions. Likewise every effort has been made to contact  copyright holders. If any copyright material has been reproduced unwittingly and  without permission the Publisher will gladly receive information enabling them  to rectify any error or omission in subsequent editions. Copyright  2020 Rupert Knight British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library ISBN: 9781912508853 This book is also available in the following e-book formats: MOBI ISBN: 9781912508860 EPUB ISBN: 9781912508877 Adobe e-book ISBN: 9781912508884 The right of Rupert Knight to be identified as the Author of this work has been  asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Design and Patents Act 1988. Cover design by Out of House Limited Text design by Out of House Limited Project Management by Newgen Publishing UK Printed and bound in Great Britain by 4edge, Essex Critical Publishing 3 Connaught Road St Albans AL3 5RX Paper from responsible sources For orders and details of our bulk discounts please visit our website www. criticalpublishing.com or contact our distributor, NBN International, 10  Thornbury Road, Plymouth PL6 7PP, telephone 01752 202301 or email orders nbninternational.com.

v

v Acknowledgements I would like to thank Julia Morris, from Critical Publishing, and Val Poultney,  as series editor, for their prompt and encouraging feedback at all stages in the  writing of this book. My thanks also go to the many schools, colleagues and  pupils I have worked with in education over the years who have provided the  inspiration for the examples in the chapters that follow. Rupert Knight

vi

vii

vii Contents Meet the series editor and author	 viii Foreword	 ix Chapter 1: Introducing and mapping debates  around classroom talk  1 Chapter 2: Learning as a social activity and the  place of oracy  12 Chapter 3: Whole-class interaction  25 Chapter 4: The dialogic classroom  40 Chapter 5: Promoting productive peer talk and  collaboration  57 Chapter 6: Classroom talk and the twenty-first  century learner  75 Chapter 7: Planning for action and implementation  89 References  97 Index  115

viii

viii Meet the series editor and author Val Poultney  Val Poultney is a senior lecturer at the  University of Derby. She teaches on initial  teacher education and postgraduate  programmes. Her research interests include  school leadership and school governance with  a particular focus on how to develop leadership  to support teachers as researchers. Rupert Knight  Rupert Knight was a school teacher in London  and Nottingham before moving into higher  education. He is now Assistant Professor at  the University of Nottingham, working with  student and practising teachers in England  and overseas. His research interests include  the relationship between theory and practice  in learning to teach.

ix

ix Foreword Our education system is arguably one of the most complex in the world and  ever evolving. Teaching professionals face competing demands on a daily basis  as they strive to maintain high standards of teaching and learning in a system  which is in a constant state of flux. However, among such complexity there  has been one enduring theme of the self-improving school, and at grass-roots  classroom level it is teachers who bear the weight of constantly looking for  ways to improve pupil learning. We have, so far in this series, argued that in  order to improve outcomes for pupils, educators should be critically engaging  with research as both consumers and producers to provide them with the  evidence to reflect on their practice.  In this latest addition to the series Evidence-based Teaching for Enquiring  Teachers Rupert Knight examines issues around classroom talk. Rupert is an  assistant professor at the University of Nottingham and has a special interest  in classroom talk and collaboration. He argues that classroom dialogue is a  powerful medium through which both pupil and teacher learning can take  place. What is arguably a taken-for-granted activity between teachers and  their pupils is in fact a far more complex interaction than we might imagine.  Through a series of questions around three distinct areas of classroom dialogue,  Rupert encourages us to consider the social, cultural and political dimensions  of how we use our spoken language in classrooms. He goes on to examine in  detail how pupils receive and construct knowledge, the effect of language on  relationships between teachers and their pupils, and the different types of  language most commonly used in schools.   The importance of oracy in education is now a re-emerging theme, which  brings to the fore a whole body of academic research and publication in this  field. This is highlighted by the Oracy All Party Parliamentary Group Oracy  APPG, 2019 who have raised concerns about the importance of oracy in  state education. The view is that spoken language use in schools is currently  undervalued and potentially underdeveloped. In response an inquiry was set  up to examine the quality of this provision. Alongside quality issues the inquiry  investigated the value of oracy in terms of development of language skills to  enhance pupil achievement, social mobility, well-being and employability, and  any potential barriers to accessing oracy education.  In these times of change it is important for educators to have access to a range  of evidence which can inform and direct practice. Furthermore, this evidence  should be easily accessible to a range of educators: teacher professionals, 

x  C l a s s r o o m   T a l k

x     x trainee teachers, school mentors and university academics as well as educators  more widely. Ruperts book provides a highly readable and informative  introduction to classroom talk, providing links to academic research and  school case studies that encourage teachers to reflect on their own approach to  classroom talk and how important dialogue is for learning. This, during a period  of emerging government interest in this area of education, makes Ruperts book  a very timely publication. Val Poultney, series editor Senior lecturer in Education, University of Derby Reference Oracy All Party Parliamentary Group 2019 Speak for Change new enquiry.  online Available at: www.oracyappg.org.uk accessed 18 July 2019. newgenprepdf
C h a p t e r  1    I n t r o d u c i n g  a n d  m a p p i n g  c l a s s r o o m   t a l k   1 Chapter 1 Introducing and mapping debates  around classroom talk 1.1 Chapter overview This chapter will outline: 1.2	 what is meant by classroom talk and the scope of the book; 1.3	 why an evidence-informed approach is important; 1.4	 how you can make sense of research in this field; 1.5	 key debates and questions to be explored. 1.2 Introduction: what is meant by classroom talk  and what is the scope of this book? Take a walk along a school corridor, pause outside a classroom door and listen.  There are voices, but whose voices? What are they saying and why? Perhaps a  teacher is introducing a new concept to a class and asking questions to check  understanding or provoke new thinking. Perhaps the voice heard is not the  teachers at all, but that of a pupil answering or asking a question. Perhaps  pupils are talking to one another independently of the teacher. Sometimes there  is consensus, sometimes debate and disagreement. Tuning in and trying to  discern the meaning and dynamics of this complex mixture of spoken language  might give rise to a number of questions.  A first set relates to participation and the learners role in this process.  Are pupils passive recipients of knowledge, or active participants in the  construction of understanding? The stance taken on this determines particular  classroom routines and consequently patterns of spoken interaction. A second  set of questions concerns the purpose and content of this interaction. To what  extent is learning predetermined by the teacher, with pupils guided along a set  path? To what extent, in contrast, are pupils invited to engage in open, authentic  dialogue? Is talk between pupils purely social and a distraction from learning,  or can peer talk be productive for learning? Finally, questions might be raised  about the form of spoken language employed in all of these scenarios. Are there  modes of speech that are more cognitively or socially desirable than others and,  if so, should talk be an object of learning in its own right? Some positions taken 

newgenprepdf
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
2 by teachers on these questions may be strongly value-related and embedded  in the purposes of education more widely. From this starting point, the aim of  this book is to consider the evidence around what is known  and not known   about classroom talk. Moving beyond the mere ubiquity of talk in classrooms, it is important to  question why it is particularly worthy of your attention. After all, while spoken  language is the medium through which much teaching and learning takes  place, its purposes and conventions are often very different from talk in  everyday life. There are three broad arguments, each with its own strand of  research, that have been made for a focus on classroom talk. 	1.	 The psychological or cognitive argument: the idea that learning and  development are shaped heavily  though not exclusively  by social  interaction. For example, Mercer and Littleton 2007 explain that  cognitive development and learning are mediated by cultural and social  activities such as talk and that learning can be thought of as the joint  construction of understanding through a process of dialogue. 	2.	 The sociological argument: an interest in principles such as identity,  inclusion and communicative rights, whereby authentic pupil voice  and ownership of learning have a place in classrooms. For example,  Lefstein and Snell 2014 provide a critique of typical classroom discourse  structures in terms of their promotion of a narrow, uncritical acceptance  of knowledge and authority. 	3.	 The communicative competence argument: the idea that capability  with spoken language is an essential skill for success in education  and beyond. For example, Bruner 1978 notes that such competence  goes beyond a grasp of syntax and semantics and depends on the  sophisticated social use of dialogue. For some, this includes valuing the  richness of informal language, while for others this has been about the  use of correct standard forms. In this book, therefore, you will be able to evaluate arguments for classroom  talk not only on the basis of pedagogy and academic achievement, but also in  light of cultural, social and political considerations. The case for talk is neatly  previewed by Alexanders 2012 summing up of the understanding of the role  played by high-quality talk in the following: 	 contributing to childrens development, thinking and learning as a form of  pedagogy; 	 closing equity gaps due to social disadvantage;

C h a p t e r  1    I n t r o d u c i n g  a n d  m a p p i n g  c l a s s r o o m   t a l k   3
3 	 enhancing employability and social and economic well-being; 	 promoting democratic involvement in learning and student voice; 	 helping teachers to assess pupils understanding formatively. Nevertheless, such arguments are by no means universally accepted or enacted.  Within the UK, for example, the effects of what Sahlberg 2016 calls the Global  Education Reform Movement have been felt. They include increased standardisation  of teaching and a focus on prescribed content transmitted in a risk-averse, often  teacher-led, mode. Meanwhile, the national curriculums DfE, 2013 spoken  language strand within the English curriculum positions talk largely as a skill to  underpin reading and writing. This calls to mind Alexanders 2014 vivid report of a  government ministers caution, during a curriculum review, about the danger of being  seen to encourage idle chatter in class p 357. In order to explore the case for talk  rigorously, therefore, a careful review of the evidence base is required. The scope of this book is primarily the evidence on promoting the use of highquality talk by pupils as a means, but also the object, of learning. This means  that some forms of classroom talk necessarily fall outside this boundary, but  this is not a reflection of their importance. For example, teacher exposition  through explanation and modelling is a central part of any educators repertoire,  but will be discussed only in so far as this relates to more interactive forms of  talk. Similarly, the all-important social relationships formed through informal  peer talk will be considered largely for their value in promoting academic  learning. In this book, then, the focus is on spoken interaction at classroom  level, across age phases, as a mode of thinking and communicating and a  means of jointly constructing understanding. 1.3 Why is an evidence-informed approach important? A detailed account of current approaches to, and benefits of, the use of evidence  to inform education is provided by Philpott and Poultney 2018 in this series. It  is fair to say, however, that the relationship between research and teaching has  sometimes been an uneasy one, with claims that there has historically been  a mismatch between the knowledge required by teachers and that generated  by researchers Cain, 2015. In recent years, there has been a renewed interest  in connecting teachers more directly with evidence. This arises in part from  arguments for greater teacher autonomy, linked to a research-literate teaching  community, active as both informed consumers and producers of evidence  BERA, 2014. This argument is strongly associated with the vision of a selfimproving school system, championed in England, for example, in government  reforms DfE, 2010. While there is much to admire in this school-led stance, it  might also be seen as a product of the shift in some parts of the world towards 
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
4 standardisation, measurement, comparison and competition mentioned in  Section 1.2. Some have also called into question an impoverished, what works view of  what constitutes evidence and how it might be used. Biesta 2016, for example,  draws attention to the emphasis on effectiveness and argues that this term has  little meaning unless it is clear what an action is effective for. There are many  potential value systems and purposes for education, beyond simply improving  attainment, rendering a single response impossible. Others have questioned  the privileging of scientific approaches to research, such as randomised  control trials RCTs. Attractive for their promise of an experimental, controlled  trial of an intervention, potentially establishing causation, they may not  always take into account context and experience. Connolly et al 2018 reflect  these concerns and others in their systematic review of RCTs in education,  but also conclude that this approach can make an important contribution to  understanding if used appropriately. A further issue raised with a simplistic  effectiveness view is that it may encourage shortcuts and a superficial use of  evidence. Meta-analyses involve an aggregation of outcomes from previous  studies and the calculation of an effect size for an intervention. They provide an  opportunity to compare and even rank strategies at scale eg EEF, 2018a; Hattie,  2009 but the feasibility of meaningfully comparing disparate research studies  around a broad theme and determining a single effect size has been questioned  Wrigley, 2018. Rather than view these issues as obstacles, they might instead be seen to  suggest three implications for teachers. 	1.	 The need to take an informed and critical stance when presented with  research evidence, particularly of the easily digestible, what works  variety. Research summaries and meta-analyses, for example, can be  very useful tools but the story behind ranked interventions needs to be  understood. 	2.	 The importance of going beyond a view of effectiveness as improved  attainment to consider the wider purposes of education. This links  to the three lines of argument, with their three aims, discussed in  Section 1.2. 	3.	 The value of exploring the research around a subject in some depth and  achieving a nuanced and reasonably balanced perspective on the topic.  This is largely the purpose of this book and indeed this whole series.

C h a p t e r  1    I n t r o d u c i n g  a n d  m a p p i n g  c l a s s r o o m   t a l k   5
5 1.4 How can you make sense of research in this field? Navigating the research field Substantial research interest in classroom talk dates largely from the 1970s.  While there are important antecedents, such as the thinking from the 1920s  and 1930s of Lev Vygotsky, even this work became widely known only after  its translation into English from the 1960s onwards. The interdisciplinary  nature of this research field makes it a complex one to navigate and some  of the impetus has come from outside education. Early seminal studies,  therefore, include those from a linguistic perspective, concerned chiefly with  the structure of language use, rather than its meaning Sinclair and Coulthard,  1975 and those using a more ethnographic approach, exploring context and  relationships Edwards and Furlong, 1978. Since the 1980s, much of the work  has coalesced around two key approaches, characterised by Mercer 2010 as  linguistic ethnography and sociocultural research. The linguistic ethnography  tradition explores the interaction of language with social and cultural context,  while sociocultural researchers focus chiefly on dialogue and collaboration as a  tool for learning. From the 1980s onwards, a notable body of work has been the  detailed analysis of talk conducted by sociocultural researchers in an attempt  to develop analytical frameworks eg Mercer, 1995. This has led to a degree of  consensus around typical forms of naturally occurring classroom talk. Since  then, another important focus has become the use of this understanding to  articulate and trial more productive models of talk, sometimes in the form of  teaching structured repertoires such as collaborative reasoning eg Clark et al,  2003 and sometimes as broader approaches to pedagogy, such as dialogic  teaching eg Alexander, 2017. The limitations of research in this field and the possible ways forward are  considered more fully in Chapter 7, but it is clear that, within this diverse body  of research, there exist certain patterns of emphasis. Howe and Abedins 2013  systematic review of research on classroom dialogue finds, for example, a field  dominated by Western and particularly UK and US research, with the proportion  of UK research increasing in recent years. The same review notes a curricular  emphasis on science especially, but also mathematics and English. The evidence  base is also skewed in its age focus towards primary and early secondary pupils.  In discussing the relative lack of research in secondary classrooms, Higham  et al 2014 suggest various possible reasons, including the greater capacity in  primary education for engaging with new pedagogies in a sustained and holistic  way. Finally, Howe and Abedin 2013 note a preponderance of small-scale  qualitative research  unsurprising, given the focus on close examination of  dialogue. What is beginning to emerge now, however, according to Resnick and  Schantz 2015 is a body of experimental studies, more rigorously testing models 
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
6 of classroom talk and starting to provide evidence of transfer to other contexts.  The research map which follows attempts to represent some key milestones  in this research field chronologically, including some examples of important  publications mentioned in this book. A classroom talk research map and timeline 1960s onwards Systematic research, usually quantitative and focused on categorising  observable features rather than on meaning. Often associated with teacher  effectiveness. 	 Flanders 1961 	 Galton et al 1980; 1999 Researching spoken language competence eg oracy and different registers. 	 Wilkinson 1965 	 Bernstein 1971 	 Heath 1983 	 Mercer et al 2017a 1970s onwards Linguistic research, based on analysis of transcripts to discern language  structure and functions. 	 Sinclair and Coulthard 1975 	 Mehan 1979 Sociolinguistic research, based on analysis also focusing on the function and  meaning of language. 	 Barnes and Todd 1977 	 Edwards and Furlong 1978 Social constructivist research on learning through scaffolding and contingent  teaching. 	 Wood et al 1976 	 Bruner 1978

C h a p t e r  1    I n t r o d u c i n g  a n d  m a p p i n g  c l a s s r o o m   t a l k   7
7 1980s onwards Ethnographic and sociocultural research with an interest in context and the  development of analytic frameworks eg exploratory talk. 	 Edwards and Westgate 1994 	 Mercer 1995 	 Wells 1999 Researching the impact of productive models of talk eg exploratory talk;  reciprocal teaching; collaborative reasoning; accountable talk. 	 Palinscar and Brown 1984 	 Mercer 2000 	 Clark et al 2003 	 Michaels et al 2008 2000s onwards Dialogic teaching research, with a focus on classroom culture and community  to promote effective learning. 	 Nystrand et al 2003 	 Mortimer and Scott 2003 	 Alexander 2017 Experimental research designs and an interest in transfer of learning 	 OConnor et al 2015 	 Sun et al 2015 	 Alexander 2018 1.5 What are the key debates and questions? As might be expected from the preceding discussions about the nature of  evidence and the diverse, multi-disciplinary perspectives informing the study  of talk, this is a complex and contested field. In this section, a dialogue of  contrasting views is offered as a way of introducing some of the key debates  explored in the chapters that follow. On the left are justifications for classroom  talk and on the right are possible counter-arguments.
C L A S S R O O M  T A L K
8

 Arguments around talk in the classroom   Learning is a social activity, mediated through talk, so we need  to give spoken language and social interaction a higher status  within the classroom.   Bruner,  1978 ; Vygotsky,  1978    But acknowledging this social constructivist view of learning  doesnt necessarily imply any particular form of teaching, such as  a move to pupilled discussion, does it?      Perhaps not, but there are also other reasons to change our  view of talk. Giving pupils greater ownership of their learning  and creating a community of learners, for example. As it stands,  teachers dominate classroom learning.   Lefstein and Snell,  2011 ; Wells,  1999    Thats as it should be. Teachers are the experts and its their  job to impart knowledge. Anyway, lessons these days are highly  interactive, with plenty of questions put to pupils. They are far  from passive.      Certainly lessons may be superficially interactive, but  the questioning and level of discussion often lack cognitive  challenge. Whats needed is a more dialogic classroom where  pupils collective reasoning is really allowed to come through.   Alexander,  2017 ; Myhill,  2006    But isnt direct instruction, with fewer demands on working  memory, a more effective way to  teach? And anyway, sometimes  a teacher simply needs to explain a new concept, surely? 

C H A P T E R 1    I N T R O D U C I N G  A N D  M A P P I N G  C L A S S R O O M  T A L K   9
9

 Thats a fair point. Sometimes a teacher does have to be more  directive. So perhaps its about knowing when to allow this  freedom. Its less about strict adherence to a particular form of  interaction and more about an overarching ethos.   Alexander,  2017 ; Mortimer and Scott,  2003    Even so, this seems like a challenging classroom environment  to manage. For example, if we leave pupils to talk to their peers  in groups, theyll quickly go offtask and either argue or just chat  and they wont learn anything.      Youre right that peer talk can easily be unproductive. The key  is to teach pupils explicitly how to talk to one another and to set  up tasks carefully that are conducive to this kind of learning. It  isnt necessarily easy or an overnight transformation but it can  be done.   Mercer and Littleton,  2007 ; Mercer etal,  2017a    But if pupils can learn to talk productively as peers in this  way, where does that leave the teacher? Hasnt discovery or  minimally guided learning been called into question?      In some respects, yes. However, this does not imply a handsoff  role for the teacher. Rather than merely facilitating learning from  a distance, the teacher has a skilled and active role to play in  modelling talk and providing structure for pupil dialogue.   Gillies,  2016 ; Newman,  2017    If I accept that this could be achieved, it still seems more  efficient to have a largely teacherled lesson. We can cover  essential curriculum content much more quickly, for one thing. 
C L A S S R O O M  T A L K
10

 Maybe so, but the level of understanding might be more  superficial. High quality talk has been shown to benefit not just  reasoning but other outcomes. Anyway, isnt school about more  than just academic attainment? There are multiple benefits for  lifelong learning and wellbeing based on good spoken language  and collaboration skills.   Reznitskaya etal,  2009 ; Snowling etal,  2011    But is there actually good evidence that these benefits really  transfer to other contexts beyond these talkbased lessons  themselves? Improved reasoning is all very well, but teachers are  judged on academic attainment.      Good question. Until recently, a coherent evidence base has  been somewhat lacking, but there is now a body of evidence  showing transfer into other contexts and with impact on  attainment in other subjects. More largescale trials are now  needed though.   Alexander,  2018 ; Resnick and Schantz,  2015     In this exchange, the three strands of argument from  Section 1.2 are  represented, but so too are very legitimate questions about issues such as  principles of effective instruction, the demands placed on teachers and the  impact on attainment. This provides a starting point for the consideration of the  evidence in the rest of this book.    1.6    Organisation of the rest of the book     Chapter2 provides the theoretical and empirical basis for an interest in classroom talk, exploring this from both cognitive and social perspectives.  Chapter3    then considers what is known about patterns of whole-class interaction and  how they can be developed further. Following this,  Chapter4 seeks to develop  your understanding of wholeclass talk further by introducing the concept of  dialogic teaching, a potentially powerful but challenging form of pedagogy.  Shifting the focus from wholeclass, teacherinitiated interaction to talk  amongpupils, the theme of  Chapter5 is peer talk and collaboration, often in 

C h a p t e r  1    I n t r o d u c i n g  a n d  m a p p i n g  c l a s s r o o m   t a l k   11
11 small groups. Having investigated the evidence for classroom talk in fairly  generic terms, Chapter 6 then focuses on how classroom talk relates to three  aspects of learning for modern society: technology, metacognition and critical  thinking. Finally, the complexity and diversity of educational environments  mean that tailoring the principles from all of this evidence to specific settings is  vital. With this in mind, Chapter 7 is about implementing these ideas in practice  through careful action planning. Exploring further This paper from Mercer and Dawes provides a useful summary of research in  spoken language: 	 Mercer, N and Dawes, L 2014 The Study of Talk between Teachers and  Students from the 1970s until the 2010s. Oxford Review of Education,  404: 43045. The University of Cambridge has established the Hughes Hall Centre for Spoken  Communication. Their website, including a video from Neil Mercer, provides an  introduction to some of the arguments for spoken language in education: 	 https:oracycambridge.org accessed 17 May 2019.
12  C l a s s r o o m   T a l k Chapter 2 Learning as a social activity and  the place of oracy 2.1 Chapter overview This chapter will outline: 2.2	 the ideas behind spoken language as a tool for learning; 2.3	 why spoken language is so important in schools; 2.4	 what is meant by the concept of oracy; 2.5	 how oracy might be implemented across school. 2.2 What are the ideas behind spoken language as a tool  for learning? Theories of learning as a social activity You will meet a number of key theorists in the chapters that follow, but  the rationale for a classroom rich in talk is often traced back to two in  particular: Jean Piaget and Lev Vygotsky. Better known for theories focused  on individual development, rather than social aspects of learning, Piaget 1977  considers learning to arise from a constant need for cognitive equilibrium, or  balance, in the face of new experiences. As part of this process, learning occurs  through experiencing cognitive dissonance, or disturbance, leading to an  imbalance and a shift in understanding. While often arising from independent  engagement with the material world, this challenge to a childs thinking may  also be induced by exposure to others ideas, since contrasting views create  a need to resolve the resulting imbalance Piaget, 1950. The idea of sociocognitive conflict was developed further by Piagets followers in a number of  experiments eg Mugny and Doise, 1978 and, as noted by Mercer 2000, spoken  language can both create this conflict and be the means of resolving it. This  productive consideration, through dialogue, of different perspectives is a key  feature of Chapters 4 and 5. For Piaget, then, talk may be one of many routes to  individual development. For Vygotsky 1986, on the other hand, social interaction is at the very  heart of learning. He suggests that speech has a communicative role in 

newgenprepdf

C h a p t e r   2    L e a r n i n g  a n d  t h e  p l a c e  o f   o r a c y   13
13 sharing knowledge, but also operates as an internal mode of thinking. In this  sense, speech is functioning as both a cultural tool and a psychological tool  respectively. As Higham et al 2014 explain: not only does dialogue underpin  the process of learning to think, but meaning is co-constructed through this  dialogue, rather than simply transmitted. Another of Vygotskys important  propositions is that adults might most productively focus not on what a child  can already do independently, but on the potential that each child has when  working with guidance. This fertile area of potential achievement, he terms  the zone of proximal development ZPD. By interacting with a more capable  partner, a learner develops new ways of thinking, for what a child can do with  assistance today she will be able to do by herself tomorrow Vygotsky, 1978, p  86. The implication, therefore, is that socially constructed learning, mediated  largely through talk, is worthy of a good deal of teacher attention. In seeking to integrate these two perspectives, Gillies 2016 distinguishes  between personal and social constructivism. Both seek to explain how  learners make sense of their experiences of the world, but Piagets focus is  on the intrapersonal, or individual development, while Vygotskys is on the  interpersonal, or interaction between people. Rogoff 1990 similarly contrasts  Piagets interest in interaction as individuals sharing contrasting information,  with Vygotskys interest in interaction as a shared learning process in its  own right. Edwards 2009 makes a further distinction between the social  constructivism of Vygotsky, in which  for all the interest in interaction  a  strong focus remains on outcomes for individuals, and a sociocultural interest  in how learning and new understanding takes place collaboratively, at a group  level. While social constructivism underpins much of this book, sociocultural  theory is particularly relevant for Chapter 5 on peer talk. By way of drawing  together these ideas, the twenty-first century has seen a surge of interest in  educational implications of neuroscience. Goswami 2015 uses this evidence  base to validate the key principles above, emphasising ideas such as: the  socially mediated nature of childrens learning, the crucial role of language in  development and the need for dialogic as well as direct teaching. Talk-related  implications for the classroom of these learning theories will already be  apparent in, for example, the use of opportunities for speech to expose learners  to contrasting ideas, the interest in structuring learners next steps and the  modelling of effective strategies just beyond a learners reach. Nevertheless,  it is important to remember that such connections are largely inferred, as the  research of Piaget and Vygotsky was not carried out in classrooms. The next  section considers the way these ideas have been extended into these settings  by others, prefiguring many of the ideas to be encountered elsewhere in  this book.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
14 Educational application of the theory Vygotskys 1978 notion of the ZPD, under-developed at the time of his death,  begs questions about precisely how pupils might be supported towards next  steps in their learning and what form these interactions might take. These  questions have often been taken up through the metaphor of scaffolding.  Scaffolding is normally attributed to Wood et al 1976, p 90 who describe it as a  process that: Enables a child or novice to solve a problem, carry out a task or achieve a  goal which would be beyond his unassisted efforts. Bruner 1978, as part of this research team, further emphasises the central  role in this process of verbal communication specifically in maintaining focus  and progress. Through research on tutors supporting children 11 to complete  a puzzle, Wood et al 1976, p 98 identify six forms of support that a more  knowledgeable partner might give: 	1.	 recruiting, or engaging the learner in the task; 	2.	 reducing degrees of freedom by simplifying the task; 	3.	 maintaining the learners focus and direction; 	4.	 marking critical features, through accentuating relevant aspects of a task; 	5.	 controlling the learners possible frustration; 	6.	 demonstrating or modelling part of a task. As can be seen, some of these forms involve minimal intervention, while  others allow for more direction, as required. This is a reminder that the  scaffolding metaphor is useful for its image of a temporary support but  should not be seen to imply rigidity: scaffolding is about empowerment  and a contingent, flexible response to a learners progress. Wertsch 2008  has examined this as a transfer of responsibility. He shows how children  move from other-regulation by an adult to increased participation and selfregulation, culminating in moving beyond the ZPD altogether, as they take  full ownership of a task through the internalisation of speech and thought.  Wertsch suggests this progression ideally involves an adult skilfully tutoring  a child in the problem-solving thought process itself through providing  directions and modelling appropriate responses. The nature of scaffolding has  also been examined by Van de Pol et al 2010 in a review of relevant literature.  While many definitions exist, they identify three commonly accepted features,  as shown below.

C h a p t e r   2    L e a r n i n g  a n d  t h e  p l a c e  o f   o r a c y   15
15 Cazden 2001 points out that scaffolding does not only take place at an  individual level. It can also be seen through skilled teacher involvement with  groups  as will be seen at whole-class and small group levels in Chapters 4  and 5  and through the structure and sequencing of curricular materials. While  the literature therefore provides a measure of clarity over scaffolding and the  potential role of talk, Howe and Abedins 2013, p 342 systematic review of  literature finds, from studies of teachers actual practice: without exception,  poor approximation to scaffolding is reported, together with considerable  variation over what happens instead. It would seem, therefore, that effective  scaffolding remains poorly implemented at classroom level and, according to  Van de Pol et al 2010, under-researched in terms of its effectiveness. Another way in which Vygotskys ideas have been developed is to move beyond  a view of socially mediated learning as a 11 interaction involving a more  able party supporting a less able party. Mercer 2000 builds on the notion of  the ZPD to introduce the concept of an intermental development zone IDZ.  The IDZ explains how understanding is collaboratively constructed through  joint activity and shared consciousness, allowing a focus on the variable  contributions of all parties Littleton and Mercer, 2013. As argued by Mercer  and Littleton 2007, the IDZ also allows the idea of scaffolding and developing  collective understanding to encompass potentially a small or even whole class  group. In this sense, it links closely to the idea of the dialogic classroom which  will be introduced in Chapter 4. Littleton and Mercer 2013 also use the term  interthinking to describe this application of talk, not merely to communicate  but also as a tool for thinking collectively. Ways of promoting talk likely to lead  to such interthinking are explored in Chapter 5. A further elaboration on the learning from others in a ZPD comes from  Rogoff 1990 who, like others cited in this section, views children as more  active participants in learning than might have been implied in Vygotskys  1978 work. Rogoff, however, also sees social interaction as a form of guided  Table 2a Three features of scaffolding adapted from Van de Pol et al, 2010 Contingency Responding and adapting to a pupils changing needs, based  on frequently determining a pupils level of competence Fading Gradually withdrawing the scaffolding over time at an  appropriate rate Transfer of  responsibility Requiring the pupil to take increasing control of the activity,  in both cognitive task understanding and metacognitive  process management terms
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
16 participation into society. The transfer of responsibility associated with  scaffolding is conceived of as apprenticeship, going beyond the use of talk to  include learning through tacit and non-verbal cues too. This apprenticeship  involves: active learners in a community of people who support, challenge and  guide novices as they increasingly participate in skilled, valued sociocultural  activity Rogoff, 1990, p 39. This perspective has much in common with others  who have investigated learning as incremental participation in a community  eg Lave and Wenger, 1991. While Rogoffs research focuses much more on  learning from parents or caregivers, as opposed to in-school settings, the idea of  learning in a community is potentially powerful. 2.3 Why is spoken language so important in schools? So far, the focus has been on the theoretical basis for talk chiefly as a tool, or  medium, for learning. In addition to this, there is a line of argument for spoken  language as an object of learning in its own right. Going back several decades,  the influential Bullock report Bullock, 1975, on behalf of the UK government,  made clear  and still pertinent  recommendations for language assuming a  high profile across the curriculum. Since then, however, spoken language has  not always had a prominent position in curricula, despite initiatives such as  the short-lived but influential National Oracy Project of 19871993 in the UK  and international validation as one of the OECDs 2005 key competencies  for success in modern society. Foremost among the current arguments for an  emphasis on spoken language in classrooms is the link between speech and  language proficiency and subsequent outcomes in education and beyond. This  builds on a line of research from the 1970s onwards that, while valuing the  richness of spoken language of children from low socio-economic groups, also  highlights a potential mismatch with linguistic conventions within schools  Bernstein, 1971; Heath, 1983. The 2008 Bercow Report for the UK government identifies communication  as an essential, but neglected, life skill which provides the basis for  social, emotional and educational development Bercow, 2008. Drawing  attention to communication as a basic skill in this way has led to the  identification of striking deficiencies and inequalities. Speech, Language and  Communications Needs SLCN can include: difficulties with fluency, forming  sounds and words, formulating sentences, understanding what others say,  and using language socially Bercow, 2008, p 14. Research suggests up to  10 per cent of UK pupils may have SLCN Centre for Social Justice, 2014  and clear predictive links have been made to later educational outcomes  Snowling et al, 2011. Beyond questions of academic attainment, SLCN are  also seen as predictors of wider difficulties: research in the UK for the Early 

C h a p t e r   2    L e a r n i n g  a n d  t h e  p l a c e  o f   o r a c y   17
17 Intervention Foundation charity 2017, for example, links SLCN to later  mental health difficulties and involvement in the criminal justice system.  SLCN are also over-represented in children from economically disadvantaged  backgrounds, with a suggestion that the prevalence of SLCN within this  group may be as high as 50 per cent Centre for Social Justice, 2014. The  Communication Trust, a UK coalition of organisations in this field, claims  that while SLCN are on the rise, a large proportion of these needs remain  unidentified Communication Trust, 2013. More generally, large gaps in childrens vocabulary skills are seen between  children from the richest and poorest families in the US as well as UK Sutton  Trust, 2012. Importantly, however, while teachers perceptions of this word  gap are prominent in surveys Oxford University Press, 2018, recent research  adds another perspective. A US study by Gilkerson et al 2018 of the talk  between parents and pre-school children suggests that adultchild turntaking in talk is a stronger predictor of academic success years later than  merely exposure to vocabulary. This provides another strong argument for  teachers to focus on dialogue as a particular form of classroom talk. In all of  these reports, it is important to note that it is not necessarily casual links that  are claimed or established, but instead a strong correlation, within a complex  social picture. A further rationale for valuing talk as a form of language is provided by Carter  2003 and his extensive work on spoken grammar. Based on his study of a  huge archive of spoken language recordings, Carter draws attention to the  specific features and conventions of grammar in talk. While these are often  distinct from written language, Carter places spoken and written grammar on  the same continuum, particularly with the influence of modern technology  and the hybrid genres of text messages and emails. Spoken language,  therefore, is closely related to its written forms. Drawing on the same corpus  of data, Carter 2004 also shows how talk can feature especially creative  forms of language and thought. This serves not just a playful purpose, as heard  in puns and figures of speech, but also a social and potentially critical one, as  ideas are explored and there is a creative co-construction of relationships  Carter, 2004, p 188. There are, therefore, compelling arguments for spoken communication being  a fundamental skill needing to be taught explicitly. However, Cameron 2003  warns that a communication skills view of spoken language could result in  a focus on a limited range of vocationally oriented tasks unlikely to generate  either sophisticated speech or opportunities to learn through language. One  concept that seeks to offer a more ambitious vision is that of oracy.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
18 2.4 What is oracy? Oracy is an idea attributed to Andrew Wilkinson 1965. He proposes the term  as a description of ability in oral skills, including both speaking and listening,  arguing for its teaching to be placed at the heart of schooling, alongside  numeracy and literacy. The need for a specific term is justified in part by the  power that words have to shape ones thinking Wilkinson, 1970, implying that  very naming of oracy might therefore raise awareness and confer status. More  recently, Alexander 2012, p 10 defines oracy as: What the school does to support the development of childrens capacity  to use speech to express their thoughts and communicate with others,  in education and in life. Since the 1960s, other terms have been used in official documentation,  including spoken language, oral language and speaking and listening Millard  and Menzies, 2016. Of these, speaking and listening has been perhaps the  most prevalent in the UK, but has been criticised for being conceptually weak  and failing to address the complex relationship between the two components  Alexander, 2012. While Wilkinsons original conception of oracy suggests a  focus on skills taught predominantly  though not exclusively  within the  subject of English, others have developed the idea more broadly. The National  Oracy Project sought to promote not only communication skills, but the use  of speech and oral work as a means of learning Norman, 1992, a view echoed  in Edwards and Westgates 1994, p 6 description of oracy as talking to learn.  Figure 2a Two aspects  of oracy Gaunt and Stott, 2019, p 9 Learning to  talk Learning through talk Oracy

C h a p t e r   2    L e a r n i n g  a n d  t h e  p l a c e  o f   o r a c y   19
19 More recently, Voice 21, a UK group campaigning to raise the status of oracy in  schools, has similarly proposed the model in Figure 2a. While the interest in learning through talk, as well as to talk, is consistent with  the focus of this book, oracy as a term is not always used in this way. Alexander  2012 makes a distinction between oracy, more narrowly, as the use of speech  and what he calls oral pedagogy, as the use of talk as a medium for teaching  and learning across the curriculum. Elsewhere, he draws on his international  comparative studies to highlight also a similar polarisation in UK and US  classrooms between social and cognitive functions of talk that is not found in  some other countries Alexander, 2003. While positive social attitudes to talk  are a prerequisite for learning through talk, he identifies a need for an enhanced  focus on the cognitive aspects, something that is taken up in Chapter 4s  consideration of the dialogic classroom. Though Alexander 2012 argues that  oracy and oral pedagogy are therefore intertwined and need to be considered  together, Mercer 2018 advises caution. He suggests that the conflation of  oracy education and what he calls dialogic teaching practices has led to a  misconception among policy-makers that oracy is an optional pedagogical  strategy, as opposed to essential curriculum content. While oracy as a specific term and unifying concept has been largely confined  to the UK, the underlying ideas are evident  and sometimes more prominent   elsewhere in the world. This has been highlighted in Alexanders comparative work  on primary schools, contrasting the UK with, for example, Russia Alexander, 2000;  2003, and in many of the studies cited in the chapters to follow. Considering oracy  directly, however, there are some signs of this term becoming used more widely.  The English Speaking Union 2017, as strong advocates for this cause, report on an  international meeting on oracy in global classrooms attended by delegates from  22 countries, while the World Economic Forums website also highlights oracy  research, in a post making a case for its relevance internationally McKenna, 2017. 2.5 How can oracy be implemented across a school? While oracy is a powerful idea, its implementation varies considerably. Millard  and Menzies 2016 carried out a survey on behalf of Voice 21 of over 900 teachers  to find out about awareness of oracy, current practices and obstacles. Among  their findings is that oracy is valued very highly, but that this is more pronounced  among primary and early years teachers than those of older pupils. This links  to Alexanders 2010 report of teachers submissions to the Cambridge Primary  Review calling for a greater prominence for oracy in the primary curriculum.  Millard and Menzies 2016 research also illustrates a number of challenges,  however. Most staff members surveyed had not received recent training, teaching  oracy explicitly across the curriculum remained inconsistent and a number of 
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
20 specific obstacles were identified. These included a lack of time due to curricular  pressures, fears about pupils behaviour or capabilities, teachers own confidence  levels and a perceived lack of support from school leaders. Similar challenges are  raised by Coultas 2012, who notes dilemmas for teachers centred on practical  issues around confidence and classroom management, but also judgments of  peers and school leaders in a performative education environment. All of this supports Mercers 2015 argument that, if oracy is to attain a higher  status in school, a degree of clarity is needed around the specific skills involved,  including how they might be monitored or assessed. To this end, a University of  Cambridge team has developed, through trials at a variety of schools with both  primary and secondary pupils, a set of assessment tasks and an oracy skills  framework providing relevant criteria Mercer et al, 2017b. This is shown in  Table 2b.

C h a p t e r   2    L e a r n i n g  a n d  t h e  p l a c e  o f   o r a c y   21
21 Table 2b Oracy skills framework Mercer et al, 2017b, p 54 Physical Voice  Fluency and pace of speech  Tonal variation  Clarity of pronunciation  Voice projection Body language  Gesture and posture  Facial expression and eye contact Linguistic Vocabulary  Appropriate vocabulary choice Language  Register  Grammar Structure  Structure and organisation of talk Rhetorical  techniques  Rhetorical techniques such as metaphor,  humour, irony and mimicry Cognitive Content  Choice of content to convey meaning and  attention  Building on the views of others Clarifying and  summarising  Seeking information and clarification  through questions  Summarising Self-regulation  Maintaining focus on task  Time management Reasoning  Giving reasons to support views  Critically examining ideas and views  expressed Audience  awareness  Taking account of level of understanding  of the audience Social and  emotional Working with  others  Guiding or managing the interactions  Turn-taking Listening and  responding  Listening actively and responding  appropriately Confidence in  speaking  Self-assurance  Liveliness and flair
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
22 A framework such as this, validated through research, provides a common  language and understanding for schools promoting oracy. The broad, multidimensional model of oracy offers, particularly in its cognitive and social emotional dimensions, a rich grounding for learning through talk across the  curriculum. An important consideration, however, which might be associated  with the linguistic dimension of a framework such as this, is the danger  associated with over-emphasising a deficit view of spoken language. Coultas  2015, reviewing debates on spoken language in the UK, suggests that, alongside  the development of talk as a democratic form of pedagogy, there has also been  a long-running strand of policy and practice seeking to correct language, based  on notions of standard English. This relates to research from Fisher and Larkin  2008 who found negative judgments and low expectations about childrens  language to be prevalent among teachers. Fisher and Larkins findings lead  them to question the extent to which classroom talk is about conformity to a  cultural norm, as opposed to a cognitive strategy, or whether disadvantage is  less concerned with linguistic competence so much as linguistic difference  Fisher and Larkin, 2008 p 14. All of this points towards the balance required  when implementing strategies to promote oracy, something which will be  considered in the following case study. Case study Oracy at a whole-school level Woodside Academy is an inner-city primary school. Rachel, the assistant head,  heard about and joined a national training programme for oracy and began  to work with her school team to embed these principles across the school. As  well as the desire to improve the use of talk as a form of pedagogy, there was  a strong commitment to raising aspirations and life opportunities for pupils  through improving their confidence in communication. For this to have serious impact, a shift of whole-school culture was needed and  so the change had to be carefully implemented. It was important early on to  build on relevant aspects of practice already in place, such as rehearsing writing  through talk, and to focus on opportunities for relatively straightforward impact.  An example of this was highlighting the immediate benefit for assessment  for learning to be gained through allowing more time for pupils to share their  thinking. New structures to support oracy objectives were introduced across the  school: a four-part planning model helped teachers to consider the purpose for  talk, its structure, the means of modelling and how it was to be reviewed. While the substance of the taught curriculum was unchanged, it was  important that oracy became an integral part of planning, so each year 

C h a p t e r   2    L e a r n i n g  a n d  t h e  p l a c e  o f   o r a c y   23
23 group had a specific oracy focus embedded into their termly topics. Year  2, for example, studied interviews and undertook a structured process of  watching, deconstructing and planning for this form of talk, before finally  being interviewed themselves. To avoid these developments being associated  with just one school leader, a small number of teachers were initially invited to  adopt and model these ideas in their classrooms. These teachers then allowed  other colleagues to see techniques in practice, thereby acting as advocates and  helping to build up staff confidence through their personal experiences and  testimony. While a number of new strategies were introduced, based on ongoing  training in this area, teacher judgment remained at the heart of pedagogical  decisions, with an emphasis on talk strategies based on fulfilling a clear  learning purpose. A key part of this journey involved embedding oracy values in all that the  school did. Each class negotiated a talk charter and reflected vocabulary  for talk in its displays. At whole-school level, regular oracy assemblies were  held, featuring pupil rather than teacher input. Using a four-part model  based on the Cambridge framework in Table 2b, specific oracy assessment  criteria for each year group were created, giving teachers a clear idea of  relevant teaching points. The focus also extended to incorporating oracy  targets into the annual performance management process, giving the  initiative high status and emphasising strategic commitment from the  top of the school. With oracy held as a core value, other new initiatives  were evaluated with this in mind and implemented in line with these  principles. This case illustrates a number of important features, such as the need to provide  clear structures and tools for teachers, focusing on gradual implementation.  Above all, however, it shows the significance of embedding and explicitly  valuing talk, not only across the curriculum, but in all aspects of school life and  involving the entire teaching and leadership staff. 2.6 Summary Talk in the classroom is underpinned by theories suggesting the value of  exposure to diverse alternative perspectives and of talk as a tool for thinking  and learning with others, but also for mediating ones own thought processes.  Ideas such as scaffolding have sought to elaborate on these processes in  an educational context, showing how this involves skilled and responsive  interaction on the part of the teacher. As well as these arguments for socially  mediated forms of learning, another justification for the prominence of  classroom talk is the need to develop spoken language among pupils as the  basis for successful outcomes in education and beyond. The concept of oracy 
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
24 draws attention to spoken communication as a key, but under-emphasised skill  to be taught explicitly and this involves a number of dimensions, including the  cognitive. While there are arguments for distinguishing between oracy and oral  pedagogy, the two are intertwined and the former provides a strong grounding  for the latter. Questions for enquiry in your own school 	 How is learning in your classroom scaffolded through opportunities for talk  with either adults or peers? 	 Based on a model such as the oracy skills framework, where in lessons  might there be opportunities to develop the four strands? 	 Which curriculum areas lend themselves well to particular aspects of oracy? 	 How might your planning process or recording be amended to  incorporate oracy? Exploring further The oracy skills framework and many examples for classroom implementation  are outlined in this book: 	 Gaunt, A and Stott, A 2019 Transform Teaching and Learning Through  Talk: The Oracy Imperative. London: Rowman and Littlefield. Voice 21s site includes resources, videos and other tools to help promote oracy  in schools: 	 www.voice21.org accessed 17 May 2019.
C h a p t e r   3    W h o l e c l a s s  i n t e r a c t i o n   25 Chapter 3 Whole-class interaction 3.1 Chapter overview This chapter will outline: 3.2	 an introduction to whole-class interaction; 3.3	 what is meant by whole-class interaction; 3.4	 the dominant whole-class pattern of talk; 3.5	 how this typical pattern can be extended and enhanced; 3.6	 how teachers can move beyond this pattern in whole-class interaction. 3.2 Introduction Managing talk at a whole-class level is an everyday feature of any teachers  repertoire. The sheer complexity of simultaneous, multi-layered interactions,  both verbal and non-verbal, can be challenging for even the most experienced  practitioner. It is little wonder, then, that there is a widely noted tendency to  keep things straightforward, predictable and controlled. This chapter explores  the common features of whole-class talk and considers some of the typical  and inherent constraints. Even standard, potentially restricted patterns of  interaction, however, need not necessarily be cognitively limiting for the  learner. There is scope to extend everyday practice in a variety of ways and a  number of these adaptions are explored and evaluated. 3.3 What is meant by whole-class interaction? Underlying the question of what is meant by interaction are others concerning  who is doing the talking, when and why. Despite school rhetoric frequently  implying that classroom interaction has a high status, it is very clear that  particular forms of teacher-directed interaction prevail and that these have  implications for the learning that takes place. A long line of research, particularly from the 1960s onwards, has noted the  asymmetry of classroom interaction and particularly the way that talk is  dominated by the teacher. Flanders 1961 systematic observation examined  patterns of teacher interaction in US classrooms over six years and famously  derived from this the two-thirds rule: two-thirds of classroom time involves 

newgenprepdf
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
26 talk; two-thirds of that talk is teacher talk and two-thirds of teacher talk is  a teacher explaining or directing. Superior teachers were characterised by  lower ratios of teacher talk and a greater focus on interacting with students  ideas. While Flanders work is more than half a century old, these patterns  have remained remarkably consistent over the years. Edwards and Furlongs  1978 seminal study of secondary school classrooms showed the way that talk  patterns, often based on telling, reflected the teachers authority. Galton et al  1980 gathered extensive primary classroom data in the UK over five years in  the 1970s and noted interaction mainly at an individual level but with very little  attention for each pupil. When they replicated their own work 20 years later,  after the introduction of the national curriculum and its prescribed content,  there was much more whole-class talk but in other respects little had changed  in the intervening period: As was the case 20 years ago, teachers talk at rather  than with children during class teaching Galton et al, 1999, p 34. Moving into the twenty-first century, researchers investigating the explicit  emphasis on whole-class interactive teaching in the National Literacy and  Numeracy Strategies introduced to English primary schools, found that highly  controlled, teacher-led talk continued to prevail Burns and Myhill, 2004; Mroz  et al, 2000. Indeed, computer-assisted analysis of video footage by Smith et al  2004 put the figure at 74 per cent teacher talk, suggesting that top-down  initiatives like these strategies have little impact on underlying pedagogical  habits. More recent studies with various ages of learner Wangru, 2016; Vaish,  2008 paint a similar picture of teachers dominating classroom interaction,  even when skilfully orchestrating classroom dialogue eg Skidmore and  Murakami, 2012. This sort of asymmetry has important implications for learning. In such  interactions, it may be the teachers and not the pupils who are doing most  of the academic work, a marked contrast to the social constructivist ideas  discussed in Chapter 2. As Hattie 2012 argues, teachers need to learn to listen  much more, partly to allow pupils to deepen their thinking and partly to find  out more about their pupils understanding. His studies of effect sizes based  on extensive meta-analysis show clear advantages for a high profile teacher  role, but in the guise of an activator, guiding and involving pupils in their  own learning. Related to this are questions of power, ownership of learning  and communicative rights. Maybin 2006 describes the teachers voice as an  authoritative text that frames social interaction in the classroom, suggesting  that teacher-dominated talk serves to reinforce the hierarchy of the school. As you can see, therefore, it is not interaction itself that is important, but its  quality. Re-evaluating the word interactive in the classroom context, Myhill  2006 makes a case for focusing on involvement and participation and 

C h a p t e r   3    W h o l e c l a s s  i n t e r a c t i o n   27
27 Alexander 2017 reminds us that it is not the organisational aspects of talk  that matter, but rather the discourse and values associated with that talk.  Alexanders research into types of teaching talk suggests a particular value for  discussion and dialogue, but first the more commonly encountered forms and  particularly what is often known as the recitation script must be examined 3.4 What is the dominant whole-class pattern of talk  and why? Extensive research worldwide has noted the near-ubiquity of what has been  termed the Initiation, Response, Feedback IRF sequence. This can be a  potentially limiting type of interaction, but one that can be enhanced in a  number of ways. The IRF pattern The identification of IRF sequences is usually attributed to Sinclair and  Coulthard 1975 who developed a framework for analysing classroom  interaction in terms of three moves: an initiation by the teacher, a response  from a pupil and feedback from the teacher. In its simplest form, IRF may be a  very limited exchange indeed: What is the square root of 144? 12 Great, well done. This sort of interaction has also been characterised as triadic dialogue Lemke,  1990 and as IRE Initiation, Reply, Evaluation by Mehan 1979. Mehans  emphasis here is that evaluation is the distinctive third move in instructional   as opposed to everyday  questioning. This basic pattern has been noted  extensively in research across the world, as evidenced by Howe and Abedins  2013 systematic review of 225 studies over four decades. Howe and Abedin  point out that, despite some variation, this seems to cut across cultures,  supporting Alexanders 2000 detailed observations of this phenomenon in  five different countries and Hardmans 2008 reports on Nigerian and Kenyan  classrooms. The persistence of IRF has been attributed by Mercer and Dawes  2008 partly to the implicit ground rules that exist in classrooms, such as the  teachers exclusive right to evaluate pupil comments. Mercer and Dawes argue  that ground rules are important but that new rules may be needed for different  purposes. While Sinclair and Coulthards original interest in IRF was purely as a  linguistic exploration, the prevalence of this form of exchange raises a number  of pedagogical questions for teachers. In examining three of these in particular, 
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
28 it is important to be mindful of Wells 1999 point that an IRF structure is not  inherently good or bad: rather, its value depends on the purposes it serves. What are the issues for learning arising from the IRF pattern? One frequent finding from research has been the association of IRF with a very  limited repertoire of questioning. This is exemplified by a cluster of studies  of primary classrooms in the UK in the wake of the literacy and numeracy  strategies. Myhill 2006 report that over 60 per cent of questions were factual,  rather than procedural, speculative or process-oriented and that childrens  own questions were seldom heard. Other researchers suggest that 70 per cent  of childrens responses were three words or fewer Smith et al, 2004 or that, in  many cases, a feedback move was missing altogether, resulting in a sequence  of initiation-response-initiation-response, with teachers barely listening to  childrens answers Burns and Myhill, 2004. However, in contrast, more recent  research involving 28 English primary schools finds evidence of frequent use  of productive forms of dialogue, such as elaboration, reasoning and querying  Vrikki et al, 2019, so it is important to retain a sense of perspective about  overly pessimistic portrayals. While much of this work has been at primary  level, similar patterns of often limited interaction emerge from research with  secondary pupils, for example in Switzerland and Germany Pauli and Reusser,  2015 and Singapore Vaish, 2008. While these teacher-dominated exchanges undoubtedly have some value   indeed, Maybin 2006 uses analysis of such transcripts to show how repetition  can lead to productive appropriation of ideas  they also point to another form  of asymmetry within the classroom. What is clear from the frequent accounts  of tightly controlled interaction is that the direction of thought is often dictated  by the teacher with a tendency to seek convergence on a particular correct  response. The third move  feedback or evaluation from the teacher  is the  key to controlling the flow of interaction Mehan and Cazden, 2015. Mroz  et al 2000, p 382 attribute this to: The teachers claim to prior knowledge  of the subject content and right to control the pacing and sequencing of its  transmission. As Myhill and Warren 2005 point out, a focus on a pre-determined path  through a lesson, usually in the name of meeting a set objective, serves  teachers purposes, rather than pupils learning needs. Similarly, OConnor  et al 2017 point to the sheer complexity of balancing a range of requirements  such as: clarity and coherence, adequate representation of content, time and  equitable participation. This frequently leads to a trade-off of priorities that  ultimately results in this same convergence effect.

C h a p t e r   3    W h o l e c l a s s  i n t e r a c t i o n   29
29 Participation in talk is another issue. In their analysis of UK primary  classrooms, Burns and Myhill 2004 found variations in participation according  to gender and achievement level: there was much more positive participation  in IRF exchanges by girls and high-achieving pupils. However, these findings  take into account only observable acts of participation, such as putting a hand  up to answer, whereas participation may be silent as well as vocal. A study of  US Grade 47 pupils by OConnor et al 2017 found no link between the amount  of spoken contribution and an individuals performance on tests, though  they attributed this partly to teachers developing a culture of pupils listening  and orientating to a speaker. This echoes findings reported by Cazden 2001  showing pupils from a lower socio-economic group being much less willing to  speak than their peers but nevertheless proving to have learned just as much. 3.5 How can the IRF pattern be extended and enhanced? So far, this chapter has focused on some of the limitations inherent in IRF, but  there has been a great deal of work on how even this simplest form of exchange  might be made more productive. For example, Mercer 2000 has identified five, near universal, conversational  techniques observed in classrooms around the world which may be effective  in linking new learning to pupils prior experiences: one important purpose for  whole-class discussion. These are listed in Table 3a. Apart from recaps perhaps, the other four techniques are entirely consistent  with the teachers initiation or feedback moves within an IRF sequence but  serve a strategic purpose. This leads to a consideration of how to enhance each  of the IRF phases. Table 3a Building the future from the past adapted from Mercer, 2000 Recaps Briefly reviewing prior learning for pupils Elicitations Questioning pupils to encourage recall of prior learning Repetitions Repeating a pupils response in either an affirming or  questioning tone Reformulations Paraphrasing a pupils response in a clearer or more relevant  form Exhortations Emphasising the value or relevance of past experiences for  current activities
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
30 Initiation: what sort of questions might be most productive? Although questioning is a major topic in its own right, extending beyond  the scope of this book, it is clear that certain questioning strategies might  particularly promote high quality pupil responses. Hatties current list of effect  sizes for classroom interventions rates questioning relatively highly, for its  impact on student achievement Visible Learning Plus, 2018, but it is clear that  this potential depends greatly on the form that questioning takes. As already  noted, the vast majority of questions in whole-class exchanges are of the  closed, factual variety Myhill, 2006; children are given limited time to respond  Cazden, 2001 and these responses, unsurprisingly, are extremely brief Smith  et al, 2004. In these critiques of the limitations of IRF, however, there is a danger  of overlooking the very important role played by even these apparently cursory  interactions. Indeed, questioning based on factual recall has an important place  in classrooms as an immediate diagnostic form of assessment. It can form  part of a highly contingent view of lesson planning in which: the elicitation,  identification and interpretation of evidence is an indispensable component of  effective instruction Black and Wiliam, 2018, p 11. As an example, Wiliam 2013  refers to hinge points in lessons. These are moments when teachers need to  take stock swiftly and efficiently of every pupils understanding and respond  flexibly on the spot. Even brief, closed questioning, therefore, can be strategic  and full of impact on learning. However, it is questioning to promote thinking and more extended responses  that is of particular interest here. To this end, Mercer and Littleton 2007  report on studies from the UK and Mexico which explored the relationship  between teachers use of questioning and their pupils attainment in reading  comprehension and mathematics. Teachers whose pupils attained highly on  these tests had three questioning characteristics. 	1.	 Questioning went beyond factual recall to encompass probing for  understanding with a view to adjusting subsequent teaching. 	2.	 Problem-solving strategies were modelled and children were encouraged  to make their own thought processes explicit in their responses. 	3.	 Questioning encouraged pupils to take a more active role in the  classroom through articulating their reasoning, exchanging ideas and  supporting peers. Building on this last point, an extensive analysis of lessons in US classrooms  by Nystrand et al 2003 highlights the power of authentic questions: those  without a pre-determined answer and offering a range of responses. In  short, questioning from this perspective is a scaffolded interchange, geared 

C h a p t e r   3    W h o l e c l a s s  i n t e r a c t i o n   31
31 towards guiding learning and developing pupils metacognitive awareness  of this process. Wertsch 1991 has seen similar examples as a negotiation of  perspective, whereby the teacher reformulates pupil responses and shifts the  responsibility for learning in their direction. This use of questioning to guide enquiry has been investigated with Indian  Grade 7 science pupils by Kawalkar and Vijapurkar 2013 and, from their  observations, they derive five types of question which are likely to promote  enquiry. These questions operate not discretely, but as a progression  chronologically and in terms of cognitive demand see Table 3b. Table 3b Teachers enquiry questions adapted from Kawalkar and  Vijapurkar, 2013 Type of question and strategy Examples 1. Exploring prerequisitessetting  the stage eg factual recall and eliciting prior  experiences Where? What? Can you think of an example of? 2. Generating ideas and  explanations eg directing attention and asking  for explanations Did you see? How does? Ask a question about 3. Probing further eg asking for clarification,  elaboration or justification So, what would happen if ? How do you know? How can that be? 4. Refining conceptions and  explanations eg encouraging reasoning, making  connections, pointing out flaws in  arguments How can we find out? So what was the difference between? Why did we? 5. Guiding the entire class towards  scientific concepts eg encouraging wider responses,  rephrasing, taking stock Do you agree with? How many of you? X thinksHow do we know?
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
32 While this typology is a useful summary of questioning strategies designed  to develop childrens thinking, it is notable that this comes from lessons  on science, a subject in which enquiry is an inherent feature. This sort  of progressive questioning may be harder to implement elsewhere in the  curriculum. Response: how can you enable pupils to provide high quality answers? Some researchers have focused on maximising the amount of participation  by individual pupils through different response strategies, often aimed at  challenging the convention of a small number of participants raising hands  to speak. Wiliam 2006, for example, advocates a pedagogy of engagement,  based on strategies requiring every pupil to participate, in order that their  understanding be revealed and next steps considered. Our interest, however,  is more on the quality of responses to teacher questions. One research focus  has been the concept of wait time: the interval between the teacher asking  a question and the pupil responding, or between an initial response and any  follow-up. Some 40 years ago, Rowes 1978 influential analysis of over 800  lessons showed a wide range of cognitive, social and affective improvements  based on extending both forms of wait time to only around three seconds.  Building on this, there is a now a strong consensus that such extension of  these intervals can result in significant gains through encouraging wider  participation and more sophisticated thought Cazden, 2001; Loughran, 2010;  Mercer and Dawes, 2008. However, Ingram and Elliott 2016, based on analysis  of many classroom extracts, argue that teachers mechanistically increasing  wait time may be counter-productive. They suggest that this perpetuates the  artificial nature of teacher-dominated interaction and discourages the sort of  natural, self-selecting participation more characteristic of everyday dialogue.  Ingram and Elliotts view is that classrooms would be better served by teachers  using their judgment flexibly and changing the norms and power imbalances  within such exchanges. Similarly, Cazden 2001, p 82 has investigated ways of  disrupting the teachers role-given right to speak at any time and to any person,  providing examples of classrooms where pupils learn to manage their own  turn-taking and teachers learn to listen more keenly. In terms of who responds, Alexanders 2000; 2008 cross-cultural research calls  into question the practice in places such as the UK and US of distributing brief  questions to as many pupils as possible in the name of equity. He contrasts this  with the very different patterns of participation found in Russian classrooms.  Based partly on a more collective value system, fewer children participate in  questioning, but they do so in a more sustained way, serving as representatives  of the rest of the class and talking as much to their peers as the teacher. As 

C h a p t e r   3    W h o l e c l a s s  i n t e r a c t i o n   33
33 well as enabling deeper forms of questioning, classroom talk again becomes as  much about listening to others as competing to offer a brief correct answer, an  idea that accords with the point in 3.4 about the benefits of silent participation. Feedback: how can the third move be used for maximum benefit? As you have seen, these exchanges have been represented as both IRF and  IRE. Wells 1999 has argued that the third, follow-up, move is better thought of  as feedback rather than evaluation, as this broader term offers greater scope  for extending pupils learning. In these triadic patterns, it is this feedback  move that has the most influence on the quality of interaction Wells and  Arauz, 2006. This emphasis on rich feedback, rather than simply evaluation  following a pupils contribution, also relates to what is known more generally  about feedback. Hatties extensive meta-analysis has made clear the huge  potential impact of feedback on attainment but also that this varies enormously,  depending on how it is enacted. Effective feedback is focused on closing a gap  towards a well-defined learning goal and should not be diluted with praise,  or feedback at self level Hattie and Timperley, 2007; Hattie and Yates, 2014.  Research on feedback in general is well summarised by Atherton 2018 in  this series. More specifically and in view of current concerns about teacher  workload, which centre partly on marking as written feedback eg DfE, 2016;  Elliott et al, 2016, there is an even more compelling case for high-quality,  collective verbal feedback. In line with this, a number of researchers have looked closely at teacher followup moves. Myhill and Warrens 2005 studies of 54 primary lesson episodes  yielded three types of critical moment as teacher moves shaped whole-class  discussion: 	1.	 moments of confusion caused by teacher misconceptions; 	2.	 moments of careful steering of the class along a pre-determined path; 	3.	 moments more rarely of flexible and responsive interaction, building on  pupils emerging learning. This last category aligns with the productive discussions reported by Hardman  2008 in UK and African classrooms in which teachers created space for  classroom discourse through strategies such as inviting pupils to comment  on one anothers ideas and asking for clarification, and thereby created a more  symmetrical form of discourse. Greeno 2015 uses similar examples from US  classroom transcripts to revisit the IRF abbreviation, noting variations like  IRQA to denote the follow-up questions and answers and IRRF for a restating  of the pupil response followed by a fellow pupils feedback comment. Mehan  and Cazden 2015, p 19 see these moves as a shift from recitation to reasoning 
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
34 and identify, from examples of science and mathematics lessons in the US,  productive third move strategies such as: 	 asking for clarification; 	 expecting pupils to justify their reasoning; 	 reformulating pupils answers; 	 seeking answers offering competing interpretations; 	 allowing a number of responses before offering any evaluative comment. The common factor here, then, is the extension of the third move. It is clear  to see, therefore, that a narrow view of IRF as an isolated exchange between  a teacher and one pupil may be unhelpful: one such exchange may well be  part of a complex and potentially productive sequence of learning involving  many moves and many pupils. Indeed, Molinari et als 2013 analysis of  Italian classrooms shows the prevalence of chains of IRF interactions, some  of which go beyond a simple feedback on the appropriateness of the answer  and instead offer opportunities for fruitful co-construction of understanding.  Nevertheless, this move from convergence to divergence needs to be balanced  against curriculum coverage and, as Skidmore and Murakami 2012 point out,  orchestrating such discussions valuing contrasting viewpoints is a complex  and dynamic balancing act for practitioners. Case study A teacher develops her questioning practice Jane has a class of six and seven year-olds and is starting a unit of work on  picture graphs in mathematics. Her usual practice when introducing a new  topic is to do so with a mixture of teacher exposition  based on a structured  sequence of slides  and questioning. Her colleagues have begun to film their  own practice as a form of professional development and Jane has just done  so for the first time. Although she has previously considered her whole-class  episodes with pupils reasonably interactive and engaging, Jane is surprised  to see that she has dominated the discussion and that her questioning has  lacked purpose: on the one hand, the questions have lacked the precision and  participation to be useful as assessments; on the other, they have failed to  provoke deep thought. She resolves to use the next whole-class episode as an  opportunity for deeper learning. The lesson begins in this way:

C h a p t e r   3    W h o l e c l a s s  i n t e r a c t i o n   35
35 Table 3c Lesson and commentary Interactions Commentary and rationale Jane shows the class a variety of  objects seemingly from her desk  drawer pens, paperclips, pins etc  and asks, I need to sort out this mess.  How can I quickly work out how many  of each I have? She asks pupils to  discuss this briefly with a partner. Jane begins with an authentic, open  question, allowing for a range of  responses which help her to gauge  starting points. By avoiding her usual  hands-up mode of response, she has  given each child a voice and audience  and has effectively built in wait time  before a public, formal response. Jane then asks, What ideas did you  and your partner have? Lots of hands  are raised. Jane phrases this question as an  assumption that there will be ideas  and offers children the safety-net of  articulating their joint thinking, rather  than just their own idea. Raj is chosen and says, You could put  them into different groups. Jane replies, Ah, I see. And why would  you do that? Tell me more. Raj responds, So you can count them  separately and see how many of each. Jane asks Raj to come and show  her how he would begin to do this,  scaffolding his explanation to the  class as he does so. Jane avoids a simple evaluation of  Rajs answer and presses him in two  ways to articulate his reasoning. She  is conscious that Raj is having a turn  while others are not, but decides a  sustained response is worthwhile, so  long as she and Raj are addressing the  rest of the class with their comments. When Raj has demonstrated counting  and sorting into untidy piles, Jane  asks, Can anyone build on what Raj  just did for us, so that we can see  more clearly how many there are?  She pauses for a second or two before  choosing Kelly to reply. Jane consciously refrains from  closing down the ideas with her views  and offers another turn to the class.  By using the words us and build, she  signals that this is both a collective  and a cumulative effort. Continued overleaf
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
36 Interactions Commentary and rationale Kelly suggests sorting the objects  into orderly lines. Jane does so on her  behalf, but not in size order, and adds,  Like this? Is there anything else we  can do? Alfie volunteers an idea: The  objects could be lined up next to each  other with the one with the most first  and then the next biggest. Jane has responded in a minimal way  and deliberately left room for a further  refinement of the childrens thinking  as part of the chain. Jane follows this guidance and asks  the whole class to count up the total  in each line with her. She adds a  sticker to record this number in each  case. Together, Jane and the class  have created a concrete version of  a rudimentary picture graph. Jane  then proceeds to link this to a visual  representation of a similar problem The choral counting reinforces the  collaborative reasoning and Jane  acts as the conduit for the childrens  ideas. She has gradually refined  their early explanations and guided  them towards a more mathematical  representation of the data. What this example illustrates is a teacher stepping beyond a typical IRF  exchange to develop a form of questioning that prompts children to think  deeply but also collectively about an authentic question. Structure and purpose  remain but feedback has become less evaluative and more empowering. 3.6 How can teachers move beyond IRF in whole-class  interaction? Other researchers have gone beyond an IRF-based analysis to consider  patterns of productive whole-class talk more broadly. One of the most complete  frameworks is the work of Michaels et al 2008 on what they have termed  accountable talk, an analysis based on many years of research across a wide  range of age groups. In this view, academically productive talk is characterised  by three interrelated critical features, all of which must be present see  Table 3d. Table 3c continued  Lesson and commentary

C h a p t e r   3    W h o l e c l a s s  i n t e r a c t i o n   37
37 These principles have been exemplified for teachers through the development  of a number of talk moves Michaels and OConnor, 2015 in the form of prompts  or other strategies, such as re-voicing, which is designed to model and nurture  appropriate responses. An interesting aspect of this model is its emphasis on a  firm knowledge base, at a time when there is widespread interest in knowledgerich curricula Young, 2013. Much of the other research examined, while not  necessarily downplaying knowledge, has a greater focus on inquiry and thought  processes, whereas this model is predicated on good reasoning underpinned by  good knowledge. Characterising talk moves is also a feature of the work of Tytler and Aranda  2015 who investigate the way that whole-class discussion is managed by  primary teachers regarded as experts in Australia, Germany and Taiwan.  Despite substantial differences in teaching approach, they identify a common  discursive moves framework of three productive moves: 	 eliciting and acknowledging: canvassing new ideas; 	 clarifying: sharpening ideas for greater precision; 	 extending: seeking further justification and reasoning. The fact that these categories are thought of as moves, rather than simply  question types, hints at the complex and contingent interplay with learners.  This work is of interest for its attempt to identify hallmarks of expert  interaction that cut across cultures and pedagogical norms. The Taiwanese  classroom, for example, had a far higher percentage of teacher talk and pupils  were strongly led through a highly structured curriculum, but the same features  were observable nonetheless. While some studies measure success as quality of discussion, with an  assumption, drawn from wider sociocultural theory, that this will lead to  productive learning, there have been some attempts to link high quality  Table 3d Accountable talk adapted from Michaels et al, 2008 Accountability to the  learning community Talk that takes into account and builds on others  contributions Accountability to  standards of reasoning Talk that emphasises logical connections and  reasonable conclusions Accountability to  knowledge Talk that is based explicitly on facts and evidence
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
38 whole-class discussion to pupil attainment more directly. A large scale study of  US middleand high-school pupils presented by Applebee et al 2003 reports  a significant correlation between discussion-based teaching approaches and  attainment on literacy tests. It is important to note that, while the benefits were  seen for pupils of all attainment levels, those in the lowest tracks or streams  were much less likely to encounter this form of pedagogy. All of this suggests  the creation of a learning culture and norms of discussion that are much more  collective and cumulative, pointing towards what has been termed dialogic  teaching and learning: the subject of the next chapter. 3.7 Summary Whole-class interaction is often characterised by asymmetries of talk, with  teachers dominating the exchanges. A long tradition of research across the  world points to the resilience of the IRF pattern in a variety of forms. While  often employed in a very limiting form, this need not be the case. There are  examples of how teachers can make much better use of initiation and response  practices to promote high level thought and participation. The third move,  feedback, is particularly powerful if used to build on pupils responses, rather  than evaluating them in a closed manner. Some researchers have attempted  to capture good practice in whole-class discussion in forms that go beyond a  simple IRF analysis and these suggest a shift in classroom norms hinting at a  more collective view of talk.

C h a p t e r   3    W h o l e c l a s s  i n t e r a c t i o n   39
39 Questions for enquiry in your own school 	 Based on the critique of the term interaction in this chapter, to what extent  is your classroom truly interactive? 	 How might your whole-class discussions move beyond always converging  on a pre-determined outcome? 	 What can you do to ensure that your follow-up to pupils responses takes the  form of productive feedback, rather than narrow evaluation? 	 How do you seek to guide pupils thinking through your discursive moves? Exploring further This paper sums up many of the issues surrounding whole-class interaction  and its limitations: 	 Myhill, D 2006 Talk, Talk, Talk: Teaching and Learning in Whole-Class  Discourse. Research Papers in Education, 211: 1941. This chapter provides a useful overview of the research over the years on IRF  and IRE patterns: 	 Mehan, H and Cazden, C 2015 The Study of Classroom Discourse: Early  History and Current Developments. In Resnick, L, Asterhan, C and Clarke,  S eds Socializing Intelligence Through Academic Talk and Dialogue.  Washington: AERA: 1334. This University of Cambridge site, focusing on active learning for all ages in  mathematics and science, has classroom ideas and resources that may initiate  productive whole-class interaction. 	 https:inquiryproject.terc.edusharedpdTalkSciencePrimer.pdf accessed  29 August 2019.
40  C l a s s r o o m   T a l k Chapter 4 The dialogic classroom  4.1 Chapter overview This chapter will outline: 4.2	 an introduction to the dialogic classroom; 4.3	 what is meant by dialogic; 4.4	 the hallmarks of a dialogic classroom; 4.5	 the practices associated with dialogic teaching; 4.6	 the impact of dialogic teaching; 4.7	 challenges of dialogic teaching. 4.2 Introduction In Chapter 3, patterns of talk were examined and some productive teacher  moves identified. There is a danger at this point, however, that the function of  productive dialogue becomes exclusively associated with certain forms of talk.  In this chapter, you will encounter the concept of a dialogic classroom framed  as a broad set of values and practices, rather than a single, narrowly defined  talk repertoire. A dialogic classroom is seen by some as an end in itself, based  on the democratic value system it implies; for others, it is the means to greater  reasoning and articulation of ideas; for others still, arguments can be made about  the transferable learning and impact on subsequent attainment. This chapter  critically explores the ideas and evidence behind all of these perspectives. 4.3 What is meant by dialogic? Dialogic teaching and learning is a broad heading which encompasses a range  of similar approaches and practices. While chiefly associated in the UK with  the work of Robin Alexander 2017, there are similarities with other bodies  of research. From the UK, for example, there are overlaps with exploratory  talk Mercer and Dawes, 2008 and from North America with collaborative  reasoning Reznitskaya et al, 2009, dialogic inquiry Wells, 1999 and the notion  of accountable talk Michaels et al, 2008 encountered in Chapter 3. What is  common to all is that they articulate a classroom ethos that goes beyond talk  itself to consider other classroom attributes Calcagni and Lago, 2018. While 

newgenprepdf

C h a p t e r   4    T h e  d i a l o g i c  c l a s s r o o m   41
41 dialogic practices are usually presented in contrast to the prevailing habits of  interaction, it is important to note that some proponents argue that teacherled forms of interaction retain an important role, since function, rather than  form, is the defining characteristic of dialogic talk Kim and Wilkinson, 2019.  The focus, therefore, is more about the broadening of repertoires than about  imposing a kind of orthodoxy. As a way of starting to understand this concept, Maybin 2006 makes a helpful  distinction between dialogue, as a word for conversation, and dialogic,  which goes further to refer to the constant ongoing process of interactive and  recursive meaning-making among children p 24. Current understanding of  dialogic processes is commonly associated with the influence of the Russian  scholar Mikhail Bakhtin. Bakhtins contribution includes his suggestion that  any utterance is part of a chain of speech communication Bakhtin, 1986,  emphasising a connection not only with preceding utterances, but also with  those to follow. This orientation to, and awareness of, an anticipated audience  and response he characterises as addressivity and all utterances, therefore, are  seen as interlinked. Even when superficially monological, as when conveying  an idea, they have the potential dialogically to create new meaning Bakhtin,  1981, 1986. This meaning-making thrives in part on the existence of diverse  perspectives and the tension between them, or dialogic gap Wegerif, 2011.  Wertsch 1991, p 63, building on Bakhtins ideas, points out that a fundamentally  Bakhtinian question might therefore be: who is doing the talking?  the answer  always being: at least two voices, since all speech has retrospective and  prospective reference points to other voices. Dialogic is a broad term, therefore,  which is more about inter-connectedness and co-construction than just talk  itself. What may be clear from these points is that, as well as the arguments for  academic and social benefit, explored later in this chapter, dialogic teaching  implies a particular value system. One perspective on this might be the need  to equip pupils for twenty-first century life in terms of citizenship and lifelong  learning Alexander, 2017, or a commitment to reasoned discourse Reznitskaya  et al, 2009. Another justification is provided by a desire to avoid a controlling,  oppressive version of schooling characterised by Freire 1970 as banking  education. In contrast to this model of knowledge handed down to passive  recipients, dialogic teaching is associated with pupil involvement in decisions  and a more egalitarian environment. An important point in this respect,  however, is made by Reznitskaya and Gregory 2013 who argue that this shared  control need not diminish the teachers authority as the more knowledgeable  partner; in contrast it gives teachers the opportunity to demonstrate how their  expertise may have arisen from their own participation in collective learning.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
42 Dialogic teaching, therefore, needs to be understood holistically, as a habit of  mind that goes beyond improved talk Alexander, 2018. By way of summary,  Lefstein and Snell 2011 suggest that a dialogic view of education offers a  critique of traditional practice along five dimensions: 	 structural: questions of whose voice dominates in classroom exchanges; 	 epistemic: questions of knowledge as either accepted or contested; 	 interpersonal: questions of individual versus collaborative approaches to  learning; 	 substantive: questions of the coherence and connectedness of what is learned; 	 political: questions of power relations and authority in the classroom. The next section explores what this shift in emphasis and these principles  might mean at classroom level. 4.4 What are the hallmarks of the dialogic classroom? Dialogic classroom features Alexander 2017, p 23 stresses that specific forms of lesson or classroom  organisation are much less important than the quality, dynamics and content  of talk but it is clear that there are recognisable hallmarks of a dialogic  classroom. Originating in his large-scale comparative studies of pedagogy in classrooms in  different countries Alexander, 2000, Alexander 2017 offers perhaps the bestknown list of dialogic teaching features, as seen in Table 4a. Table 4a Features of dialogic teaching adapted from Alexander, 2017 Collective Teacher and pupils addressing learning tasks together rather  than in isolation Reciprocal Teachers and pupils listening, sharing ideas and considering  multiple viewpoints Supportive Children sharing ideas without fear in a supportive  environment geared towards helping with misunderstandings Cumulative Teacher and children build on one anothers thinking and  develop coherent chains of learning Purposeful Dialogic teaching is planned with particular educational goals  in mind

C h a p t e r   4    T h e  d i a l o g i c  c l a s s r o o m   43
43 Other definitions have added emphasis on implicit features of these classrooms,  such as teachers and pupils addressing authentic, open problems Snell and  Lefstein, 2018 and the metacognitive aspects of learning Reznitskaya and  Gregory, 2013, through which pupils awareness of these processes is explicitly  developed. It will be apparent that creating a dialogic environment is a complex  undertaking. Alexander 2008 himself is clear that some of the observed  international practices that inspired his vision of dialogic teaching are closely  related to broader societal values, such as collectivism, which may be less  common in countries like the UK and US. Creating the conditions for dialogic  learning and teaching may involve a whole host of influences. The next  sections explore two particularly important factors that help to distinguish  further between dialogic teaching and interactive dialogue: communicative  style and a sense of community. Communicative style It seems clear that a dialogic classroom must place special demands on a teachers  communicative style. An influential analytical tool has been developed by  Mortimer and Scott through their study of talk in secondary science classrooms  Mortimer and Scott, 2003; Scott and Mortimer, 2006. Classroom interaction is  examined along two dimensions see Table 4b below. Using the first of them,  dialogic discourse is contrasted with authoritative discourse, which allows for  no deviation from the official, or textbook content. Mortimer and Scotts insight  is to use a second dimension  from interactive to non-interactive  to make a  distinction between the degree of dialogic discourse and the degree of interaction.  Teacher-dominated talk, therefore, may still have a dialogic quality, whereas a  highly interactive exchange might remain entirely authoritative.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
44 The InteractiveAuthoritative quadrant describes the more limited forms of IRF  examined in Chapter 3 but perhaps most interesting is the Non-interactive  Dialogic quadrant, allowing, for example, for teacher-led modelling of dialogic  thought processes. Using analysis of science classroom transcripts, Scott and  Mortimer 2006 show how teaching might be characterised by a series of skilful  and productive shifts between dialogic and authoritative discourse. These shifts  are not dictated solely by the teacher. In a dialogic classroom, pupils may pose  high-level wonderment questions, which sometimes act to shift the focus  independently of the teacher Aguiar et al, 2010. This interplay places great  demands on a teachers subject knowledge Scott, 2008 and will vary depending  on the discipline in question. As these researchers point out, dialogic discourse is  valuable in terms of motivation and making connections but science, in particular,  also depends to a certain extent on guidance towards authoritative forms of  established scientific understanding, as illustrated in this chapters case study. A sense of community If Mortimer and Scotts 2003 framework helps teachers to plan for cumulative  and purposeful dialogic classrooms, another of Alexanders 2017 criteria   collective learning  has also been the subject of much research. While some  have analysed learning in everyday settings through the lens of participation and  apprenticeship Lave and Wenger, 1991; Rogoff, 1990, this has often focused on  the idea of a community of practice. Subsequent researchers have often pointed  out the limited transferability of this model to the school setting, with its often  isolated and fluid working practices Chambers and Armour, 2011; Wubbels, 2007. In a review of research on classroom communities with learning, rather  than practice, as their object, Watkins 2005 suggests that they result  Table 4b Four classes of communicative approach adapted from Mortimer  and Scott, 2003 Interactive Non-interactive Dialogic InteractiveDialogic: A range of diverse ideas is  explored by teacher and  pupils together Non-interactiveDialogic: The teacher summarises or  explores different points of  view without pupil input Authoritative InteractiveAuthoritative: Pupils are highly involved  through questioning but with  a focus on one point of view Non-interactiveAuthoritative: The teacher presents a specific  point of view without pupils  active participation

C h a p t e r   4    T h e  d i a l o g i c  c l a s s r o o m   45
45 in: disciplined discourse, shared knowledge, co-constructed learning and  shared metacognition. Yet another vision of community, which aligns even  more clearly with dialogic teaching, has been proposed by Wells 1999 and his  work on communities of enquiry in science classrooms, in which the main  object of collaboration is not induction into practice or learning for its own sake.  Instead, the object is the joint solving of a problem and the development of a  metacognitive awareness of this process in a classroom community which  shares a commitment to caring, collaboration and a dialogic mode of making  meaning Wells, 1999, p 334. Based on this model, Wells and Arauz 2006 report  on research with Canadian teachers over a six year project aimed at creating  such communities. They found that adopting a communal enquiry orientation  in this way did result in a far more dialogic style of interaction, though this  was often still within the triadic IRF pattern discussed in Chapter 3. This is  attributed in part to the teachers responsibility for guiding pupil engagement  with a prescribed curriculum and still permits authentically dialogic teaching to  occur. As well as the teachers instructional role, Skidmore 2006 points towards  the teachers role in the affective aspects of a community, as a concerned other,  guiding, coaching and sharing in the ups and downs of the discovery process. A dialogic stance What both of these bodies of research point towards, therefore, is a way of  resolving the abiding tension between the need to ensure curriculum coverage  and purposeful learning on the one hand with a commitment to a genuine coconstruction of meaning on the other. As Mercer and Littleton 2007 point out,  from their research in primary science lessons, it is the quality of the collective  thinking as a whole that is important. Seen this way, the teacher judgment and  shifts between dialogic and authoritative discourse, or the monologic episodes  within a broader dialogic community noted above, are entirely compatible with  a dialogic classroom. What this strongly suggests is that individual episodes of  talk are less indicative of classroom culture than what Wells and Arauz 2006, p  418 call a dialogic stance. The idea of a dialogic stance is taken up by Boyd and Markarian 2011 who  use a close analysis of classroom talk to show how features such as didactic  teacher comments or closed questions may still allow for a discourse space  allowing pupils to have a genuine voice. Much of this depends on the readiness  of the teacher to listen more attentively: when considering talk, it is not just  how we say it, but how we are predisposed to receive it Boyd and Markarian,  2011, p 516. A dialogic stance, then, has much in common with the creation  of an intermental development zone IDZ Mercer, 2000, as introduced in  Chapter 2: a shared space for truly collective thinking between teacher and  pupils. The argument for dialogic teaching going beyond specific talk forms 
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
46 is also reinforced by Alexander 2017. His highly detailed list of indicators of  dialogic teaching covers not only hallmarks of the talk itself, but many aspects  of the wider context, including matters of organisation, pace, lesson structure  and an awareness of the impact of teachers dispositions and interventions.  While it will be clear already that dialogic teaching may encompass all forms  of classroom interaction, the focus of the rest of this chapter is primarily on  specific practices for whole-class talk. Small group, peer interaction will be  considered more specifically in Chapter 5. 4.5 What are the practices associated with dialogic  teaching? Based initially on his comparative studies of classrooms internationally and  then refined through subsequent studies, Alexander 2017 identifies a series of  repertoires that teachers need to use. These include organisational structures  and opportunities for developing pupil talk for both everyday life and learning eg  narrating, explaining and negotiating. His other repertoire concerns teaching talk: 	 rote: drilling of facts through repetition; 	 recitation: questioning designed to stimulate recall of previous learning; 	 exposition: imparting information; 	 discussion: exchanging ideas; 	 dialogue: achieving common understanding through cumulative questioning  and discussion. While Alexander is clear that all of these forms have their place, the first three  often account for the bulk of classroom talk. The less frequently used last two   particularly dialogue  have the greatest cognitive potential and are the basis of  enacting the dialogic principles set out in Section 4.4. Related to this, Nystrand et al 2003, p 178 make a distinction between  discussion as open-ended conversational exchange of ideas largely absent of  questions and dialogue as engaged student questions and an absence of teacher  test questions, noting that the two often overlap. However, in their analysis of  extensive data gathered from over 200 US middle and high school classrooms,  79 per cent of observed episodes had neither discussion nor dialogue and only 2  per cent had both. These rare dialogic spells were characterised by: 	 increased interest and enthusiasm of pupils; 	 discourse building on past contributions; 	 pupils asking questions;

C h a p t e r   4    T h e  d i a l o g i c  c l a s s r o o m   47
47 	 teachers refraining from asking questions testing recall; 	 pupils answering questions with little prompting or without being  individually chosen. A very different, but complementary, perspective to this large-scale quantitative  analysis is provided by researchers such as Skidmore and Murakami 2012 who  closely examine transcripts of dialogue to note the teachers complex balancing  act. This often involves initiation through a question or problem involving  many possible viewpoints, the accommodation of pupils diverse ideas and the  maintenance of engagement in a collective exploration. Drawing on a wide range  of qualitative studies, Reznitskaya and Gregory 2013 summarise characteristics  of the talk within dialogic classrooms. They suggest that cognitive and linguistic  tools for effective engagement in reasoned argumentation are developed through: 	 teachers asking open-ended questions geared towards enquiry; 	 pupils articulating a position on an issue and backing this up with reasoning; 	 pupils making lengthy contributions, explaining their thinking; 	 teachers and pupils engaging in meta-level talk, with reflection on dialogue  itself; 	 teachers providing meaningful feedback to prompt further enquiry; 	 teachers building on pupils answers and seeking elaboration; 	 pupils building on their peers contributions in coherent lines of inquiry,  listening to one another and responding accordingly. As you will see, there is a degree of consensus over these characteristics but  they ask a great deal of the teachers expertise. The next section explores what  is known about achieving this goal. 4.6 What does research suggest about the impact of  dialogic practices? Practices found to promote dialogic talk One way to consider and evaluate dialogic teaching is to accept the case made in  Chapter 2 about the importance of talk in childrens learning, as well as the valuebased arguments introduced in this chapter, and to focus simply on evidence on  promoting dialogic talk, presuming this to be a desirable outcome in its own right. Some studies have focused on establishing dialogic practices in the classroom  through structured programmes of intervention. For example, Alexander 2008  summarises findings from two research projects in London and Yorkshire with 
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
48 primary and lower secondary pupils. These projects eg Alexander, 2004 used a  combination of training, advisory work, documentation and video analysis in an  attempt to embed dialogic talk across schools. While outcomes were somewhat  mixed, often relating to fidelity to the programme, there were broadly positive  developments in the quality of talk, such as extended contributions from  pupils, less teacher direction and longer chains of interaction. As an example  of a similar outcome, improvements in communicative competence among  early years pupils were found in an experimental study involving a six week  intervention in the Netherlands Van der Veen et al, 2017. Notwithstanding the  challenges also identified, these studies suggest that significant improvements  in talking practice are achievable through a structured intervention project. In contrast, Mercer et al 2009 conducted a study that raised participants  awareness of whole-class dialogic practices, but refrained from a formal  programme of intervention. This yielded talk that was plentiful and often  productive, but rarely met the criteria for dialogic interaction. Mercer et al  2009 contrast this more general talk with evidence of dialogic talk stimulated  by what they call talking points, or provocative statements to debate eg The  moon changes shape because it is in the shadow of the earth . This device has  much in common with the concept cartoons developed by Naylor and Keogh  2013 some 20 years ago, in which high quality dialogue is developed through  presenting alternative viewpoints  including erroneous ones  on everyday  situations related to scientific concepts. The implication is that a talk stimulus  reflecting differing viewpoints may be particularly powerful. Khong et al 2017, in a review of research on classroom talk, identify the  creation of a culture of enquiry as one of three approaches taken to developing  dialogic talk the others being the training of teachers, as seen in this section,  and the training of pupils, which will feature in Chapter 5. In an enquiry-based  classroom, dialogic talk becomes a logical by-product of the curriculum itself.  This model of learning through enquiry is often associated with Wells 1999  who proposed learning through a five-step process of: 	1.	 responding to a launch stimulus and elicitation of questions; 	2.	 researching; 	3.	 interpreting evidence; 	4.	 presenting findings; 	5.	 reflecting on the process.

C h a p t e r   4    T h e  d i a l o g i c  c l a s s r o o m   49
49 As previously cited in 4.4, the data from extensive enquiry-oriented projects reported  by Wells and Arauz 2006 suggests real benefits for dialogic talk. It is notable that  Wells data, like many other studies cited, comes from the science classroom. While  his vision is a broader one, based on discipline-based forms of inquiryin all areas of  human activity Wells, 1999, p 163, not all subjects are as inherently associated with  enquiry. While there are examples of curricula beyond science which are organised  around enquiry, such as the International Baccalaureate Organizations programmes  IBO, 2013, this remains relatively unusual. Other researchers have focused on a close analysis of whole-class interaction  to identify particular triggers for dialogic talk. Returning to the extensive  quantitative analysis of English and social studies classrooms in the US  by Nystrand et al 2003, certain teacher and pupil moves are found to be  associated with creating the conditions for dialogic spells. These are outlined in  Table 4c, using the analogy of building a fire. Table 4c Three factors in dialogic discourse adapted from Nystrand  et al, 2003 Teacher primes the class  for dialogic discourse: the  kindling Creating the conditions, for example by:  posing a provocative question;  soliciting ideas and opening up the floor;  withholding evaluation of ideas;  encouraging pupils to respond to one another. Pupil respond in an  engaged way: the spark Taking up the teachers bid, for example by:  freely voicing their ideas;  asking their own questions;  building on others questions to form clusters of  pupil questions. Open discussion breaks  out: the ignition Critical discourse begins, for example featuring:  teacher and pupils co-constructing their  understanding;  teacher stepping back and just keeping the  discussion flowing;  questioning and transmitting information  giving way to working out ideas jointly.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
50 What this analogy highlights once again is the importance of creating a dialogic  culture, rather than simply focusing on talk itself. Dialogic talk and impact on attainment It seems clear, then, that there is evidence for specific practices which  promote dialogic forms of talk. However, a pertinent question, particularly in  an international climate of competition, standardisation and accountability  Sahlberg, 2016, is whether there is firm evidence for the impact of dialogic  teaching on attainment more directly. In the Van der Veen et al 2017 study  mentioned in Section 4.6, for example, the improvements in communication  were not accompanied by greater improvements in subject-matter knowledge  in post-intervention tests. As Reznitskaya et al 2009 argue, large-scale,  empirical evidence for the impact of dialogic approaches on educational  outcomes beyond the quality of talk itself has been relatively scarce. Some evidence for impact of dialogic approaches on attainment has been found  in US classrooms. Applebee et al 2003 examined lesson footage of 974 pupils  in Grades 711 across 19 schools, looking for any correlation between features  of dialogic instruction and raised literacy attainment. Dialogic episodes were  evidenced by: 	 open discussion between at least three participants; 	 authentic teacher questions without a pre-specified answer; 	 uptake of a previous speakers ideas. These researchers found very consistent results Applebee et al, 2003 relating  high academic demand and discussion-based approaches to performance  in literacy tests across a range of ages, pupil backgrounds and school types.  Notable in both these examples is an emphasis not on the amount of talk, but  on the quality of collective co-construction of meaning. More recently, OConnor  et al 2015 report on the findings of interventions in Grades 47 mathematics  lessons. An initial large-scale, talk-rich intervention with some 500 pupils  over four years led to significant improvements on subsequent tests. This was  then probed further in a small-scale controlled study based on the sorts of talk  moves Michaels and OConnor, 2015 discussed in Chapter 3. Even when taught  by the same teacher, pupils attainment, when compared with traditional direct  instruction, was significantly higher in the groups taught. In the UK, Howe et al 2019 undertook a large study capturing naturally  occurring talk in 72 primary classes and found two forms of teacherpupil  dialogue to be positively associated with performance on mathematics and  English tests though not on tests of science and reasoning, so long as pupil 

C h a p t e r   4    T h e  d i a l o g i c  c l a s s r o o m   51
51 participation was also high. These two powerful forms of dialogue, seen by  the authors as relatively straightforward and manageable for teachers to  promote, were: 	 elaboration: building on, elaborating, evaluating or clarifying a contribution; 	 querying: doubting, disagreeing with, challenging or rejecting a statement. It is notable that these forms have much in common with the categories  of uptake and authentic questioning found by Applebee et al 2003,  mentioned above. Dialogic teaching has also been evaluated for its impact on attainment through  a randomised control trial RCT in 38 UK schools as part of a wider evaluation  project EEF, 2017. The intervention, devised by Robin Alexander and based on  his model of dialogic teaching Alexander, 2017, featured a training programme  and then a two term implementation in Year 5 classrooms. In subsequent tests,  pupils in the intervention group made additional progress of two months in  English and science and one month in mathematics. While Alexanders 2018  own reflections on the RCT highlight a number of methodological limitations,  the results, achieved at relatively low cost, are encouraging nonetheless.  Alongside these outcomes, however, comes recognition again that fully  embedding dialogic teaching approaches requires longer-term engagement  EEF, 2017, a finding in line with previous arguments for an embedded dialogic  classroom culture. While Alexander acknowledges that isolated elements of  dialogic practice, or fairly brief interventions such as this, can have positive  effects, he strongly asserts that dialogic teaching, in his conception, is a total  pedagogy Alexander, 2018, p 31 involving a more fundamental shift of values  and practices. There are also examples of pedagogical practices which, while not explicitly  positioned as dialogic, nevertheless fulfil many of the same criteria. One such  initiative is a series of research-based resources from Kings College, London,  aimed at cognitive acceleration of pupils in mathematics and science. These  programmes, such as Cognitive Acceleration through Science Education  CASE, are based on three principles: the Piagetian idea of cognitive conflict,  Vygotskian social interaction and metacognitive reflection. Lessons feature  subtly guided activities, beginning with concrete preparation and centred on  conflict resolution through collaboration and dialogue, which are then linked, or  bridged into the broader science curriculum Adey and Shayer, 2015. In terms  of the commitment to enquiry, reasoning and co-construction of meaning  through talk, CASE and its related programmes bear the hallmarks of dialogic  teaching.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
52 The effect on attainment of the resulting materials, published as Thinking  Science Adey et al, 2003 has been impressive. For example, Shayer 1999  reports on cohorts of pupils followed over several years who showed  improvements in attainment that were sustained not only immediately after  the CASE lessons, but in national tests two years after the intervention and  which were evident in English and mathematics as well as science itself.  Similar long-term and transferable impacts on attainment are reported from  the subsequent Cognitive Acceleration in Mathematics Education CAME  projects with both primary and secondary age groups Adey and Shayer, 2015.  Nevertheless, it is notable that, amidst their reports of success, it is clear  that this is a substantial commitment: sustained use  the programmes are  designed as two year interventions  and teacher professional development are  essential to their success. Furthermore, challenges for teachers, as they probe  for reasoning and steer discussions contingently may be considerable Oliver  and Venville, 2015. In the following case study, a teacher grapples with some of  the challenges of implementing these cognitive acceleration principles within  his lessons. Case study A science teacher begins to implement Thinking Science Mark was a secondary-school science teacher. A few years into his career, he  found himself becoming dissatisfied with his pupils somewhat superficial  approach to learning  often strategically focused on test performance   and was looking for ways to promote deeper thinking within his lessons. He  heard from a local university about CASE and the Thinking Science materials,  attended some training and decided to try this out in his Years 7, 8 and 9 biology  classes. Mark proceeded cautiously at first, retaining much of his usual practice,  but planning a few of his lessons each week based on the CASE principles the  intervention involved 30 lessons over two years. Each lesson began with a challenging problem to consider, centring on a  practical or concrete experience designed to induce a degree of cognitive  conflict. CASE emphasises social construction of understanding, so Mark  needed to plan for opportunities for talk and the sharing of pupils ideas. He  understood that he needed to allow pupils to direct their own enquiry through  this discussion as they worked on the problems, but he initially found it difficult  to refrain from offering answers and closing down the dialogue. At times, the  awkward pauses, as he stopped himself from giving immediate feedback,  were uncomfortable for teacher and pupils alike and it became clear that this  sort of lesson would involve a shift in classroom culture that would take time. 

C h a p t e r   4    T h e  d i a l o g i c  c l a s s r o o m   53
53 Gradually, pupils became more accustomed to this form of interaction and their  reasoning and awareness of the learning process were much more evident,  but this presented a new challenge. Mark found that he was often having to  improvise his responses and interventions rapidly, placing great demands  on his subject knowledge, as lessons proceeded in unexpected directions.  A further issue Mark encountered was that the freedom to work collaboratively  and largely independently of the teacher gave potential for misconceptions  to arise. As a result, Mark planned lessons around a series of shorter episodes,  allowing authentic discussion but building in frequent plenary moments. These  allowed him to draw together progress and help the class to reach a consensus  reflecting correct scientific understanding, before moving onto a new  phase of discussion. Towards the end of the first year, changes were already  becoming evident. Mark had begun to incorporate some new habits into his  traditional lessons, allowing pupils more opportunity to struggle with their own  explanations and discuss answers with peers. Pupils themselves saw value, not  only in the Thinking Science lessons, but in their work across the curriculum. Commentary Marks shifts of practice in this example have much in common with  Alexanders 2017 vision of a dialogic classroom. A far more collective,  reciprocal and supportive lesson format emerged, as pupils and teacher jointly  considered these problems and more space was allowed for pupils voices.  The tensions Mark encountered relating to pupil misconceptions and his  own subject knowledge relate in particular to Alexanders cumulative and  purposeful criteria. What seems clear is that dialogic teaching requires fidelity  to a programme and that long-term impact most likely involves a change of  culture. This may be difficult to enact in the short-term or in isolation but, even  in a diluted form, dialogic practices may seep quickly into other learning for  both teachers and pupils. In the next section research on some of these issues  is considered in more depth. 4.7 What are the challenges of dialogic teaching? Despite the evidence for the benefits of dialogic teaching, it is also clear that  this is far from straightforward to enact. Snell and Lefstein 2018 identify five  key issues in their review of the research literature: 	1.	 the lack of time in a crowded curriculum geared towards  high-stakes tests; 	2.	 the necessary culture shift in terms of views on knowledge, authority and  learning;
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
54 	3.	 the durability of existing practices; 	4.	 the demands placed on teacher knowledge and flexibility; 	5.	 the clash with embedded pupil identities, particularly around ability. Challenges for the learner Snell and Lefstein argue that there is a tension between the inclusive ideals of  dialogic pedagogies and the tendency to label some pupils as low ability and  incapable of rising to the cognitive challenges of the dialogic classroom. This is  reinforced by Sedova et al 2014 whose research found only the most motivated  and gifted pupils participating in this sort of talk. While Sedova et al suggest  either withdrawing low-track students or lowering the challenge level for all,  this is called into question by the large-scale study by Applebee et al 2003  who found benefits of dialogic teaching for all levels of attainment. The key  problem, they suggest is instead one of expectations and a lack of opportunity,  as discussion-based approaches have not been widely tried for what they term  lower track pupils. A further issue pertaining to all learners emerges from insights from cognitive  science into the process of learning. Kirschner et al 2006, in a summary of  research into instruction involving minimal guidance, claim that all forms of  enquiry-based learning make heavy demands on working memory and that  such approaches are largely ineffective for pupils learning new concepts. Novel  information, they argue, needs to be taught explicitly through processes such  as worked examples. One perspective on these ideas about memory is that of  cognitive load theory. This implies that teachers need to minimise unnecessary,  or extraneous, cognitive load in the form of, for example, redundant  information or the need to attend to multiple sources of information Sweller,  2016. It is immediately clear that this raises questions about the cultivation in  a dialogic classroom of a community of enquiry with its potential for divergent  collective thinking. However, it is all too easy for such debates to become  polarised. The principles of introducing novel information through teacher-led  instruction and grounding higher-level debate and thought in prerequisite prior  knowledge are not incompatible with a broader dialogic approach. Indeed, they  align with the shifts between authoritative and dialogic approaches discussed  in Section 4.4 Scott and Mortimer, 2006 and an assumption that effective  enquiry is based on extensive teacher scaffolding Hmelo-Silver et al, 2007. The  main implication of these ideas, therefore, may be more about the choice of a  communicative style fitting for a given stage in a learning sequence, rather than  a binary choice between ideological positions.

C h a p t e r   4    T h e  d i a l o g i c  c l a s s r o o m   55
55 Challenges for the teacher As shown in Chapter 3, IRF is highly resilient. Reznitskaya and Gregory 2013  argue that, due to the patchiness of the research, teachers commonly underestimate the challenges involved and so it is important to acknowledge  these obstacles openly. With this awareness, Alexander 2017 proposes a  constructive way forward. Rather than discussing deficits, Alexander re-frames  them as dilemmas, often centred on striking a balance between approaches  like questioning and telling, or open discussion and teacher-led discussion.  Alexander argues that such matters of judgment concerning the form of talk  have been shown through research to be amenable to change. He therefore  divides his five fundamental principles into two groups. Three of the principles  relate to this form and culture of talk: building collective, reciprocal and  supportive classrooms; the other two  cumulative and purposeful  concern  the content of talk. Achieving cumulative, and thereby purposeful, talk is,  he suggests, often under-emphasised in research and is where the greatest  challenges lie. Alexander therefore proposes a phased approach, as shown in  Table 4d. 4.8 Summary Dialogic teaching, for many, goes beyond talk to reflect a wider educational  value-system centred on an egalitarian and participatory view of learning. It  involves creating a classroom ethos based on dialogue, collective problemsolving and a co-construction of understanding. While classroom talk may  at times need to be teacher-led and authoritative, a dialogic stance can  nevertheless be maintained, based on a commitment to communal inquiry.  Table 4d A two phase process adapted from Alexander, 2017 Phase 1 Talk that is:  collective;  reciprocal;  supportive. Establishing the conditions, by creating the  appropriate ethos and dynamics Phase 2 Talk that is:  cumulative;  purposeful. Structuring and sequencing content to  meaningful ends, through teachers skilled  and flexible responses and interventions
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
56 Dialogic talk can be developed effectively in schools through structured  intervention programmes and can be initiated in classrooms through particular  forms of stimulus. Dialogic teaching has been shown to have benefits, not just  for the quality of talk itself, but for attainment in various subjects and pupils  metacognitive capacities. Nevertheless, it remains a challenging form of  pedagogy to enact well. Questions for enquiry in your own school 	 What might you change in your school or classroom culture that would help  to develop a dialogic stance in the approach to the ownership of learning? 	 Which aspects of the forms of dialogic talk covered in this chapter  collective, reciprocal and supportive are already in evidence in your  setting? 	 Do pupils of all attainment levels have the same access to learning through  high-quality discussion? Exploring further This paper by Robin Alexander offers a useful summary of his model of dialogic  teaching, as well as the recent evaluation discussed in this chapter: 	 Alexander, R 2018 Developing Dialogic Teaching: Genesis, Process, Trial.  Research Papers in Education, 335: 56198. Robin Alexanders site has a multitude of links related to dialogic teaching: 	 www.robinalexander.org.uk accessed 17 May 2019. The Lets Think website provides resources associated with cognitive  acceleration, as discussed in the case study: 	 www.letsthink.org.uk accessed 17 May 2019.
C h a p t e r   5    P r o m o t i n g  p r o d u c t i v e  p e e r   t a l k   57 Chapter 5 Promoting productive peer talk  and collaboration 5.1 Chapter overview This chapter will outline: 5.2	 the different contexts for peer dialogue; 5.3	 the different kinds of peer talk; 5.4	 how pupils make sense together through peer talk; 5.5	 the evidence for the benefits of peer talk; 5.6	 how productive peer talk can be promoted; 5.7	 the challenges associated with peer talk. 5.2 What are the different contexts for peer dialogue? In Chapters 3 and 4, the focus has been mainly on whole-class interaction,  but this represents only one of a number of modes of classroom talk. To go  alongside the various forms of teaching talk introduced in the previous chapter,  Alexander 2017 also offers, in his list of teachers repertoires, a variety of  organisational contexts for talk. As well as teacherclass and teacherpupil  interaction, he draws attention to: 	 collective group work teacher-led; 	 collaborative group work pupil-led; 	 one-to-one pupil pairs. This chapter focuses on the interaction between pupils, which may be  prompted to some extent by teachers, but is largely between peers, either  in pairs or small groups. To return to the ideas introduced in Chapter 2, a  distinction is made between a social constructivist interest in collaboration  as the means to individual development and a sociocultural interest in  collaboration in terms of learning as a group Edwards, 2009. In the focus here  on the latter, it is important to acknowledge that not all peer talk in classrooms  is directly related to planned-for learning. For example, Janet Maybins 2006 

newgenprepdf
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
58 work provides evidence of rich meaning-making and identity-building among  peers in informal interactions within the school setting. Peer discussion is closely related to the broader concept of co-operative  learning, in which pupils work together on academic tasks. While this is largely  beyond the scope of this book, the nature of peer group organisation does  have relevance. Alexander 2017, p 14 is among those who have noted in UK  classrooms: the seeming paradox of children working everywhere in groups but  rarely as groups. Considering contexts for dialogue in peer groups as a tool for  learning, Cazden 2001 suggests that pupils commonly take on four intellectual  roles in pair or small group activities, as shown in Table 5a. Each of these roles is likely to result in a particular kind of talk with  implications for the way in which the conditions for this are created.  Spontaneous helping implies informal, unstructured interaction; assigned  tutoring and reciprocal critique may be highly structured, bounded roles;  collaborative problem-solving may be more open and highly complex in both  social and cognitive terms. In the sections to follow, you will find out more about  the most productive forms of peer talk and how to promote them. 5.3 What kinds of peer talk are there? Categorising talk Looking more closely at peerpeer talk, attempts have been made, through  close scrutiny of transcripts, to categorise commonly occurring talk. One  of the most influential typologies arose from detailed classroom research  Table 5a Intellectual roles in peer group work adapted from Cazden, 2001 Spontaneous  helping Pupils sharing informal requests and offers of help in the  course of everyday classroom activities Assigned teaching  or tutoring Pupils being empowered as experts in order to tutor peers  on a specific, pre-learned topic Reciprocal critique Pupils providing constructive feedback to one another on  ongoing work Collaborative  problem-solving Pupils collaborating on a task often based on articulated  social norms, sharing of ideas and challenge of others  ideas

C h a p t e r   5    P r o m o t i n g  p r o d u c t i v e  p e e r   t a l k   59
59 on 811 year-olds carried out in the 1990s. This led to a three-part model of  how peers in a classroom commonly interact Mercer and Littleton, 2007  summarised in Table 5b. Table 5b Three ways of talking and thinking adapted from Mercer and  Littleton, 2007 Hallmarks Verbal features Disputational talk Disagreement and  individualised decisionmaking; little constructive  criticism or pooling of  resources Short exchanges based on  assertions and challenges Cumulative talk Building positively  but uncritically on  others contributions;  construction of common  knowledge Repetitions, confirmations,  elaborations Exploratory talk Critical and constructive  engagement with ideas;  joint consideration of  ideas; active participation  from all Justifications and  alternatives offered;  opinions sought; explicit  reasoning This framework has an evaluative dimension, as it implies that not all forms  of peer talk are equally valuable. Disputational and cumulative talk are,  in different ways, likely to be unproductive as vehicles for thinking, while  exploratory talk, discussed in the next section, offers rich potential for coconstructing understanding. Other typologies of peer talk eg Keefer et al, 2000,  similarly distinguish between disagreement, consensus and more productive  considerations of different viewpoints. Considering cumulative talk specifically,  two things are striking. One is the issue of terminology. As seen in Section  4.4, cumulative talk  as an outcome of collective thinking  is a cornerstone  of Alexanders 2017 vision of the dialogic classroom, but the term is used  somewhat differently here to refer to an uncritical acceptance of others views.  The other is that harmony and early consensus are not necessarily desirable.  Productive thinking in groups depends on subjecting ideas to robust challenge  and the consideration of alternative perspectives.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
60 Before turning to exploratory talk in more detail, it is important to note that  Mercer and Littleton 2007 are clear that this model centres on academically  productive peer talk and makes no attempt to analyse other social or affective  functions. This is taken up in some ways by Maybins 2006 ethnographic  work on 1012 year-old pupils. She identifies both duets among friends, in  which peers contributions overlap and become almost indistinguishable, and  conflictual talk, in which peers compete for the conversational floor. While  these forms have echoes of cumulative and disputational talk respectively,  they perhaps underline the fact that exploratory talk is much less likely to  occur spontaneously. Nevertheless, fairly unstructured collaborative dialogue  between friends may still be highly productive. Indeed, Vass et al 2014 argue  that reasoning has been over-emphasised in evaluations of peer talk. They  draw on transcripts from paired creative writing work to show how emotionbased connectivity leads to rich interaction through moments of, for example,  humour, exuberance, shared frames of reference and enjoyment of content and  process. Exploratory talk Exploratory talk, then, is a form of dialogue with particular potential for  learning. Mercer 2000, p 98 defines it as: That form of talk in which partners engage critically but constructively  with each others ideas. Relevant information is offered for joint  consideration. Proposals may be challenged and counter-challenged, but  if so reasons are given and alternatives are offered. Agreement is sought  as a basis for joint progress. Knowledge is made publicly accountable  and reasoning is visible in the talk. Mercer and Littleton 2007, p 66 refer to this as: a distinctive social mode of  thinking, thereby emphasising its role as a collective thought process. While  exploratory talk is usually associated with peer interaction, you may notice  some of the hallmarks of accountable talk introduced in Chapter 3 Michaels  et al, 2008 and also of the wider dialogic stance discussed at whole-class level  in Chapter 4 Wells and Arauz, 2006. Although popularised as part of the model discussed at the start of this section,  the concept of exploratory talk is also commonly identified with the earlier  work of Douglas Barnes. Barnes 1976; 2008 draws attention to the tentative,  hypothetical tone of this mode of peer-oriented talk, contrasting it with final  draft, or presentational speech, presented publicly for a teachers approval  and valuable in its own right as a strand of oracy. Unlike presentational talk,  exploratory talk is provisional and potentially cognitively liberating if teachers  allow it time and space. The question of audience is a critical one, since Barnes 

C h a p t e r   5    P r o m o t i n g  p r o d u c t i v e  p e e r   t a l k   61
61 suggests that formulating explanations and arguments for a listener who does  not already know the answers is much more powerful than presenting to a  teacher who has the authority of presumed expertise. This idea, of habitually  being required to explain, links to a recent meta-analysis of 64 studies on selfexplanation Bisra et al, 2018. This long-established principle, found to be a  powerful learning strategy, involves prompting pupils to explain a concept they  are studying. Although, in this case, the explanation is not shared with others,  the process of having to formulate an explanation, even hypothetically for  another, has some parallels with the reasoning used in exploratory talk and has  implications for the use of peer talk in classrooms. 5.4 How do learners make sense together through  peer talk? The workings of exploratory talk have been further explored in a variety of  ways. Fernndez et al 2015, based on studies of groups of pupils in the UK  and Mexico, argue that, through exploratory talk, peers can exhibit as a group  all of the features of a scaffolding role usually attributed to an adult or more  knowledgeable other in asymmetrical talk. Unpacking this mutual scaffolding  further, Littleton and Mercer 2013 identify three process at work in what they  term interthinking: 	1.	 appropriation  learning strategies from peers that can then be applied  independently; 	2.	 co-construction  creating new ideas and strategies through collective  reasoning that surpasses an individuals capabilities; 	3.	 transformation  developing transferable metacognitive understanding  about individual reasoning. The last of these, they argue, is particularly powerful because it concerns the  impact of social experience on subsequent individual cognition. A number of researchers have attempted to explore in detail the specific  mechanisms of this process of collective sense-making. Barnes and Todd 1977  identify four categories of collaborative move associated with productive  learning: 	1.	 initiating  introducing a new topic; 	2.	 eliciting  inviting contributions from others; 	3.	 extending  building on one anothers ideas; 	4.	 qualifying  airing complexities, limitations and contradictions.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
62 In addition to talking about the content of the learning, exploratory talk may  also feature utterances which serve to regulate the discourse process itself.  Gillies 2016 expands on this idea of teachable strategies. She draws on  extracts from science enquiry work from pupils trained in dialogic strategies  to identify  alongside non-verbal strategies such as open body language and  encouraging sounds  the verbal strategies seen in Table 5c. The following case study shows an instance of exploratory talk in a Year 8  classroom. Case study History classroom: exploratory talk extract  Pupils have been given the task of matching and then sequencing pictures and  captions relating to the slave trade. One stage of the triangle of trade is missing  and must be added and explained. Table 5c Verbal strategies to teach pupils Strategy to be taught Gillies,  2016 Example opener Asking open questions How might we? Paraphrasing or re-voicing key  ideas So what you are suggesting is Summarising the main points of  a process So far weve found out that Using empathic listening skills It sounds like you found it hard to Clarifying misperceptions Im not sure what you mean by. Assertively expressing a point  of view I see what you mean but instead we could  try Offering suggestions tentatively Would it be worth considering this as a  plan? Offering self-disclosure When that happened to me, I felt

C h a p t e r   5    P r o m o t i n g  p r o d u c t i v e  p e e r   t a l k   63
63 Ben	 What does this say? Captured and taken to the coast. Nathan	 Where does it go then? Ben	 It goes with this, so thats the first one I think. Kiran	 Wait, how about we put all the captions with pictures first? Nathan	 Yeah, then well seeso, wait, I can see already what the  missing one is. Its where they sell the slaves in England.  That  what do you call it? Kiran	 Auction. Yeah but Ben	 Yeah, the auction where they choose the best ones. Nathan	 No, wait, they dont get sold in England, do they? Ben	 Yeah, it was places like Liverpool, remember? Kiran	 No it started there, but the slaves were working in the West  Indies at the end werent they? So thats where they sold them. Nathan	 So, hang onthe boat started in Liverpool but not with slaves? Ben	 Where do the slaves come in? Weve got this picture where  theyre on the big ship  the one with them all crowded in. Nathan	 Oh yes, they were in Africa first. Thats where they were  captured. Is that what you mean, Ben? Kiran	 Yeah, they came from Africa but got sold in those places like  Jamaica. We all need to agree this, so are we agreeing now?  This is where they are captured, this is on the boat and this is  in the fields? Ben	 So we are saying the auction is the missing one and it  goes here? Nathan	 Yeah, the auction, definitely. And what do we need to say  about that? What can be seen in this brief extract is a hint of the tentative dialogue  characteristic of exploratory talk, as the exchange builds towards a purposeful  outcome. There are some collaborative moves as, for example, Ben builds on  Nathans understanding of an auction and Nathan elicits more detail from Kiran  about the capture of the slaves. There is also some evidence of meta-talk in  Kirans attempts to keep the task on track with strategies like matching pictures  with captions, summarising and seeking consensus. What these pupils would  benefit from now is a greater focus on extending and qualifying ideas.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
64 5.5 What evidence is there for the benefits of peer talk? Fostering productive talk in group situations can be complex. It is reasonable,  therefore, to consider what evidence exists for benefits arising from highquality peer discussion, particularly as monitoring groups for productive talk  has been deemed an under-researched area Howe, 2014; Reznitskaya et al,  2009. In this section, the evidence arising from three specific programmes  centred on this form of pedagogy is considered. Mercer and Littleton 2007 offer a variety of findings related to the use of  exploratory talk using the Thinking Together approach, which has resulted  in a range of teaching materials for various age groups. Thinking Together  is a programme based on establishing ground rules and delivering carefully  structured group discussion lessons. The independent group work component,  centred on specific activity stimuli provided, is framed by teacher-led wholeclass introductions and concluding plenary discussions and the materials  have subsequently been published as teacher guides eg Dawes et al, 2004.  Mercer and Littleton 2007 report on four main studies over a number of years,  on pupils between the ages of 6 and 14, comparing intervention to control  groups. Following participation in Thinking Together lessons, they show, for  example, increased attainment in English assessments for Year 8 pupils and  improved performance in science, mathematics and reasoning tests for Year 5  pupils. This UK team has also collaborated with colleagues in Mexico. Through  similar interventions, improved performance among Mexican pupils has been  found on reasoning tests Rojas-Drummond and Mercer, 2003 and reading  comprehension assessments Rojas-Drummond et al, 2014, showing the  potential for this approach to transcend cultures. Looking beyond the specific Thinking Together materials, exploratory talk  has also been evaluated in South African secondary science classrooms  through a similar process of teacher professional development and lessons  based on discussion-rich activities. Webb et al 2017 report on a number of  studies carried out in this context, based on a rigorous experimental design.  A consistent finding was that the exploratory talk in science led to transferable  gains, beyond science itself, in reasoning tests. This is seen as significant, as  it is an example of far transfer, or the application of learning to a new task,  different in either content or context from where the original learning took  place Barnett and Ceci, 2002. Webb at al 2017 speculate that this transfer  may be due to features of exploratory talk that are consistent with current  knowledge about learning science, such as learning dialogue routines that help  to manage working memory capacity.

C h a p t e r   5    P r o m o t i n g  p r o d u c t i v e  p e e r   t a l k   65
65 While exploratory talk is often associated with independent interaction among  peers, other programmes fit more closely with Alexanders 2017 category of  teacher-led collective group work. Researchers in the US have developed an  approach known as Collaborative Reasoning Clark et al, 2003, which shares  many features with Philosophy for Children Lipman, 1998, a programme which  will be discussed in depth in Chapter 6. Collaborative Reasoning is based on a  seven-step process whereby pupils discuss a provocative question, sometimes  involving a moral dilemma, arising from their reading of a story. They explain  and elaborate on their views, challenge others ideas and finally vote and review  the discussion. Apart from providing the initial stimulus, the teacher has only  a facilitating role and pupils are free to make reasoned contributions, openly  building on one anothers ideas Reznitskaya et al, 2009. Collaborative Reasoning has been extensively researched. Sun et al 2015  summarise a number of studies showing the development of argument skills  and problem-solving strategies, which were found to transfer to new contexts,  while the meta-analysis of discussion-based comprehension activities by  Murphy et al 2009, points towards gains in not only basic comprehension,  but high-level critical thinking. Reznitskaya et als 2009 findings include  improved individual performance transferring to subsequent reflective writing  tasks among Grade 4 and 5 pupils. The basis of this transfer of learning is the  principle that pupils are developing through this structured process a schema  for argumentation, through which they internalise this form of discourse, much  like Mercer and Littletons explanation of transformation through exploratory  talk. While Collaborative Reasoning, like Thinking Together, centres on peer  dialogue, regulated to a great extent by pupils themselves, Gillies 2016  highlights the subtle but important role of the teacher, eliciting elaboration,  challenge and review. A further example of peer talk involving some initial teacher facilitation  is Reciprocal Teaching Palinscar and Brown, 1984. In this case, the  object is to improve pupils comprehension of texts. Stimulated, to begin  with, by teacher modelling, pupils learn to regulate their own discussion  through activities which make explicit the process of successful reading  for understanding: summarising, questioning, clarifying and predicting. As  the children grow in confidence, the teacher increasingly withdraws and  responsibility is transferred to the pupils, who take turns as the dialogue leader.  Palinscar and Browns 1984 own initial studies, mainly involving US Grade 7  pupils, found that the Reciprocal Teaching intervention led to improvements,  beyond those of the control groups, not only in the quality of dialogue itself but  in comprehension test scores. These benefits were found within naturalistic  classroom environments and were sustained over time.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
66 Since then, Reciprocal Teaching has been widely evaluated. Hattie 2012, based  on meta-analysis of 38 studies, reports an effect size of 0.74 for this approach,  well above the average of 0.40 and the highest of all the teaching strategies  investigated. Gillies 2016 summarises a number of studies from the last 20  years that report similar, convincing gains in attainment on comprehension  tests, albeit also reflecting some of the challenges involved, such as the  high degree of scaffolding sometimes needed. Another interesting caveat  is offered by McKeown and Beck 2015. They acknowledge the impact on  comprehension of what they broadly term strategies approaches, including  Reciprocal Teaching. However, they also note that this can lead to dialogue that  is heavily focused on process and the enactment of routines, but lacking deep  engagement with the actual meaning and content of the text. The implication  may therefore be that the most powerful impact lies in the transferable benefits,  such as argumentation schema Reznitskaya et al, 2009 encountered earlier.  This echoes Littleton and Mercers 2013 idea of individual transformation  through interthinking, involving the internalisation of externally introduced  routines, in line with the Vygotskian ideas introduced in Chapter 2. 5.6 How can productive peer talk be promoted? Productive group dialogue depends on a variety of factors and is far from  straightforward. Littleton and Mercer 2013, for example, suggest that learners  using exploratory talk need to: 	 freely offer constructive criticism; 	 receive constructive criticism; 	 treat and scrutinise ideas from all with equal respect; 	 share relevant information with the group; 	 justify proposals; 	 seek relevant information from peers; 	 check for agreement on proposals; 	 reflect on the discussion process. The next sections explore what is known about creating the conditions for this  to flourish. While there is an extensive literature around group work and cooperative learning in a wider sense, the focus here is on those aspects germane  to productive discussion.

C h a p t e r   5    P r o m o t i n g  p r o d u c t i v e  p e e r   t a l k   67
67 Structuring peer discussion: the group In their seminal work on small group communication, Barnes and Todd  1977 identify group composition as a central consideration. While there is  consensus on the importance of this, views on the details differ somewhat.  One aspect of this is the size of group which Blatchford et al 2003, reviewing  group work literature, suggest is an under-researched issue. Some researchers  have suggested a maximum of four members Barnes and Todd; 1977; Gillies,  2016. This is consistent with the work of the Social Pedagogic Research into  Group Work SPRinG project with learners aged 514 Baines et al, 2009, which  also stipulated, and saw success with, groups of four. However, while SPRinG  was an extensive, multi-year intervention involving teacher development  and classroom materials, its aim was to develop learning in groups more  generally, rather than directly promoting talk itself. With the aim of generating  exploratory talk more specifically, the Thinking Together materials Dawes et al,  2004 recommend groups of three, to avoid a split into two pairs. Exploratory talk is also influenced by the combination of learners. There is  general agreement that good relationships are fundamental in group work  Baines et al, 2008; Blatchford et al, 2003, but while some have stressed the  importance of working in a group in which a child feels comfortable Barnes  and Todd, 1977, the teams researching exploratory talk explicitly argue against  friendship groups Mercer and Littleton, 2007. This is based on the need to  consider diverse perspectives and avoid uncritical early consensus. In terms of  the optimum mix of abilities within a group recognising that ability implies an  unhelpfully fixed view of potential, there is much less agreement. Nevertheless,  focusing specifically on the talk generated, research by Schmitz and Winskel  2008 on different pairs in Australian Year 6 mathematics lessons found that  exploratory talk is more likely in relatively symmetrical pairings, which avoid  extremes of ability. Similarly, while stability of groupings is often advocated in  terms of general productive group working Baines et al, 2015; Blatchford et al,  2003, for the purposes of exploratory talk, Mercer and Littleton 2007 suggest  children working with a range of partners. These distinctions  between  group work outcomes generally and exploratory talk specifically  reinforce  the special status of exploratory talk as tentative and hypothetical. While  consensus is sought eventually, efficient problem-solving is not the chief aim  and the process may involve hesitations and digressions or, as Barnes 1976, p  28 put it, groping towards a meaning. Structuring peer discussion: ground rules In order to develop these good working relationships among peers, some  attention has been given to the development of ground rules for talking in 
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
68 groups. This is based on an acknowledgement that successful talk requires  children to be taught how to interact appropriately Gillies, 2016. Littleton and  Mercer 2013 point out that patterns of interaction in any social setting are  governed by a distinctive set of norms. In everyday life, these conventions  may be only tacitly agreed but, in the classroom, such ground rules can be  made explicit. In an echo of the hallmarks of exploratory talk listed in Section  5.6, Mercer and Dawes 2008 propose a generic list of ground rules centred on  principles of participation, reasoning, challenge of ideas and joint decisionmaking. Importantly, however, the approach to exploratory talk seen in the  Thinking Together materials involves co-constructing ground rules with  children and then using them as a common reference point for reflecting on  the process of talk Mercer and Littleton, 2007. Collaborative Reasoning also  features ground rules, such as not talking over others, looking at both sides  of an issue and responding to the idea rather than the person Clark et al,  2003. However, in this case, these guidelines are pre-determined rather than  negotiated, reflecting the more structured, process-driven nature of this form of  peer talk. Structuring peer discussion: the task The task itself also needs careful consideration if it is to promote talk. Gillies  2016 reviews a number of studies and identifies features of particularly  productive tasks. Such tasks are likely, for example, to be: open, challenging,  complex, problem-based, ill-structured and lacking obvious procedures and  outcomes. As Gillies points out, pupils have much to gain when working  together on problems like this. In line with this need to provide a task with  a reason to talk together, Mercer et al 2017a, based on their exploratory talk  research, propose four conditions: 	1.	 all participants must need to talk in order to complete the task; 	2.	 activity should encourage co-operation, rather than competition; 	3.	 participants need a shared understanding of the activitys purpose; 	4.	 participants need some awareness of how to use talk in this way. A key point here is perhaps the first: the explicit need for talk as an integral  component of the task. In this vein, Barnes and Todd 1977 emphasises that  teachers need to make clear to learners that they are specifically seeking  different perspectives on an issue and that this process of collective thinking  is valued alongside  or even above  any end product. Howe 2014 reinforces  this idea: reflecting on a range of her previous studies in science spanning ages  from eight to adult, she concludes that progress towards conceptual mastery 

C h a p t e r   5    P r o m o t i n g  p r o d u c t i v e  p e e r   t a l k   69
69 within group tasks hinges on discussing contrasting ideas and that this is the  biggest predictor of knowledge gain Howe, 2014. Similarly, Webb et als 2014  study of primary pupils mathematical problem-solving found that the biggest  predictor of achievement was the level of engagement with, and building on,  other pupils ideas, whether in agreement or not. This accords with the ideas  of cognitive conflict encountered in Chapter 2, of course, but how this mutual  engagement is achieved depends to a great extent on the teacher, who retains  an important role. Structuring peer discussion: the teachers role In considering the role of the teacher, a variety of positions have been proposed.  Some of the forms of peer discussion previously mentioned incorporate a  designated role for the teacher. For example, Reciprocal Teaching requires the  teacher to model the four comprehension activities before gradually ceding  ownership to pupils Palinscar and Brown, 1984, while Collaborative Reasoning  involves the teacher being specifically trained in a process of facilitation Clark  et al, 2003, which may involve regular interjections. In contrast, during tasks  aiming to generate exploratory talk, as enacted through Thinking Together  lessons, the teachers role is much less overt. In these lessons, the emphasis  is instead on the teachers preparatory work. The teachers job is to create a  suitable context, model exploratory talk with the whole class before and after  group work and rehearse the ground rules Mercer and Littleton, 2007. While  Mercer and Littleton acknowledge the need for timely interventions in group  discussions, the teacher is not primarily positioned as a participant. In between these two positions lies an interesting middle ground of responsive,  contingent teacher responses. Gillies 2016 draws on her many studies of group  discussions to show the positive impact on the quality of discussion, but also  reasoning and problem-solving, when teachers are trained in specific linguistic  tools to enhance the talk. She also finds that pupils subsequently adopt for  themselves the discourse modelled by the teacher. In one particular study,  Gillies and Boyle 2008, p 1337 closely examine what they term the mediatedlearning behaviours of some of the teachers who had undergone such training,  as shown in Table 5d. You may notice that these resemble the enquiry questions  at whole-class level introduced in Chapter 3.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
70 Looking more closely, Newman 2017 provides a detailed analysis of one  teachers interventions and draws attention to the skilled switching of  modes. In an echo of the different communicative approaches Mortimer and  Scott, 2003 encountered in Chapter 4, Newman shows how, in the process  of scaffolding and modelling group dialogue, a teacher may move between  transmissive and exploratory contributions and between authoritative and  informal tones. In addition to these examples, Webb et al 2014, reporting on  US primary pupils mathematical problem-solving, draw particular attention to  the power of teacher follow-up comments and questions which prompt pupils  to engage with others ideas and to relate and compare their own ideas. The  teachers role in modelling these expanded responses that draw in and build  on prior contributions has also been found by Rajala et al 2012 to be crucial  in ensuring inclusive, symmetrical forms of group discussion. The common  thread across these positions is the teachers strategic and skilled role in  creating and maintaining the conditions for talk. Case study Embedding the ground rules Conor was keen to develop peer talk with his Year 1 class of 56 year-olds.  A lesson on freezing and melting provided an opportunity for collaborative  problem-solving and Conor approached the introduction of ground rules  Table 5d Teachers mediated-learning behaviours for groups Teacher behaviour Gillies  and Boyle, 2008 Examples of a teachers verbal interventions Challenging questions Probing further: What was? Cognitive questions Asking for reasons: Tell us why Metacognitive questions Thinking about thinking: What do we know so  far? Prompts Moving discussion on: What could you consider  next? Focus on issues Zooming in: Lets look atspecifically. Open questions Eliciting more information: Tell us more about Validation and  acknowledgement of efforts Noting specific achievements: Its great to see  how youve worked well today on

C h a p t e r   5    P r o m o t i n g  p r o d u c t i v e  p e e r   t a l k   71
71 as an ongoing process extending beyond this lesson itself, as seen in the  example below. Table 5e Working with ground rules Providing  a suitable  stimulus Conor knew that an intriguing problem without a single solution  was needed to provoke productive talk. Building on images of the  real life discovery of frozen mammoths preserved in ice, small  toy dinosaurs had been frozen in small pots and then turned out.  The children had to plan how to release the dinosaurs from the  ice without causing damage. Modelling  the issues Conor and his teaching assistant modelled a discussion in which  there were frequent interruptions, unco-operative behaviour and  ultimately a failure to listen to one another. The children were  invited to comment on what had gone wrong. Agreeing  the ground  rules The children were then asked to come up with suggestions for  how this discussion could have been handled better. Conor revoiced where necessary and his teaching assistant scribed the  ideas in a list, including things like: taking turns, letting everyone  have a say and using kind voices. The children were now ready  to talk in groups of three. Noticing  the ground  rules in  action As the planning discussions began, Conor circulated, listening for  examples of good talking, noting down childrens specific phrases  and talk moves. Stopping the class, he was then able to share what  he had noticed, drawing attention to salient features: It was great  to hear Jay saying: Have you thought about how to hold the ice  while it melts? That gives his group a good idea to think about. Valuing  the ground  rules The lesson concluded with a plenary discussion. As well as  asking what had been learned about the subject content melting  and freezing, Conor asked what the children had learned about  talking together and how useful their rules had been. This made  clear to the children that the process of talking was valued  alongside the end product of understanding scientific content. Keeping  the ground  rules alive Conor wanted to build on this early attempt in subsequent  lessons. He had taken photographs of a few groups. He printed  them for display, adding speech bubbles to reflect the appropriate  talk moves he had witnessed. This provided a visual reference  point for future lessons.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
72 What this example illustrates is the way that ground rules can be reinforced  before, during and after an activity, helping to create an ethos going beyond any  one lesson. 5.7 What are the challenges associated with peer talk? The complexity of planning for productive peer talk will already be apparent  from the discussion in Section 5.6. Howe and Abedins 2013 systematic  review of classroom dialogue studies notes that teachers find exploratory talk  extremely difficult to promote. A number of challenges are identified from  this body of research, including the need to educate pupils in the purpose and  procedures of dialogue and the delicate balance required between exploring  diverse views and ensuring curriculum coverage. The second of these points  highlights the use of teachers judgment to identify the moments best suited  to a more open exploration of ideas. While renowned as a proponent of  exploratory talk, Barnes 2008 nevertheless supports this view that carefully  orchestrated group discussion is just one of many forms of classroom  communication: it is a valuable resource in a teachers repertoire but it is not a  universal remedy  p 7. The case for using peer collaboration and dialogue judiciously is reinforced by the  cognitive science insights mentioned in the previous chapter and their warnings  about the additional cognitive load demands of minimally guided approaches  to learning Kirschner et al, 2006. Hatties 2009 extensive meta-analysis of  studies reinforces this point by contrasting interventions involving the teacher  as an activator with those in which the teacher is a facilitator. Overall effect  sizes for interventions in which the teacher plays an active role eg setting clear  goals and providing responsive feedback are far higher than for those based on  a more passive stance. This does not, however, preclude a high-profile role for  peer discussion  indeed, Hatties highest-rated example of a teacher-activated  intervention is Reciprocal Teaching  but it suggests that, along with the role of  the teacher, its structure and its position in a sequence of learning are paramount. Cognitive science has been applied more specifically to peer interaction  by Kirschner et al 2018, who suggest implications for the design of such  activities in order to ensure that the potential advantages of harnessing a  groups collective working memory outweigh the additional cognitive burden  of managing the collaboration itself. Kirschner et al suggest that making  collaboration effective depends on: 	 sufficiently complex tasks that make collaboration worthwhile; 	 clear guidance and support for collaboration; 	 a small group with clearly defined roles;

C h a p t e r   5    P r o m o t i n g  p r o d u c t i v e  p e e r   t a l k   73
73 	 group members with expertise in the subject matter at a similar level; 	 good collaborative skills and prior experience of working together. You will notice that these principles, based on cognitive science, bear out those  arising from other forms of research, as cited in Section 5.6, and that the very  notion of collective working memory has echoes of interthinking, introduced in  Chapter 2 Littleton and Mercer, 2013. 5.8 Summary Children talk to their peers in a variety of contexts within the classroom  but not all forms of discussion are productive. Exploratory talk is a form of  dialogue with particular potential for learning. It involves the co-construction  of meaning through a process of reasoning and challenge, featuring a number  of identifiable and teachable talk moves. Exploratory talk, which may be known  under a variety of names, has been shown to benefit pupils reasoning but also  transferable performance in subject assessments. Productive peer talk depends  on attention to group composition, ground rules, appropriate tasks and the  flexible, responsive role of the teacher. Among the challenges involved are the  need to decide when and how to incorporate peer collaboration discussion as  part of a wider repertoire of classroom activity.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
74 Questions for enquiry in your own school 	 Which learning experiences in your classroom might be most suitable for  promoting peer dialogue? 	 How could you design an activity, or adapt an existing one, in order to  require pupils to speak and share their ideas? 	 What ground rules would your class need in order to be able to engage in  productive dialogue? Exploring further The University of Cambridge team associated with Neil Mercer and colleagues,  as encountered in this chapter, have useful resources for promoting  exploratory talk: 	 https:oracycambridge.orgresources accessed 17 May 2019. The Thinking Together project site also has useful teaching resources: 	 https:thinkingtogether.educ.cam.ac.ukresources accessed 17 May 2019. This book covers many of the principles of exploratory talk and interthinking  more broadly: 	 Littleton, K and Mercer, N 2013 Interthinking: Putting Talk to Work.  Abingdon: Routledge.
C h a p t e r  6    C l a s s r o o m  t a l k  m o d e r n  l e a r n e r   75 Chapter 6 Classroom talk and the twenty-first  century learner 6.1 Chapter overview This chapter will outline: 6.2	 what is meant by learning for the twenty-first century; 6.3	 how classroom talk relates to technology; 6.4	 how classroom talk relates to self-regulated learning and metacognition; 6.5	 how classroom talk relates to critical thinking. 6.2 How does classroom talk relate to ideas about  twenty-first century learning? The increasing globalisation of education noted in Chapter 1 and consequent  policy-borrowing has fuelled long-standing debates about the purpose of  schooling and what is to be taught. For some, this has led to an emphasis on  knowledge-rich curricula and substantive content in an attempt to emulate  the attainment levels of high-performing nations or to promote social  mobility Hirsch, 2009; Young, 2013. Others have argued for a response based  on developing transferable, lifelong skills and dispositions needed for the  workplaces of the future Claxton, 2008; Ritchhart, 2015. Whether any of this is  truly new, or uniquely tied to the twenty-first century, is debatable, of course,  as is setting up these positions as a dichotomy between knowledge and skills.  The two are intertwined: knowledge often becomes understanding through its  application in novel ways, while skill development requires some substantive  content with which to work. From this more integrated perspective, the OECD 2018 have begun to develop  a global learning framework for preparing pupils to thrive in an uncertain  future. This involves the mobilisation of knowledge, skills, attitudes and values  to meet complex demands OECD, 2018, p 5. Among the skills through which  they envisage knowledge will be applied are collaboration  at the heart of  much of this book  but also critical thinking, self-regulation and the use of  technology. It is important to be clear that identifying these skills as significant 

newgenprepdf
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
76 is not to argue for them being taught discretely, or even necessarily in generic,  transferable terms. Indeed, evidence from cognitive science suggests that  the academic content comprising much of schooling biologically secondary  knowledge is highly domain-specific Sweller, 2016 and that skills like critical  thinking are also embedded in content Willingham, 2007. On that basis, this  chapter seeks to explore briefly the relationship and contribution of classroom  talk to these aspects of the framework. 6.3 How does classroom talk relate to technology? Perspectives on talk and technology Cazden 2001 proposes four ways in which technology might intersect with  classroom talk: 	1.	 talk with computers: pupils interacting with computers; 	2.	 talk at computers: pupils interacting with one another at a computer; 	3.	 talk through computers: pupils using technology to interact at a distance; 	4.	 talk in relation to computers: pupils using talk away from the computer  for broader activities in which technology plays a role. While this remains a useful conceptual map, much has changed since 2001,  with technology now playing at least some role in most activities pupils  encounter. A recent review of themes emerging from the research on dialogue  and technology identifies three ways in which digital technology has been  found to enhance dialogue Major et al, 2018, as shown in Table 6a. Teachers will need to judge which of these contributions could equally well  be achieved without technology and which of them  particularly in the  technological affordances category  offer something distinctly different.  Indeed, it could be argued, based on the examples to follow, that there is little  evidence of technology, for all its advantages, having a unique and irreplaceable  impact on talk.

C h a p t e r  6    C l a s s r o o m  t a l k  m o d e r n  l e a r n e r   77
77 Talking with and at computers: technology as a stimulus for talk Wegerif and Dawes 2004 identify the computers potential for promoting  a new type of interaction. In contrast to a version of the limited IRF pattern  discussed in Chapter 3, their important insight from research is that software  can provide an opportunity for an IDRF exchange. The D denotes a discussion  phase, in which pupils sit back from the computer and consider their response.  This signifies a new relationship with the computer, in which pupils appear to  be in control during the discussion activity. In this sense, IDRF also represents  a bridge between Cazdens 2001 talk with and talk at categories: pupils are  interacting with the computer but also with one another. Wegerif 2007  suggests that this represents a computer-supported ZPD. While such a  discussion phase could of course be incorporated into a traditional teacher-led  Table 6a Technology enhancing dialogue adapted from Major et al, 2018 Dialogue  activity  Exposure to alternative perspectives  Co-construction of understanding eg collaborating on, or  sharing, a digital artefact  Expressions of metacognitive learning eg reflecting on own  or others thinking  Scaffolding others understanding pupil to pupil and  teacherpupil Technological  affordances  Creation of a shared dialogic space  Mediating interaction eg sharing content  Externalisation of ideas eg making misconceptions visible  Multimodal delivery of content  Allowing ideas to be adapted and changed  Recording and revisiting of ideas eg sustaining thinking  across lessons Learning  environment  Learner autonomy  Inclusion of learners  Improved sense of community  Improved interpersonal relationships  Learner motivation and engagement
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
78 exchange, Mercer and Littleton 2007 suggest that the added value of the  computer here is its ambivalent and patient contribution. This contrasts with  the fast-paced, exposing and competitive environment that can be a feature of  traditional whole-class recitation episodes. The dialogic space created by the computers role is also a feature of research on  the role of the interactive whiteboard IWB. Various studies have explored the  IWB as a tool for creating a dialogic space, which opens up when two or more  perspectives are held in tension Wegerif, 2007, p 4. Hennessys 2011 studies of  teacher-led IWB use in mainly secondary classrooms, suggest its potential both  for teachers eliciting contrasting ideas and for allowing learners to construct and  work on digital artefacts jointly. The focus on pupils, rather than teachers, use of  the IWB is the subject of research in primary science lessons on categorisation  tasks. This suggests that features of exploratory talk can be generated  through IWB-based activities which allow for externalisation of thinking and  modification of ideas Kershner et al, 2010; Mercer et al, 2017a. As pointed out  by Littleton and Mercer 2013, in the context of primary science, it is the ease of  provisional recording and amendment of ideas which is especially productive.  They characterise such examples as improvable objects which offer a halfway  stage between the ephemerality of talk and the permanence of written texts  Littleton and Mercer, 2013, p 77. The same process of externalising and capturing  otherwise fleeting collaborative talk has also been achieved through the use  of software enabling pupils to voice their ideas through on-screen characters  Wegerif, 2007. In this case, the software was Bubble Dialogue but there are now  many online tools to create similar effects, as shown at the end of this chapter. A further example of technology as a stimulus for talk is provided by Collins  and White 2015. Building on the idea of accountable talk Michaels et al,  2008 introduced here in Chapter 3, they report on the creation of an online  environment providing prompts for different roles, such the evidence manager,  within a group. As well as improvements in generic enquiry skills, pupils were  found to have internalised and understood the various metacognitive strategies  taught, a theme that is developed in Section 6.4. Talking through and at computers: technology as an environment for talk Taking another perspective on the creation of dialogic space, there is a strand  of research examining Computer-Mediated Communication CMC as a form  of dialogue. Asterhan 2015 identifies various advantages of online dialogue  at a distance, including being able to keep track of contributions, improved  participation and reduced inhibition. Others, however, identify potential  limitations such as communicative anxiety caused by the lack of non-verbal  cues and immediate responses Wegerif, 2007 and the way that, while todays 

C h a p t e r  6    C l a s s r o o m  t a l k  m o d e r n  l e a r n e r   79
79 pupils may be very familiar with this mode of interaction, they may not  share with their teachers the same understanding of the appropriate genre of  communication when using technology Kleine Staarman, 2009. As Mercer  and Littleton 2013 point out, the need for agreed ground rules, albeit possibly  different ones from face-to-face contexts, remains. While online dialogue is of relevance in as far as it exhibits many of the features  of peer talk identified in Chapter 5, the focus of this book is firmly on spoken  language. To this end, two forms of CMC may be of particular interest. Firstly,  Asterhan 2015 reports studies cautiously suggesting that skills developed  in online environments might transfer to face-to-face contexts. In one of  these, Iordanou 2013 worked with sixth-grade pupils debating scientific and  social issues via online instant messaging and found that argument skills  subsequently improved in spoken activities compared with control groups.  This improvement is attributed in part to a reduction in complexity since,  in the electronic environment, argument is not complicated by verbal and  social demands. Other powerful examples of CMC blend talking through and  at computers. Wegerif 2007 describes classroom work using the Philosophy  for Children approach found in Section 6.5. The in-class discussions generated  outcomes which were shared via online forums with schools in other countries.  In a similar vein, Cook et al 2019 analyse transcripts of talk within secondary  geography lessons. These lessons involved a microblogging tool as a means  of sharing ideas between different groups within the classroom. This allowed  pupils to interact through the computer but then with their peers face-to-face,  as they considered other groups contributions, thereby providing examples  of all three of Major et als 2018 categories: dialogue activity, technological  affordances and the creation of a new learning environment. Embedding technology effectively While technology has potential, therefore, for promoting classroom talk, a  scoping review by Major et al 2018 also highlights many challenges from the  research in this area. Challenges for pupils include a lack of technical skills,  unhelpful expectations of technology and distraction or frustration arising from  this medium. Challenges for teachers also involve technical skills, as well as a  lack of appropriate resources, the need to foster effective collaboration and a  wide range of pedagogical and managerial issues. The authors note that many of  these challenges are interconnected and often actually centre on generic issues  associated with implementing a dialogic pedagogy. This shift away from a view  of technology as something discrete links to the approach taken in the Thinking  Together lessons discussed in Chapter 5. Computer-based work, in this model, is  set within the broader context of collective thinking activities, so that: It is the  pedagogy that is paramount, not the technology Mercer et al, 2017a, p 11.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
80 The point here is that learning the strategies for effective collaboration and  talk away from the computer first leads to much more productive work at the  computer. Rather than conceptualising computer-based learning as located in  the software, Mercer and Littleton 2007 see it as one embedded component in  a wider relationship involving learners, teacher and activities. This underlines  the argument for a reciprocal relationship: as well as technology enhancing  talk, the development of effective spoken communication strategies enables a  far more productive use of technology. When internalised, these strategies are a  form of self-regulation, which is the subject of the next section. 6.4 How does classroom talk relate to self-regulated  learning and metacognition? What is self-regulated learning and metacognition and why it is  important? Zimmerman 2002, p 65 defines self-regulation as the self-directive process  by which learners transform their mental abilities into academic skills and  suggests this involves cyclical phases of forethought, performance and selfreflection. The EEF 2018b suggests that such self-regulated learning has three  components. 	1.	 Cognition: the mental process of knowing, understanding and learning. 	2.	 Metacognition: the monitoring and directing of ones learning. 	3.	 Motivation: the willingness to apply cognitive and metacognitive skills to  ones learning. At the heart of this is metacognition, a term sometimes used more or less  synonymously with self-regulation and associated particularly with the  1970s work of John Flavell. Flavell 1979 draws attention to metacognitive  knowledge, its application to metacognitive experiences and the enactment of  this awareness through conscious metacognitive strategies directed towards  specific metacognitive goals. Since Flavells early work in this field, a wide range  of evidence attests to the impact of cultivating this form of self-awareness.  Perry et al 2018, in a systematic review of the literature relating to the teaching  of metacognition, find strong evidence of a positive impact on pupil outcomes.  This links to the EEFs 2018a research summary, pointing towards this being a  high-impact and low-cost intervention and with Hatties 2012 meta-analysis  suggesting large effect sizes for approaches related to metacognition. Hattie  2012, however, is clear that many of these strategies are rooted in subject 

C h a p t e r  6    C l a s s r o o m  t a l k  m o d e r n  l e a r n e r   81
81 matter and may not be easily transferable across content domains, while the  EEF 2018a similarly emphasises that the bulk of the evidence available is for  subject-specific work, rather than generic thinking skills. The role of talk in self-regulated learning and metacognition In her review of literature on metacognition, Lai 2011 highlights studies  showing the impact of collaborative or co-operative learning on metacognition  and in a guidance report also drawing on a review of evidence, the EEF 2018b  identifies promoting and developing metacognitive talk as one of its seven  key recommendations. In doing so, the EEF makes an explicit link to dialogic  teaching. Alexander 2017 reinforces this, emphasising that dialogic teaching  involves exploring thought processes as well as content. In line with this, as  well as the repertoires of talk for teaching introduced in Chapter 4, Alexander  2017 also considers talk for learning. Learners, he suggests, should develop  their own repertoire which includes modes such as: explaining, questioning,  speculating, evaluating and negotiating  all of which are likely to enhance  the monitoring and directing of learning associated with metacognition. This  connection is noted by Reznitskaya and Gregory 2013, p 117, who describe  dialogic enquiry as inherently metacognitive. They base this assertion on  dialogic strategies such as: 	 pupils learning to ask peers for clarification during discussion; 	 teachers making learning purposeful by modelling and encouraging  reasoning; 	 pupils learning to evaluate different perspectives by considering open-ended  questions; 	 teachers and pupils making strengths and limitations of pupil reasoning  visible to the whole group. Looking beyond dialogic teaching specifically, you may have noticed that many  other models of productive talk encountered in this book also have distinctly  metacognitive features. Three of many possible examples are considered here. 	1.	 Agreeing ground rules for exploratory talk among peers were discussed  in Section 5.6 and Littleton and Mercer 2013 suggest that childrens  reference back to them aids the transfer of responsibility for coregulation from the teacher to the group. 	2.	 Explicit structure is also a feature of collaborative reasoning, introduced  in Section 5.5. Reznitskaya et al 2009 show how experience with  these scaffolded discussions leads to pupils internalising a schema for 
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
82 argumentation. This includes specific language structures suitable for  reasoning and arguing that can be applied in new situations. 	3.	 The Cognitive Acceleration in Science Education approach explored in  Section 4.6 Adey and Shayer, 2015 has metacognition as one of its three  pillars: each lesson features a teacher-prompted reflection not only on  the learning gained collaboratively but on the learning process itself. These metacognitive elements of talk are closely linked to benefits for  assessment. Black and Wiliams 1998a seminal and extensive review of  research literature draws attention to the need to involve pupils in their own  learning through, for example, peer and self-assessment. Their subsequent  work over two decades on a model of assessment for learning brings high  quality dialogue to provoke reflection squarely into the foreground Black and  Wiliam, 1998b; 2018. This overlap, in which dialogic talk is viewed as a tool for  assessment, as well as learning, has been noted by others and indeed, the term  dialogic assessment has been proposed as an alternative to assessment for  learning Fisher, 2009; Alexander, 2017. As well as these incidental links, some  research has set out to investigate more specifically the metacognitive elements  of classroom talk and three recent studies offer valuable insights for teachers. Evidence linking self-regulated learning and metacognition with talk As seen in the examples cited in the previous section, collaborative activity  may help not only to develop self-regulation, but also to promote forms of group  co-regulation. Pino-Pasternak et al 2018 see interpersonal regulation as one  of three dimensions  together with social dynamics and the nature of group  dialogue  determining how productive peer collaboration is. Their study of  Year 1 childrens work on mathematics problem-solving suggests that children  evaluated by their teacher as being highly self-regulated consistently adopted  the pivotal roles within the group, either leading the task or scaffolding others.  Children in the latter role used sophisticated language to achieve this. Evidence  was also found of effective co-regulation, as responsibility for regulating the  task shifted among the group. This implies that, even with these very young  learners, the capacity to selfand co-regulate learning influences the quality of  dialogue and the outcome of tasks, lending weight to arguments for these skills  to be taught explicitly. As well as the explicit teaching of metacognitive skills, Kuhn and Zillmer 2015  show how these might also be fostered through exposure to rich opportunities  for dialogue. They report on a three-year intervention with US middle-school  pupils based on structured debates and subsequent reflections on the dialogue.  In an echo of one of the strategies discussed in Section 6.3, face-to-face talk  in pairs was stimulated by electronic dialogue with other pairs representing 

C h a p t e r  6    C l a s s r o o m  t a l k  m o d e r n  l e a r n e r   83
83 different views. As well as talk about the subject matter, the researchers  identified talk about the discourse itself, which they dub meta-talk. The quality  of argument improved in both the verbal exchanges and subsequent written  work when compared with a non-intervention group. The types of meta-talk  identified were: 	 	metacomprehension, relating to understanding statements made; 	 	meta-argument, relating to considering the merits of a specific argument; 	 	meta-argumentation, relating to the process of the argument. Identifying and categorising these talk moves allows teachers to plan to teach  them explicitly. Nevertheless, it is important to note that the development of  meta-talk was the result of intense engagement and practice Kuhn and Zillmer,  2015 and the powerful category of meta-argumentation, governing the norms of  discourse, was particularly slow to develop. The link between metacognitive talk and wider educational outcomes has  been explored in the US by Zepeda et al 2018. Teacher talk in 40 secondary  mathematics classrooms was analysed, comparing classes with low and  high value-added scores in mathematics assessments. More evidence of  metacognitive talk was found in the 20 high value-added classrooms and the  specific features of metacognitive support through teacher talk which were  more prevalent in these classrooms are summarised in Table 6b. Table 6b Metacognitive teacher talk in high value-added classrooms adapted  from Zepeda et al, 2018 Type of metacognitive  support Emphasis of teacher talk in high value-added  mathematics classrooms Metacognitive  knowledge Developing pupils self-awareness of personal  abilities and understanding rather than how and  when to apply strategies Metacognitive skills Monitoring and evaluation phases of tasks rather  than the planning phase Metacognitive manner Prompting through questions and directing rather  than modelling Metacognitive framing Domain-general support, applicable in a variety of  situations rather than support related to specific  problems or types of problem
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
84 Although Zepeda et al acknowledge that cause and effect cannot be established  here, as there may be other factors driving attainment and indeed the teacher  talk itself, the study provides some insight into metacognitive aspects of talk  that may be especially supportive. It is worth noting, however, the way that they  are oriented to the context of mathematical problem-solving, a reminder of the  arguments for such skills often being associated with subject content. Drawing these three examples together, the implications are that effective  metacognition both enhances pupil talk and arises from it, if appropriately  structured. The use of metacognitive talk can be modelled by teachers in a  subject-specific context and this may be associated with pupil attainment. One  specific aspect of metacognition, according to Flavell 1979, is critical thinking  and the final section of this chapter examines this in more depth. 6.5 How does classroom talk relate to developing pupils  as critical thinkers? The nature and importance of critical thinking Willingham 2007 defines critical thinking as a form of reasoning, decisionmaking, and problem-solving which has three characteristics: 	1.	 effectiveness: decision-making based in logical thought and avoiding  common pitfalls; 	2.	 novelty: the capacity to apply learning to a new situation; 	3.	 self-direction: a process of thought led by the learner. Willingham is also clear that the ability to go beyond the surface structure of  an issue or problem depends on deep knowledge of subject matter and that the  evidence for this being a skill transferable across domains is limited. Others  have highlighted additional facets of critical thought. For example, Lipman  2003 stresses its practical, applied nature, Noddings 2006 takes a broad  view of critical thought going beyond the academic, to encompass issues of  personal belief with relevance to everyday life, while Fisher 2009 argues for  the importance of attitudes, such as a willingness to challenge and a passion  for truth. In line with its inclusion in the OECDs 2018 global learning framework,  Ritchhart 2015 reports on surveys of US employers, which suggests that  applied skills, including critical thinking, are more highly rated than academic  ones. In addition to basic employability, arguments have also been made  that the ability to engage in critical debate may facilitate more general social  mobility and active citizenship Moorghen, 2016. As well as this Western 

C h a p t e r  6    C l a s s r o o m  t a l k  m o d e r n  l e a r n e r   85
85 perspective, the value of critical thinking has also been recognised more widely.  In Singapore, known for its high performance in international comparisons,  Tan 2017 discusses a national policy initiative at government level to embed  critical thinking within curriculum areas. This is in response to concerns from  employers about the impact of workers who are study-smart but who lack  criticality, showing the potential limitations of an educational focus solely on  knowledge. The role of talk in promoting critical thinking Arguments for the role of talk in developing critical thinking come from a  number of angles, but centre largely on talks role in two processes: making  thought visible and exposing different perspectives. Critical thinking is  implicit in many of the models of talk from previous chapters, such as  Collaborative Reasoning Reznitskaya et al, 2009 and Reciprocal Teaching  Palinscar and Brown, 1984, which have in common structured engagement  with ideas arising from a text and a gradual transition towards pupil  regulation of the process. Murphy et al 2018 report on a similar talk-based  programme, Quality Talk, specifically aimed at promoting critical analytic  thinking. Like Collaborative Reasoning, Quality Talk is a small-group,  teacher-facilitated discussion of a text based around a set of discourse moves  intended to elicit this sort of thought. One of the distinctive features of this  programme is its prescribed mini lessons. In a year-long intervention with  elementary school pupils, the researchers found an improvement in pupils  use of critical talk and a suggestion of much stronger than average growth in  individual comprehension. Also focusing on childrens response to themes  from literature and drawing on the concept of exploratory talk, Pierce and  Gilles 2008 show how this has been used to develop critical conversations  in which pupils engage deeply with the texts issues. Their examination of  classroom transcripts from learners aged between 6 and 13 yields four ways  that critical talk may be nurtured to: 	1.	 create a safe classroom community; 	2.	 develop protocols for discussing difficult or sensitive issues; 	3.	 embed critical discussion in curricular knowledge and materials; 	4.	 identify and refer back to recurring discussion themes and events. What is clear is the way that these points link to underlying principles of critical  thinking, such as the importance of relevant subject knowledge and the need  to acknowledge the affective dimension of such activities. It is also apparent 
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
86 that this research focuses on talk related to English as a discipline, rather than  spanning a range of subjects or making claims for transferability. One wellresearched form of talk to promote critical thought, which is potentially more  generic in nature, is Philosophy for Children. The example of Philosophy for Children Philosophy for Children, commonly known as P4C, is an approach to learning  originating in 1970 with Matthew Lipman. It centres on children learning  through dialogue in a community of enquiry, thereby aiming for distributed  thinking centred on critical thought and reasoning, but also creative and  caring thinking Lipman, 1998. Unlike similar forms of group dialogue, such as  Collaborative Reasoning, P4C is distinguished by its focus on pupil-generated  philosophical questions. The precise structure of a session was not prescribed  by Lipman but has been enacted in a number of variations. Common features  are: a starting activity, the sharing of a stimulus, pupils suggesting and deciding  on enquiry questions, the enquiry dialogue itself and some form of review  Topping and Trickey, 2014. In its use of pupil-led, collective analysis of a  novel dilemma, P4C, then, aligns closely with the hallmarks of critical thinking  outlined earlier. Due in part to its longevity, P4C has been extensively researched, in terms of  impact both on talk itself and on other academic outcomes. The Thinking  through Philosophy form of P4C eg Cleghorn, 2003 has been trialled in the  UK and found to increase open questioning from the teacher, participation  from the pupils and more elaborated, reasoned contributions from the pupils  Topping and Trickey, 2014, while the same research also yielded evidence  of cognitive gains sustained two years after the intervention Topping and  Trickey, 2007. Reznitskaya et al 2012 report similar improvements in the  quality of talk and pupil ownership in an experimental study in the US, but their  research also questions transfer to pupils subsequent individual reasoning.  These authors speculate that more support in terms of longer exposure to P4C,  experience of such dialogue in varied contexts and specific teacher guidance  might help in this respect. In general, however, evidence for the impact of  P4C on critical thought and reasoning is strong. Trickey and Toppings 2004  systematic review of 10 controlled outcome studies over a 30-year period in  both primary and secondary schools found consistently positive effective  sizes, mostly measured through reasoning tests. There is also a suggestion  that benefits may go beyond reasoning itself into the wider curriculum, as the  EEFs 2015 randomised control trial involving an intervention in 48 primary  schools in England found a positive impact on attainment in reading and  mathematics tests.

C h a p t e r  6    C l a s s r o o m  t a l k  m o d e r n  l e a r n e r   87
87 Case study  A class teacher implements classroom philosophy to develop   critical thinking Claire was a primary teacher who took part in piloting work for the Thinking  through philosophy materials discussed above. Her involvement was motivated  by a desire to improve speaking and listening skills and particularly the use  of dialogue as a learning tool. Claire began by introducing to her Years 5 and  6 class the concepts of philosophy and dialogue and by helping the children  to categorise questions, identifying those which could not be answered  conclusively, but could be explored. Other preparatory work included practising  focusing exercises, proving or disproving statements and developing ground  rules for building or challenging the views of others. In this way, the class  gradually built up to full philosophy sessions. Once these were underway, skills  cards were introduced each week, helping the children to reflect on and improve  their critical thought by focusing their attention on processes such as changing  their mind or asking questions for clarification. Over time, the childrens  articulated thinking became more sophisticated, as they justified their ideas  and reasoned using language such as, That doesnt necessarily mean that, or  Have you got an example of what you mean by?. As their confidence increased,  Claire was able to take a lower-key role, allowing pupils to debate increasingly  independently. As well as the success of the philosophy lessons themselves,  Claire noticed transferable outcomes elsewhere, as children realised that they  had something to contribute in all lessons. Improved criticality, questioning, selfregulation and empathy were noticeable across the curriculum, as evidenced in  English comprehension, mathematical reasoning and scientific enquiry. 6.6 Summary Arguments have been made for twenty-first century learners to be equipped  not only with knowledge, but also with attitudes and skills, including using  technology, self-regulation and critical thinking. Questions have been raised  over whether such skills are generic and transferable with a strong case  for them being embedded in specific subject domains. Technology can be  thought of as one means of generating dialogic space and promoting talk in  distinctive ways, but this is best thought of as part of a wider view of dialogic  learning. Much of the talk encountered in Chapters 3 to 5 has an inherently  metacognitive dimension, bringing these processes to the surface, and  metacognitive talk may also be associated with high-attaining classrooms.  Many forms of talk promote critical thinking and P4C is a well-researched  example with evidence of impact on reasoning but also wider attainment.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
88 Questions for enquiry in your school 	 In what ways do you, or might you, use technology to add value to your  classroom by providing a stimulus or a space for new forms of dialogue? 	 How might you explicitly model metacognitive processes through  teacher-led talk? 	 What does critical thought involve in a specific subject that you teach? To  what extent is this different from other subjects? Exploring further SAPERE is a charity supporting P4C and its website offers guidance and  resources across age phases: 	 www.sapere.org.uk accessed 17 May 2019. Rupert Wegerifs book sums up much of the thinking and research linking  dialogue and technology: 	 Wegerif, R 2007 Dialogic Teaching and Technology. New York: Springer. This site, created by an ICT curriculum development officer, includes examples  of sites that can be used to create speech bubbles and characters as discussed  in Section 6.3: 	 https:blogs.glowscotland.org.ukfaICTFalkirkPrimariescomics-in-theclassroom-online-tools accessed 17 May 2019. Talkwall is a platform facilitating the sort of discussion between small groups  introduced in Section 6.3: 	 www.talkwall.net! accessed 23 Aug 2019.
C h a p t e r  7    P l a n n i n g  f o r  a c t i o n  a n d  i m p l e m e n t a t i o n   89 Chapter 7 Planning for action and  implementation 7.1 Chapter overview This chapter will outline: 7.2	 the main findings about classroom talk; 7.3	 working out what you want to achieve and how to turn priorities into actions; 7.4	 implementing change and evaluating success. 7.2 What are the main findings about classroom talk? Key messages for teachers from the evidence Reviewing the evidence in this book, it is possible to discern a number of  findings about classroom talk that seem to be well supported by evidence and  worthy of your consideration. Some examples, in broad terms, include these  insights. 	 Although classroom interaction remains centred on teacher-dominated  discourse that can be cognitively limiting, there are some clear ways of  managing whole-class discussion more effectively. The third, feedback  move, in particular, can yield improvements in the quality of reasoning but  also in attainment more widely Chapter 3. 	 Dialogic teaching can be developed initially by adopting this as an  over-arching stance or ethos, as opposed to focusing on a single,  all-encompassing form of talk. Nevertheless, some specific teacher  interventions can improve the level of dialogic talk. If implemented over  time, they can have an impact on attainment Chapter 4. 	 Pupils can be taught to engage in productive peer discussions through the  use of explicit modelling and negotiated ground rules. Appropriate tasks and  stimuli are critical, as is the active role played by the teacher. A number of  structured programmes or models exist and benefits have been found for the  quality of talk and for transfer to attainment in other areas Chapter 5.

newgenprepdf
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
90 	 Appropriately structured classroom talk can play an important role in the  nurturing of other important aspects of learning such as metacognition  and critical thinking. These skills can also be developed through the use of  technology to create a dialogic space Chapter 6. Limitations of the evidence Before rushing to enact any of these principles, it is important to be aware of the  limitations of the evidence. On the one hand, Mercer and Dawes 2014 argue that  there is strong consensus about the types of talk that are most productive  in  terms of participation and educational outcomes  and the sorts of strategies  likely to foster this. Nevertheless, Howe and Abedins 2013 systematic review  suggests that the research field has not necessarily progressed in recent years  in ways that might have the most impact. Given the resilience of fairly limited  forms of interaction, particularly as reflected in Chapter 3, there is a sense that the  argument for using talk more ambitiously and productively has not yet been made  with sufficient force. As Resnick and Schantz 2015 point out, embedded recitation  practices are based on strongly held assumptions, such as the view that only some  forms of instruction and some learners can be associated with high-level reasoning  and intelligence that can be grown. The case for transferable academic benefits is  therefore a crucial one to make if dialogic teaching is to be a game changer p 443. There are two main, inter-related limitations to the current body of research,  as explored by Howe and Abedin 2013. One concerns the distinction between  model-based and target-based evaluations. A large number of studies focus  on assessing talk in terms of fidelity to a pre-determined model and, as noted  by Murphy et al 2009, these models are sometimes the researchers own. An  issue here is that, even if positive outcomes are found, this sort of research  cannot determine the extent to which one model has more potential than  another. Target-based assessment, involving external criteria such as academic  attainment, could allow this sort of comparison but there are relatively few  studies focusing on the outcomes of dialogue in this way, particularly in the  area of whole-class interaction. While some exist, the case for more studies  establishing and replicating causal connections between spoken language and  learning has been specifically made Reznitskaya and Gregory, 2013; Resnick  and Schantz, 2015. This links to the other key issue, which is one of scale and  methodology. The nature of spoken language lends itself to in-depth, qualitative  analysis, which tends to be on a small scale. While there are questions over the  appropriateness of quantitative methods for the meaningful study of classroom  talk, there are strong arguments for their use in larger studies which would  allow the magnitude of impact to be gauged more clearly Howe and Abedin,  2013. As emphasised by Mercer and Dawes 2014, this is not to suggest the 

C h a p t e r  7    P l a n n i n g  f o r  a c t i o n  a n d  i m p l e m e n t a t i o n   91
91 inherent superiority of studies of this kind, but the need for this as part of a  well-rounded body of research. 7.3 What do you want to achieve? Choosing priorities This book has covered many aspects of classroom talk, so it is important to be  clear about your priorities. For example, do you want to: 	 promote pupils proficiency in spoken communication? 	 increase pupils confidence in sharing ideas? 	 develop collaboration as a social skill? 	 develop collaboration as a means to problem-solving? 	 improve pupils individual reasoning skills? 	 encourage pupils to enquire and explore issues with others? 	 generate a deep understanding of concepts taught? 	 find out more about pupils own thinking and ideas by allowing space  for this? 	 enhance pupils metacognitive skills? 	 create more equitable classrooms in which power is more evenly  distributed? Prioritising these diverse, but inter-related, outcomes is an important first step  and a list such as this may be a useful tool for an initial whole-staff discussion.  The remainder of this chapter considers ways of putting a small number of  priorities into practice. Planning for action Given the arguments reflected in Chapter 1 about generic limitations of  educational research and the more specific points mentioned in this chapter  about the evidence around talk, it is important for you to be clear about what  is the most productive way forward. Reflecting on these uncertainties, Wiliam  2017 identifies four roles that education research can claim, providing a useful  starting point for action. Educational research can, he argues: 	1.	 suggest what is likely to be ineffective and unworthy of attention; 	2.	 help to weigh up potential benefits against financial costs;
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
92 	3.	 draw attention to the specific conditions in which a strategy may work; 	4.	 focus attention and professional development on changes likely to have a  positive impact. Wiliams 2017 principles can be related to the oracy case study from Woodside  Academy presented in Section 2.5. Table 7a shows how this might be translated  into school-level action. Table 7a Key actions in planning for change Key action Why is this important? Take stock of the  current use of  spoken language  in the classroom There may be many strong features of current  practice that should be acknowledged and it is also  important to be clear about the specific aims relating  to spoken language. For Woodside, this centred on  raising aspirations and life opportunities. Share key findings  on promising  strategies from  research with  colleagues As well as a starting point at school level, it is  important to draw on existing evidence in terms of  what is worthy of attention. At Woodside, this was  mediated through resources and training from an  external provider. Decide on a  small number  of advocates for  change Personal testimony from colleagues is powerful  and it is important that this is not associated with a  single school leader. Woodside launched their work  with a first tier of teachers to generate and trial new  practices. Select a  manageable  approach and  appropriate  resources Thoughtful integration of new practices into  everyday work helps to minimise new workload and  takes into account the specific conditions of each  school. At Woodside, oracy criteria for each year  group were created, for example, along with a new  planning format. Invite colleagues  to see and hear  about new  practices Creating an atmosphere of trust in which colleagues  can observe one anothers classrooms allows for the  sharing of new practices. Lead teachers at Woodside  invited others to experience first-hand their  modelled lessons, rich in spoken language.

C h a p t e r  7    P l a n n i n g  f o r  a c t i o n  a n d  i m p l e m e n t a t i o n   93
93 7.4 How will you know when you have achieved it? As well as implementing new practices, you may be ready for a more  systematic approach to intervention, involving an evaluation of success.  As seen throughout this book, successful classroom talk can be defined in  a number of ways. For example, studies cited have variously focused on  outcomes including: 	 authentic pupil participation eg Burns and Myhill, 2004; 	 the amount of productive talk generated eg Michaels et al, 2008; 	 the benefits for thinking or reasoning eg Reznitskaya et al, 2009; 	 the transferable impact on wider attainment eg Alexander, 2018. One approach to evaluation is to follow a cyclical model such as that used in  action research. An action research perspective Action research, often traced back to Lewins 1946 work on social change,  has been defined as: The study of a social situation with a view to improving  the quality of action within it Elliott, 1991, p 69. Action research has been  interpreted and implemented in many ways and is extensively documented  elsewhere eg Townsend, 2013. The common feature across the various models  proposed is a series of cycles involving the following in some form: Consider practices  which may be  feasible and  cost-effective to  implement more  widely A whole-school approach allows for coherent  implementation of strategies likely to work in these  conditions, but it is important also to retain a level  of professional judgment for individual teachers.  Oracy assumed a high status at Woodside through  assemblies and performance management, but  classes negotiated their own talk charters and  selected strategies fit for purpose.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
94 Action research is predominantly associated with small-scale, often contextspecific, insider enquiry addressing an issue through a recursive process of  developing a focus, reconnaissance, planned intervention, evidence gathering  and reflection, ideally conducted collaboratively Townsend, 2013. Much of this  process is evident in the following case study. Case study A whole-school enquiry approach At Tower Street Primary School, the leadership team have taken the decision  to move from evaluating teaching and learning through graded lesson  observations to a more empowering, enquiry-based approach, focused on  gathering evidence of progress over time. Table 7b An enquiry process at Tower Street Tower Streets activities Action research phase Every year, teacher research groups are set up,  each comprising teachers, teaching assistants  and a senior leader as a knowledgeable other.  The research focus for the year is determined  partly by school data and is initiated by a  research text accessible to all. One recent focus,  launched through Robin Alexanders work eg  Alexander, 2017, has been promoting more  dialogic practice in classrooms. Identifying a focus  and conducting  reconnaissance Figure 7a The action research cycle Observe Plan Act Reect

C h a p t e r  7    P l a n n i n g  f o r  a c t i o n  a n d  i m p l e m e n t a t i o n   95
95 A clear structure for the year is established,  including designated staff meeting time for  launching, monitoring and evaluating the  interventions and cover for planned-for peer  observations. Enquiry questions have centred on  issues such as structured group talk, the use of  dialogue to improve comprehension skills and  increasing wait time after questions. Planning for action Impact is assessed chiefly through data from peer  observations and questionnaires. As well as the  schools teaching staff, the process has involved  governors, colleagues from a local innovation hub  and a contact at a nearby university. Implementing and  observing actions Termly action plans are produced and  dissemination takes place through a midpoint  review and a poster presentation of findings,  before another cycle of work begins. Developing  a critical response from teachers to enquiry  findings remains a challenge, but the increase  in ownership and collaboration is helping to  foster a culture within the school of evidenceinformed professional development and school  improvement. Reflecting on and  evaluating change The action-research perspective, even if not followed to its fullest extent,  offers a number of insights. Firstly, the emphasis on identifying an issue and  conducting reconnaissance suggests that a productive starting point for action  is to identify a problem or issue to be addressed. For example, in Chapter 1,  arguments for talk were presented in not only academic terms but also social  and political ones and each of these relates to a particular part of the evidencebase. Having settled on a purpose for talk, carried out some reconnaissance  and decided on an evidence-informed strategy, action research emphasises  the evaluation of evidence as a reflective and collaborative endeavour, geared  towards a deep understanding of a specific setting. This is in contrast to a view  of success measured solely by a snapshot of attainment, for example. Finally,  this perspective centres on a cyclical, iterative process. Many of the possibilities  for improved talk outlined in this book, such as the development of exploratory  talk Mercer and Littleton, 2007 or the nurturing of a dialogic classroom ethos  Alexander, 2017 are outcomes requiring sustained engagement, refined over a  period of time.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
96 7.5 Summary There are a number of potentially fruitful aspects of classroom talk, well  supported by evidence, for teachers to explore. These include developing the  feedback, or evaluation, move in whole-class questioning and the teaching  of skills for productive peer dialogue. Nevertheless, it is important to note  the limitations of what is known. Specifically, there is a need for larger-scale  studies and a target-based focus on transferable outcomes beyond congruence  with a particular model of talk. Bearing in mind the often situated nature of  knowledge about education, action should not involve the implementation  of universal principles, but a careful consideration of specific contexts. One  approach to evaluating the success of any actions is therefore to conceive of an  intervention as a process of reflective enquiry. Questions for enquiry in your own school 	 What examples of good practice in classroom talk exist already in your  context? 	 Building on this, what talk-related goals are most appropriate and why? 	 What sort of initial change would be feasible to implement as a first step? 	 What outcomes would constitute success? Exploring further The Education Endowment Foundation has produced an implementation guide  to help schools turn evidence into school-wide action: 	 https:educationendowmentfoundation.org.uktoolsguidance-reportsaschools-guide-to-implementation accessed 17 May 2019. This paper by Paul Thompson reports specifically on practitioner enquiry as a  means of developing classroom talk, identifying factors that may help or hinder  this process: 	 Thompson, P 2007 Developing Classroom Talk Through Practitioner  Research. Educational Action Research, 151: 4160.
R e f e r e n c e s   97 References Adey, P and Shayer, M 2015 The Effects of Cognitive Acceleration. In Resnick, L,  Asterhan, C and Clarke, S eds Socializing Intelligence Through Academic Talk  and Dialogue pp 12740. Washington, DC: AERA. Adey, P, Shayer, M and Yates, C 2003 Thinking Science: Professional Edition.  London: Nelson Thornes. Aguiar, O, Mortimer, E and Scott, P 2010 Learning From and Responding  to Students Questions: The Authoritative and Dialogic Tension. Journal of  Research in Science Teaching, 472: 17493. Alexander, R 2000 Culture and Pedagogy: International Comparisons in  Primary Education. Oxford: Blackwell. Alexander, R 2003 Talk in Teaching and Learning: International Perspectives,  in Qualifications and Curriculum Authority ed New Perspectives on English in  the Classroom pp 2737. London: QCA. Alexander, R 2004 Talk for Learning: the Second Year. North Allerton: North  Yorkshire County Council. online Available at: www.robinalexander.org.ukwpcontentuploads201710North-Yorks-report-04.pdf accessed 30 June 2019. Alexander, R 2008 Culture, Dialogue and Learning: Notes on an Emerging  Pedagogy. In Mercer, N and Hodkinson, S eds Exploring Talk in School pp 91114.  London: Sage. Alexander, R ed 2010 Children, Their World, Their Education: Final Report and  Recommendations of the Cambridge Primary Review. Abingdon: Routledge. Alexander, R 2012 Improving Oracy and Classroom Talk in English  Schools: Achievements and Challenges: Extended and Referenced Version of  a Presentation Given at the DfE Seminar on Oracy, the National Curriculum  and Educational Standards, 20 February 2012. online Available at: www. robinalexander.org.ukwp-contentuploads201206DfE-oracy-120220Alexander-FINAL.pdf accessed 30 June 2019. Alexander, R 2014 Evidence, Policy and the Reform of Primary Education: a  Cautionary Tale. Forum, 563: 34976. Alexander, R 2017 Towards Dialogic Teaching: Rethinking Classroom Talk. 5th  edition. York: Dialogos.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
98 Alexander, R 2018 Developing Dialogic Teaching: Genesis, Process, Trial.  Research Papers in Education, 335: 56198. Applebee, A, Langer, J, Nystrand, M and Gamoran, A 2003 Discussion-based  Approaches to Developing Understanding: Classroom Instruction and Student  Performance in Middle and High School English. American Educational  Research Journal, 403: 685730. Asterhan, C 2015 Introducing Online Dialogues in Co-located Classrooms: If, Why  and How. In Resnick, L, Asterhan, C and Clarke, S eds Socializing Intelligence  Through Academic Talk and Dialogue pp 20518. Washington, DC: AERA. Atherton, C 2018 Assessment: Evidence-based Teaching for Enquiring  Teachers. St Albans: Critical Publishing. Baines, E, Blatchford, P and Kutnick, P 2008 Pupil Grouping for Learning:  Developing a Social Pedagogy of the Classroom. In Gillies, R, Ashman, A, Terwel,  J eds The Teachers Role in Developing Cooperative Learning in the Classroom.  New York: Springer. Baines, E, Blatchford, P and Webster, P 2015 The Challenges of Implementing  Group Work in Primary School Classrooms and Including Pupils With Special  Educational Needs. Education, 313, 431: 1529. Baines, E, Rubie-Davies, C and Blatchford, P 2009 Improving Pupil Group Work  Interaction and Dialogue in Primary Classrooms: Results From a Year-Long  Intervention Study. Cambridge Journal of Education, 391: 95117. Bakhtin, M 1981 The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays. Austin: University of  Texas Press. Bakhtin, M 1986 Speech Genres and Other Late Essays. Austin: University of  Texas Press. Barnes, D 1976 From Communication to Curriculum. London: Penguin. Barnes, D 2008 Exploratory Talk for Learning. In Mercer, N and Hodkinson, S  eds Exploring Talk in School pp 115. London: Sage. Barnes, D and Todd, F 1977 Communication and Learning in Small Groups.  London: Routledge. Barnett, S and Ceci, S 2002 When and Where Do We Apply What We Learn?  A Taxonomy for Far Transfer. Psychological Bulletin, 128: 61237. Bercow, J 2008 The Bercow Report: A Review of Services for Children and  Young People 019 with Speech, Language and Communication Needs.  London: Department for Children Schools and Families DCSF. online 

R e f e r e n c e s   99
99 Available at: https:dera.ioe.ac.uk840577771-dcsf-bercowRedacted.pdf  accessed 30 June 2019. Bernstein, B 1971 Class, Codes and Control. St Albans: Paladin. Biesta, G 2016 Improving Education Through Research? From Effectiveness,  Causality and Technology to Purpose, Complexity and Culture. Policy Futures in  Education, 142: 194210. Bisra, K, Liu, Q, Nesbit, J, Salimi, F and Winne, P 2018 Inducing Self-explanation:  A Meta-Analysis. Educational Psychology Review, 30: 70325. Black, P and Wiliam, D 1998a Assessment and Classroom Learning.  Assessment in Education: Principles, Policy and Practice, 51: 774. Black, P and Wiliam, D 1998b Inside the Black Box: Raising Standards Through  Classroom Assessment. Phi Delta Kappa, October 1998: 113. Black, P and Wiliam, D 2018 Classroom Assessment and Pedagogy. Assessment  in Education: Principles, Policy and Practice, 256: 55175. Blatchford, P, Kutnick, P, Baines, E and Galton, M 2003 Towards a Social  Pedagogy of Classroom Group Work. International Journal of Educational  Research, 39: 15372. Boyd, M and Markarian, W 2011 Dialogic Teaching: Talk in Service of a Dialogic  Stance. Language and Education, 256: 51534. British Educational Research Association BERA 2014 Research and the  Teaching Profession: Building the Capacity for a Self-improving Education  System. online Available at: www.bera.ac.ukwp-contentuploads2013 12BERA-RSA-Research-Teaching-Profession-FULL-REPORT-for-web. pdf?noredirect1 accessed 30 June 2019. Bruner, J 1978 The Role of Dialogue in Language Acquisition. In Sinclair, A,  Jevella, R and Levelt, W eds The Childs Conception of Language pp 24156.  Berlin: Springer-Verlag. Bullock, A 1975 The Bullock Report: a Language for Life: Report of the  Committee of Enquiry Appointed by the Secretary of State for Education and  Science Under the Chairmanship of Sir Alan Bullock FBA. London: HMSO. Burns, C and Myhill, D 2004 Interactive or Inactive? A Consideration of the  Nature of Interaction in Whole Class Teaching. Cambridge Journal of Education,  341: 3549. Cain, T 2015 Teachers Engagement With Published Research: Addressing the  Knowledge Problem. The Curriculum Journal, 263: 488509.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
100 Calcagni, E and Lago, L 2018 The Three Domains for Dialogue: A Framework for  Analysing Dialogic Approaches to Teaching and Learning. Learning, Culture and  Social Interaction, 18: 112. Cameron, D 2003 Schooling Spoken Language: Beyond Communication. In  Qualifications and Curriculum Authority ed New Perspectives on English in  the Classroom pp 6472. London: QCA. Carter, R 2003 The Grammar of Talk: Spoken English, Grammar and the  Classroom. In Qualifications and Curriculum Authority ed New Perspectives on  English in the Classroom pp 513. London: QCA. Carter, R 2004 Language and Creativity: The Art of Common Talk. London:  Routledge. Cazden, C 2001 Classroom Discourse: The Language of Teaching and Learning.  2nd edition. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. Centre for Social Justice 2014 Closing the Divide: Tackling Educational  Inequality in England. online Available at: www.centreforsocialjustice.org.uk libraryclosing-divide-tackling-educational-inequality-england accessed 30  June 2019. Chambers, F and Armour, K 2011 Do As We Do and Not As We Say: Teacher  Educators Supporting Student Teachers to Learn on Teaching Practice. Sport,  Education and Society, 164: 52744. Clark, A, Anderson, R, Kuo, L, Kim, I, Archodidou, A and Nguyen-Jahiel, K 2003  Collaborative Reasoning: Expanding Ways For Children to Talk and Think in  School. Educational Psychology Review, 152: 18198. Claxton, G 2008 Whats the Point of School? Rediscovering the Heart of  Education. Richmond: Oneworld. Cleghorn, P 2003 Thinking Through Philosophy 3: A Programme In Thinking  Skills and Emotional Intelligence. Blackburn: Educational Printing Services  Limited. Collins, A and White, B 2015 How Technology is Broadening the Nature of Learning  Dialogues. In Resnick, L, Asterhan, C and Clarke, S eds Socializing Intelligence  Through Academic Talk and Dialogue pp 2319. Washington, DC: AERA. Communication Trust 2013 A Generation Adrift. London: The  Communication Trust. Connolly, P, Keenan, C and Urbanska, K 2018 The Trials of Evidence-based  Practice in Education: A Systematic Review of Randomised Control Trials in  Education Research 19802016. Educational Research, 603: 27691.

R e f e r e n c e s   101
101 Cook, V, Warwick, P, Vrikki, M, Major, L and Wegerif, R 2019 Developing  Material-dialogic Space in Geography Learning and Teaching: Combining a  Dialogic Pedagogy With the Use of a Microblogging Tool. Thinking Skills and  Creativity, 31: 21731. Coultas, V 2012 Classroom Talk: Are We Listening to Teachers Voices? English  in Education, 462: 17589. Coultas, V 2015 Revisiting Debates on Oracy: Classroom Talk  Moving  Towards a Democratic Pedagogy? Changing English, 221: 7286. Dawes, L, Mercer, N and Wegerif, R 2004 Thinking Together: A Programme of  Activities for Developing Speaking, Listening and Thinking Skills for Children  Aged 811. Birmingham: Imaginative Minds. DfE 2010 The Importance of Teaching: The Schools White Paper 2010. London:  TSO. DfE 2013 National Curriculum in England: English Programmes of Study.  online Available at: www.gov.ukgovernmentpublicationsnationalcurriculum-in-england-english-programmes-of-study accessed 30 June 2019. DfE 2016 Eliminating Unnecessary Workload Around Marking: Report of the  Independent Teacher Workload Review Group. online Available at: https: assets.publishing.service.gov.ukgovernmentuploadssystemuploads attachmentdatafile511256Eliminating-unnecessary-workload-aroundmarking.pdf accessed 30 June 2019. Early Intervention Foundation 2017 Language As a Child Wellbeing Indicator.  online Available at: www.eif.org.ukreportlanguage-as-a-child-wellbeingindicator accessed 30 June 2019. Education Endowment Foundation EEF 2015 Philosophy for Children:  Evaluation Report and Executive Summary. London: Education Endowment  Foundation. Education Endowment Foundation EEF 2017 Dialogic Teaching: Evaluation  Report and Executive Summary. London: Education Endowment Foundation. Education Endowment Foundation EEF 2018a Metacognition and SelfRegulation: Teaching and Learning Toolkit. online Available at: https: educationendowmentfoundation.org.ukpdfgenerate?uhttps: educationendowmentfoundation.org.ukpdftoolkit?id138tTeaching20 and20Learning20Toolkite138s accessed 30 June 2019. Education Endowment Foundation EEF 2018b Metacognition and Selfregulated Learning: Guidance Report. London: Education Endowment Foundation.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
102 Edwards, A and Furlong, V 1978 The Language of Teaching. London: Heinemann. Edwards, A and Westgate, D 1994 Investigating Classroom Talk. 2nd edition.  London: Routledge Falmer. Edwards, J 2009 Socio-Constructivist and Socio-Cultural Lenses on  Collaborative Peer Talk in a Secondary Mathematics Classroom, Proceedings of  the British Society for Research into Learning Mathematics, 291: 4954. Elliott, J 1991 Action Research for Educational Change. Milton Keynes: Open  University Press. Elliott, V, Baird, J, Hopfenbeck, T, Ingram, J, Thompson, I, Usher, N, Zantout, M,  Richardson, J and Coleman, R 2016 A Marked Improvement? A Review of the  Evidence on Written Marking. London: Education Endowment Foundation.  online Available at: https:educationendowmentfoundation.org.ukpublic filesPresentationsPublicationsEEFMarkingReviewApril2016.pdf  accessed 18 July 2019. English Speaking Union 2017 International Perspectives on Oracy. online  Available at: www.esu.orgbloginternational-perspectives-on-oracy accessed  30 June 2019. Fernndez, M, Wegerif, R, Mercer, N and Rojas-Drummond, S 2015 Reconceptualizing Scaffolding and the Zone of Proximal Development in the  Context of Symmetrical Collaborative Learning. The Journal of Classroom  Interaction, 501: 5472. Fisher, R 2009 Creative Dialogue: Talk for Thinking in the Classroom.  Abingdon: Routledge. Fisher, R and Larkin, S 2008 Pedagogy or Ideological Struggle? An Examination  of Pupils and Teachers Expectations for Talk in the Classroom. Language and  Education, 221: 116. Flanders, N 1961 Analysing Teacher Behaviour. Educational Leadership,  December 1961: 173200. Flavell, J 1979 Metacognition and Cognitive Monitoring: A New Area of  Cognitive-Developmental Inquiry. American Psychologist, 3410: 90611. Freire, P 1970 Pedagogy of the Oppressed. London: Penguin. Galton, M, Hargreaves, L, Comber, C, Wall, D and Pell, T 1999 Changes in  Patterns of Teacher Interaction in Primary Classrooms 197696. British  Educational Research Journal, 251: 2337. Galton, M, Simon, B and Croll, P 1980 Inside the Primary Classroom.  London: Routledge.

R e f e r e n c e s   103
103 Gaunt, A and Stott, A 2019 Transform Teaching and Learning Through  Talk: The Oracy Imperative. London: Rowman  Littlefield. Gilkerson, J, Richards, J, Warren, S, Kimbrough Oller, D, Russo, R and Vohr, B  2018 Language Experience in the Second Year of Life and Language Outcomes  in Late Childhood. Pediatrics, 1424: 111. Gillies, R 2016 Enhancing Classroom-based Talk: Blending Practice, Research  and Theory. Abingdon: Routledge. Gillies, R and Boyle, M 2008 Teachers Discourse During Co-operative Learning  and Their Perceptions of This Pedagogical Practice. Teaching and Teacher  Education, 24: 133348. Goswami, U 2015 Childrens Cognitive Development and Learning: Cambridge  Primary Review Trust Research Survey 3. Cambridge: University of Cambridge. Greeno, J 2015 Classroom Talk Sequences and Learning. In Resnick, L,  Asterhan, C and Clarke, S eds Socializing Intelligence Through Academic Talk  and Dialogue pp 25562. Washington, DC: AERA. Hardman, F 2008 Teachers Use of Feedback in Whole-Class and Group-based  Talk. In Mercer, N and Hodkinson, S eds Exploring Talk in School pp 13150.  London: Sage. Hattie, J 2009 Visible Learning: A Synthesis of Over 800 Meta-Analyses  Relating to Achievement. Abingdon: Routledge. Hattie, J 2012 Visible Learning for Teachers: Maximising Impact on Learning.  Abingdon: Routledge. Hattie, J and Timperley, H 2007 The Power of Feedback. Review of Educational  Research, 771: 81112. Hattie, J and Yates, G 2014 Visible Learning and the Science of How We Learn.  Abingdon: Routledge. Heath, S B 1983 Ways With Words: Language, Life and Work in Communities  and Classrooms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hennessy, S 2011 The Role of Digital Artefacts on the Interactive Whiteboard  in Supporting Classroom Dialogue. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning,  27: 46389. Higham, R, Brindley, S and Van de Pol, J 2014 Shifting the Primary  Focus: Assessing the Case for Dialogic Education in Secondary Classrooms.  Language and Education, 281: 8699.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
104 Hirsch, E 2009 The Making of Americans: Democracy and our Schools. New  Haven: Yale University Press. Hmelo-Silver, C, Duncan, R and Chinn, C 2007 Scaffolding and Achievement  in Problem-based and Inquiry Learning: A Response to Kirschner, Sweller and  Clark 2006. Educational Psychologist, 422: 99107. Howe, C 2014 Optimizing Small Group Discourse in Classrooms: Effective  Practices and Theoretical Constraints. International Journal of Education  Research, 63: 10715. Howe, C and Abedin, M 2013 Classroom Dialogue: A Systematic Review Across  Four Decades of Research. Cambridge Journal of Education, 433: 32556. Howe, C, Hennessy, S, Mercer, N, Vrikki, M and Wheatley, L 2019 Teacher Student Dialogue During Classroom Teaching: Does It Really Impact on  Student Outcomes? Journal of the Learning Sciences, doi.org10.17863 CAM.37142. International Baccalaureate Organization IBO 2013 What is an IB Education?  Cardiff: International Baccalaureate Organisation. online Available at: www. ibo.orgglobalassetswhat-is-an-ib-education-2017-en.pdf accessed 18  July 2019. Ingram, J and Elliott, V 2016 A Critical Analysis of the Role of Wait Time in  Classroom Interactions and the Effects on Student and Teacher Interactional  Behaviours. Cambridge Journal of Education, 461: 3753. Iordanou, K 2013 Developing Face-to-Face Argumentation Skills: Does  Arguing on the Computer Help? Journal of Cognition and Development,  142: 292320. Kawalkar, A and Vijapurkar, J 2013 Scaffolding Science Talk: The Role of  Teachers Questions in the Inquiry Classroom. International Journal of Science  Education, 3512: 200427. Keefer, M, Zeitz, C and Resnick, L 2000 Judging the Quality of Peer-led Student  Dialogues. Cognition and Instruction, 181: 5381. Kershner, R, Mercer, N, Warwick, P and Kleine Staarman, J 2010 Can the  Interactive Whiteboard Support Young Childrens Collaborative Communication  and Thinking in Classroom Science Activities? Computer-Supported  Collaborative Learning, 5: 35983. Khong, T, Saito, E and Gillies, R 2017 Key Issues in Productive Classroom Talk  and Interventions. Educational Review, 713: 33449.

R e f e r e n c e s   105
105 Kim, M and Wilkinson, I 2019 What is Dialogic Teaching? Constructing,  Deconstructing, and Reconstructing a Pedagogy of Classroom Talk. Learning  Culture and Social Interaction, 21: 7086. Kirschner, P, Sweller, J and Clark, R 2006 Why Minimal Guidance During  Instruction Does Not Work: An Analysis of the Failure of Constructivist,  Discovery, Problem-based, Experiential and Inquiry-based Learning.  Educational Psychologist, 412: 7586. Kirschner, P, Sweller, J, Kirschner, F and Zambrano, J 2018 From Cognitive  Load Theory to Collaborative Cognitive Load Theory. International Journal of  Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 13: 21333. Kleine Staarman, J 2009 The Joint Negotiation of Ground Rules: Establishing a  Shared Collaborative Practice With New Educational Technology. Language and  Education, 231: 7995. Kuhn, D and Zillmer, N 2015 Developing Norms of Discourse. In Resnick, L,  Asterhan, C and Clarke, S eds Socializing Intelligence Through Academic Talk  And Dialogue pp 7786. Washington, DC: AERA. Lai, E 2011 Metacognition: A Literature Review. Pearson Assessments  Research Reports. online Available at: https:images.pearsonassessments. comimagestmrsMetacognitionLiteratureReviewFinal.pdf accessed 30  June 2019. Lave, J and Wenger, E 1991 Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral  Participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lefstein, A and Snell, J 2014 Better Than Best Practice: Developing Teaching  and Learning Through Dialogue. Abingdon: Routledge. Lemke, J 1990 Talking Science. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. Lewin, K 1946 Action Research and Minority Problems. Journal of Social  Issues, 24: 3446. Lipman, M 1998 Teaching Students to Think Reasonably: Some Findings of the  Philosophy for Children Program. The Clearing House: A Journal of Educational  Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 715: 27780. Lipman, M 2003 Thinking in Education. 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press. Littleton, K and Mercer, N 2013 Interthinking: Putting Talk to Work.  Abingdon: Routledge.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
106 Loughran, J 2010 What Expert Teachers Do: Enhancing Professional  Knowledge for Classroom Practice. Abingdon: Routledge. Major, L, Warwick, P, Rasmussen, I, Ludvigsen, S and Cook, V 2018 Classroom  Dialogue and Digital Technologies: A Scoping Review. Educational Information  Technology, 23: 19952028. Maybin, J 2006 Childrens Voices. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. McKenna, J 2017 Your Child May Need This Skill As Much As Numeracy  Or Literacy. online Available at: www.weforum.orgagenda201709oracyliteracy-skill-every-child-needs accessed 30 June 2019. McKeown, M and Beck, I 2015 Effective Classroom Talk is Reading  Comprehension Instruction. In Resnick, L, Asterhan, C and Clarke, S eds  Socializing Intelligence Through Academic Talk and Dialogue pp 5162.  Washington, DC: AERA. Mehan, H 1979 What Time is it Denise? Asking Known Information Questions  in Classroom Discourse. Theory Into Practice, 184: 28594. Mehan, H and Cazden, C 2015 The Study of Classroom Discourse: Early  History and Current Developments. In Resnick, L, Asterhan, C and Clarke, S  eds Socializing Intelligence Through Academic Talk and Dialogue pp 1334.  Washington, DC: AERA. Mercer, N 1995 The Guided Construction of Knowledge: Talk Amongst Teachers  and Learners. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. Mercer, N 2000 Words and Minds: How We Use Language to Think Together.  London: Routledge. Mercer, N 2010 The Analysis of Classroom Talk: Methods and Methodologies.  British Journal of Educational Psychology, 80: 114. Mercer, N 2015 Why Oracy Must Be in the Curriculum and Group Work in the  Classroom. Forum, 571: 6774. Mercer, N 2018 Oracy Education and Dialogic Teaching: Whats the Difference?  online Available at: https:oracycambridge.org20180222oracy-educationand-dialogic-teaching-whats-the-difference accessed 30 June 2019. Mercer, N and Dawes, L 2008 The Value of Exploratory Talk. In Mercer, N and  Hodkinson, S eds Exploring Talk in School pp 5572. London: Sage. Mercer, N and Dawes, L 2014 The Study of Talk Between Teachers and Students  From the 1970s until the 2010s. Oxford Review of Education, 404: 43045.

R e f e r e n c e s   107
107 Mercer, N, Dawes, L and Kleine Staarman, J 2009 Dialogic Teaching in the  Primary Science Classroom. Language and Education, 23 4: 35369. Mercer, N, Hennessy, S and Warwick, P 2017a Dialogue: Thinking Together  and Digital Technology in the Classroom: Some Educational Implications of a  Continuing Line of Inquiry. International Journal of Educational Research. online  Available at: https:doi.org10.1016j.ijer.2017.08.007 accessed 29 August 2019. Mercer, N and Littleton, K 2007 Dialogue and the Development of Childrens  Thinking: A Sociocultural Approach. Abingdon: Routledge. Mercer, N, Warwick, P and Ahmed, A 2017b An Oracy Assessment  Toolkit: Linking Research and Development in the Assessment of Students  Spoken Language Skills at Age 1112. Learning and Instruction, 48: 5160. Michaels, S and OConnor, C 2015 Conceptualizing Talk Moves As Tools:  Professional Development Approaches for Academically Productive Discussions.  In Resnick, L, Asterhan, C and Clarke, S eds Socializing Intelligence Through  Academic Talk and Dialogue pp 34761. Washington, DC: AERA. Michaels, S, OConnor, C and Resnick, L 2008 Deliberative Discourse Idealized  and Realized: Accountable Talk in the Classroom and in Civic Life. Studies in  the Philosophy of Education, 27: 28397. Millard, W and Menzies, L 2016 Oracy: The State of Speaking in our Schools.  London: Voice 21. online Available at: www.lkmco.orgwp-contentuploads 201611Oracy-Report-Final.pdf accessed 18 July. Molinari, L, Maeli, C and Gnisi, A 2013 A Sequential Analysis of Classroom  Discourse in Italian Primary Schools: The Many Faces of the IRF Pattern. British  Journal of Educational Psychology, 83: 41430. Moorghen, A 2016 Oracy Through Debate, in Voice 21 and English Speaking  Union. Speaking Frankly: The Case for Oracy in the Curriculum: 627. Mortimer, E and Scott, P 2003 Meaning Making in Secondary Science  Classrooms. Maidenhead: Open University Press. Mroz, M, Smith, F and Hardman, F 2000 The Discourse of the Literacy Hour.  Cambridge Journal of Education, 303: 37990. Mugny, G and Doise, W 1978 Socio-Cognitive Conflict and Structure of Individual  and Collective Performances. European Journal of Social Psychology, 8: 18192. Murphy, P, Greene, J, Firetto, C, Hendrick, B, Li, M, Montalbano, C and Wei, L  2018 Quality Talk: Developing Students Discourse to Promote High-Level  Comprehension. American Educational Research Journal, 555: 111360.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
108 Murphy, P, Wilkinson, I, Soter, A and Hennessey, M 2009 Examining the Effects  of Classroom Discussion on Students Comprehension of Text: A Meta-Analysis.  Journal of Educational Psychology, 1013: 74064. Myhill, D 2006 Talk, Talk, Talk: Teaching and Learning in Whole Class  Discourse. Research Papers in Education, 211: 1941. Myhill, D and Warren, P 2005 Scaffolds or Straitjackets? Critical Moments in  Classroom Discourse. Educational Review, 571: 5569. Naylor, S and Keogh, B 2013 Concept Cartoons: What Have We Learnt? Journal  of Turkish Science Education, 101: 311. Newman, R 2017 Engaging Talk: One Teachers Scaffolding of Collaborative  Talk. Language and Education, 312: 13051. Noddings, N 2006 Critical Lessons: What Our Schools Should Teach.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Norman, K ed 1992 Thinking Voices: The Work of the National Oracy Project.  London: Hodder  Stoughton. Nystrand, M, Wu, L, Gamoran, A, Zeisler, S and Long, D 2003 Questions in  Time: Investigating the Structure and Dynamics of Unfolding Classroom  Discourse. Discourse Processes, 352: 13598. OConnor, C, Michaels, S and Chapin, S 2015 Scaling Down to Explore the Role  of Talk in Learning: From District Intervention to Controlled Classroom Study.  In Resnick, L, Asterhan, C and Clarke, S eds Socializing Intelligence Through  Academic Talk and Dialogue pp 11126. Washington, DC: AERA. OConnor, C, Michaels, S, Chapin, S and Harbaugh, A 2017 The Silent and the  Vocal: Participation and Learning in Whole-class Discussion. Learning and  Instruction, 48: 513. Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development OECD 2005 The  Definition and Selection of Key Competencies. online Available at: www.oecd. orgpisa35070367.pdf accessed 30 June 2019. Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development OECD 2018 The  Future of Education and Skills: Education 2030. online Available at: www.oecd. orgeducation2030E203020Position20Paper2005.04.2018.pdf accessed  30 June 2019. Oliver, M and Venville, G 2015 Cognitive Acceleration Through Science  Education: The CASE for Thinking Through Science. In Wegerif, R, Li, L and  Kaufman, J eds The Routledge International Handbook of Research on  Teaching Thinking. Abingdon: Routledge.

R e f e r e n c e s   109
109 Oxford University Press 2018 Why Closing the Word Gap Matters: Oxford  Language Report. online Available at: http:fdslive.oup.comwww.oup.com oxedOxford-Language-Report.PDF?regionuk accessed 30 June 2019. Palinscar, A and Brown, A 1984 Reciprocal Teaching of Comprehensionfostering and Comprehension-monitoring Activities. Cognition and Instruction,  12: 11775. Pauli, C and Reusser, K 2015 Discursive Cultures of Learning in Everyday  Mathematics Teaching: A Video-based Study on Mathematics Teaching in  German and Swiss Classrooms. In Resnick, L, Asterhan, C and Clarke, S eds  Socializing Intelligence Through Academic Talk and Dialogue pp 18193.  Washington: AERA. Perry, J, Lundie, D and Golder, G 2018 Metacognition in Schools: What Does  the Literature Suggest About the Effectiveness of Teaching Metacognition in  Schools? Educational Review. DOI: 10.108000131911.2018.1441127. Philpott, C and Poultney, V 2018 Evidence-based Teaching: A Critical Overview  for Enquiring Teachers. St Albans: Critical Publishing. Piaget, J 1950 The Psychology of Intelligence. Abingdon: Routledge. Piaget, J 1977 The Development of Thought. New York: Viking. Pierce, K and Gilles, C 2008 From Exploratory Talk to Critical Conversations  in Mercer, N and Hodkinson, S eds Exploring Talk in School pp 3753.  London: Sage. Pino-Pasternak, D, Whitebread, D and Neale, D 2018 The Role of Regulatory,  Social, and Dialogic Dynamics on Young Childrens Productive Collaboration in  Group Problem Solving. New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development,  162: 4166. Rajala, A, Hilppo, J and Lipponen, L 2012 The Emergence of Inclusive  Exploratory Talk in Primary Students Peer Interaction. International Journal of  Educational Research, 53: 5567. Resnick, L and Schantz, F 2015 Talking to Learn: The Promise and Challenge  of Dialogic Teaching. In Resnick, L, Asterhan, C and Clarke, S eds Socializing  Intelligence Through Academic Talk and Dialogue pp 44150. Washington,  DC: AERA. Reznitskaya, A, Glina, M, Carolan, B, Michaud, O, Rogers, J and Sequeira, L  2012 Examining Transfer Effects from Dialogic Discussions to New Tasks and  Contexts. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 374: 288306.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
110 Reznitskaya, A and Gregory, M 2013 Student Thought and Classroom  Language: Examining the Mechanisms of Change in Dialogic Teaching.  Educational Psychologist, 482: 11433. Reznitskaya, A, Kuo, L, Clark, A, Miller, B, Jadallah, M, Anderson, R and NguyenJahiel, K 2009 Collaborative Reasoning: A Dialogic Approach to Group  Discussions. Cambridge Journal of Education, 391: 2948. Ritchhart, R 2015 Creating Cultures of Thinking: The 8 Forces We Must Master  to Truly Transform Our Schools. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Rogoff, B 1990 Apprenticeship in Thinking: Cognitive Development in Social  Context. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Rojas-Drummond, S and Mercer, N 2003 Scaffolding the Development of  Effective Collaboration and Learning. International Journal of Educational  Research, 3912: 99111. Rojas-Drummond, S, Mazon, N, Littleton, K and Velez, M 2014 Developing  Reading Comprehension Through Collaborative Learning. Journal of Research  in Reading, 372: 13858. Rowe, M 1978 Teaching Science as Continuous Inquiry. New York: McGraw-Hill. Sahlberg, P 2016 Finnish Schools and the Global Education Reform Movement.  In Evers, J and Kneyber, R ed Flip the System: Changing Education from the  Ground Up pp 16274. Abingdon: Routledge. Schmitz, M and Winskel, H 2008 Towards Effective Partnerships in a  Collaborative Problem-solving Task. British Journal of Educational Psychology,  78: 58196. Scott, P 2008 Talking a Way to Understanding in Science Classrooms. In Mercer,  N and Hodkinson, S eds Exploring Talk in School pp 1736. London: Sage. Scott, P and Mortimer, E 2006 The Tension Between Authoritative and Dialogic  Discourse: A Fundamental Characteristic of Meaning Making Interactions in  High School Science Lessons. Science Education, 904: 60531. Sedova, K, Salamounova, Z and Svaricek, R 2014 Troubles With Dialogic  Teaching. Learning Culture and Social Interaction, 3: 27485. Shayer, M 1999 Cognitive Acceleration Through Science Education II: Its  Effects and Scope. International Journal of Science Education, 218: 883902. Sinclair, J and Coulthard, R 1975 Towards an Analysis of Discourse: The  English Used by Teachers and Pupils. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

R e f e r e n c e s   111
111 Skidmore, D 2006 Pedagogy and Dialogue. Cambridge Journal of Education,  364: 50314. Skidmore, D and Murakami, K 2012 Claiming Our Own Space: Polyphony in  TeacherStudent Dialogue. Linguistics and Education, 23: 20010. Smith, F, Hardman, F, Wall, K and Mroz, M 2004 Interactive Whole Class  Teaching in the National Literacy and Numeracy Strategies. British Educational  Research Journal, 303: 395411. Snell, J and Lefstein, A 2018 Low Ability, Participation and Identity in Dialogic  Pedagogy. American Educational Research Journal, 551: 4078. Snowling, M, Hulme, C, Bailey, A, Stothard, S and Lindsay, G 2011 Better  Communication Research Programme: Language and Literacy Attainment  of Pupils During Early Years and Through KS2: Does Teacher Assessment at  Five Provide a Valid Measure Of Childrens Current and Future Educational  Attainments? DfE Research Brief 172a. online Available at: https:files.eric. ed.govfulltextED526910.pdf accessed 30 June 2019. Sun, J, Anderson, R, Lin, T and Morris, J 2015 Social and Cognitive  Development During Collaborative Reasoning. In Resnick, L, Asterhan, C and  Clarke, S eds Socializing Intelligence Through Academic Talk and Dialogue  pp 6375. Washington, DC: AERA. Sutton Trust 2012 Social Mobility and Education Gaps in the Four Major  Anglophone Countries: Research Findings for the Social Mobility Summit.  online Available at: www.suttontrust.comresearch-papersocial-mobilityreport-2012-summit accessed 30 June 2019. Sweller, J 2016 Working Memory, Long-Term Memory and Instructional Design.  Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 5: 36067. Tan, C 2017 The Enactment of the Policy Initiative for Critical Thinking in  Singapore Schools. Journal of Education Policy, 325: 588603. Topping, K and Trickey, S 2007 Collaborative Philosophical Inquiry for  Schoolchildren: Cognitive Gains at a 2-Year Follow-Up. British Journal of  Educational Psychology, 77: 78796. Topping, K and Trickey, S 2014 The Role of Dialog in Philosophy for Children.  International Journal of Educational Research, 63: 6978. Townsend, A 2013 Action Research: The Challenges of Understanding and  Researching Practice. Maidenhead: McGraw-Hill. Trickey, S and Topping, K 2004 Philosophy for Children: A Systematic Review.  Research Papers in Education, 193: 36580.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
112 Tytler, R and Aranda, G 2015 Expert Teachers Discursive Moves in Science  Classroom Interactive Talk. International Journal of Science and Mathematics  Education, 13: 42546. Vaish, V 2008 Interactional Patterns in Singapores English Classrooms.  Linguistics and Education, 194: 36677. Van de Pol, J, Volman, M and Beishuizen, J 2010 Scaffolding in Teacher Student Interaction: A Decade of Research. Educational Psychology Review,  22: 27196. Van der Veen, C, de Mey, L, van Kruistum, C and van Oers, B 2017 The  Effect of Classroom Talk and Metacommunication on Young Childrens Oral  Communicative Competence and Subject Matter Knowledge: An Intervention  Study in Early Childhood Education. Learning and Instruction, 48: 1422. Vass, E, Littleton, K, Jones, A and Miell, D 2014 The Affectively Constituted  Dimensions of Creative Interthinking. International Journal of Educational  Research, 66: 6377. Visible Learning Plus 2018 250 Influences on Student Achievement. online  Available at: https:us.corwin.comsitesdefaultfiles250influences10.1.2018. pdf accessed 30 June 2019. Vrikki, M, Wheatley, L, Howe, C, Hennessy, S and Mercer, N 2019 Dialogic  Practices in Primary School Classrooms. Language and Education, 331: 85100. Vygotsky, L 1978 Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological  Processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Vygotsky, L 1986 Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Wangru, C 2016 On Teacher Talk From the Perspective of Dialogue Theory.  Cross Cultural Communication, 125: 3846. Watkins, C 2005 Classrooms as Learning Communities: A Review of Research.  London Review of Education, 31: 4764. Webb, N, Franke, M, Ing, M, Wong, J, Fernandez, C, Shin, N and Turrou, A 2014  Engaging With Others Mathematical Idea: Interrelationships Among Student  Participation, Teachers Instructional Practices and Learning. International  Journal of Educational Research, 63: 7993. Webb, P, Whitlow, J and Venter, D 2017 From Exploratory Talk to Abstract  Reasoning: A Case for Far Transfer? Educational Psychology Review, 29: 56581. Wegerif, R 2007 Dialogic Teaching and Technology. New York: Springer.

R e f e r e n c e s   113
113 Wegerif, R 2011 Towards a Dialogic Theory of How Children Think and Learn.  Thinking Skills and Creativity, 6: 17990. Wegerif, R and Dawes, L 2004 Thinking and Learning with ICT: Raising  Achievement in Primary Classrooms. Abingdon: Routledge. Wells, G 1999 Dialogic Inquiry: Toward a Sociocultural Practice and Theory of  Education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Wells, G and Arauz, R 2006 Dialogue in the Classroom. The Journal of the  Learning Sciences, 153: 379428. Wertsch, J 1991 Voices of the Mind. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Wertsch, J 2008 From Social Interaction to Higher Psychological Processes: A  Clarification and Application of Vygotskys Theory. Human Development,  51: 6679. Wiliam, D 2006 Assessment for Learning: Why, What and How. In Cambridge  Assessment Network Excellence in Assessment: Assessment for Learning, a  Supplement to the Cambridge Assessment Network Assessment for Learning  Seminar held on 15 September 2006 in Cambridge UK. online Available  at: www.assessnet.org.uke-learningfile.php1ResourcesExcellencein AssessmentExcellenceinAssessment-Issue1.pdf accessed 30 June 2019. Wiliam, D 2013 Engineering Effective Tasks, Activities and Discussions  That Elicit Evidence of Learning. online Available at: www.dylanwiliam.org  accessed 30 June 2019. Wiliam, D 2017 Getting Educational Research Right. online Available  at: https:medium.comthersagetting-educational-research-rightb77fbc82ef6e accessed 30 June 2019. Wilkinson, A 1965 The Concept of Oracy. English in Education, 2A2: 35. Wilkinson, A 1970 The Concept of Oracy. The English Journal, 59: 717. Willingham, D 2007 Critical Thinking: Why Is It So Hard To Teach? American  Educator, Summer 2007: 819. Wood, D, Bruner, J and Ross, G 1976 The Role of Tutoring in Problem Solving.  Journal of Child Psychiatry, 17: 89100. Wrigley, T 2018 The Power of Evidence: Reliable Science or a Set of Blunt  Tools? British Educational Research Journal, 44 3: 35976. Wubbels, T 2007 Do We Know a Community of Practice When We See One?  Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 162: 22533.
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
114 Young, M 2013 Overcoming the Crisis in Curriculum Theory: A Knowledgebased Approach. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 45: 10118. Zepeda, C, Hlutkowsky, C, Partika, A and Nokes-Malach, T 2018 Identifying  Teachers Supports of Metacognition Through Classroom Talk and Its Relation  To Growth in Conceptual Learning. Journal of Educational Psychology. Advance  online publication. online Available at: http:dx.doi.org10.1037edu0000300  accessed 30 June 2019. Zimmerman, B 2002 Becoming a Self-regulated Learner: An Overview. Theory  into Practice, 412: 6470.
I n d e x   115 A Abedin, M, 5, 15 accountable talk,  36, 37, 40 action and  implementation  action research  perspective, 935 choosing priorities, 91 educational  research, 91 enquiry process, 94 limitations of  evidence, 901 messages for  teachers from  evidence, 8990 action research  cycle, 94 action research  perspective, 935 Alexander, R, 2, 19,  40, 65, 81 Applebee, A, 38 Aranda, G, 37 Asterhan, C, 78 asymmetrical talk, 61 B Bakhtin, M, 41 Barnes, D, 60, 61 Beck, I, 66 Biesta, G, 4 Black, P, 82 Brown, A, 65 Bruner, J, 2, 14 Burns, C, 29 C Cameron, D, 17 Carter, R, 17 categorising talk,  5860 Cazden, C, 15 classroom talk  arguments  around, 810 cognitive argument, 2 debates and  questions, 810 description of, 12 evidence-informed  approach, 34 high-quality talk, 2 implications for  teachers, 4 psychological  argument, 2 research field, 56 research map and  timeline, 6 sociological  argument, 2 twenty-first century  learning, 756 cognition, 80 Cognitive Acceleration  in Mathematics  Education CAME  projects, 52 Cognitive Acceleration  in Science  Education   CASE projects,  51, 82 cognitive argument, 2 collaborative reasoning,  65, 68, 81 collective sensemaking process, 61 communicative  competence  argument, 2 communicative  style of dialogic  classroom, 434 Connolly, P, 4 Cook, V, 79 Coultas, V, 20 Coulthard, R, 27 critical thinking  case study, 87 characteristics, 84 nature and importance  of, 845 Philosophy for  Children P4C, 86 role of talk, 856 cumulative talk, 59 D dialogic classroom  case study, 523 communicative  style, 434 Index
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
116 democratic value  system, 40 description of, 402 dimensions, 42 features, 42 sense of community,  445 dialogic discourse, 49 dialogic episodes, 50 dialogic inquiry, 40 dialogic spells, 46 dialogic stance, 456 dialogic strategies, 81 dialogic talk  five-step process of  learning, 48 impact on  attainment, 502 promoting, 4750 dialogic teaching  practices  challenges for  learner, 54 challenges for  teacher, 55 characteristics of, 46 cognitive and  linguistic tools, 47 features, 42 randomised control  trial, 51 repertoires and, 46 research literature, 53 dialogic teaching  research, 7 dialogue versus  dialogic, 41 disputational talk, 59 E educational application  of theory, 1416 Edwards, A, 18 embedding  technology, 7980 English Speaking  Union, 19 enquiry-based  classroom, 48 ethnographic  research, 7 evidence-informed  approach, 34 experimental research  designs, 7 exploratory talk, 40, 59,  601, 81 extract, 62 learners and, 66 F Fernndez, M, 61 Fisher, R, 22, 84 Flanders, N, 25 Flavell, J, 80 G Galton, M, 26 Gilkerson, J, 17 Gillies, R, 13, 65, 68 Global Education  Reform Movement, 3 Goswami, U, 13 Gregory, M, 81 H Hattie, J, 26, 80 Higham, R, 13 high-quality talk, 2 Howe, C, 5, 15 I IDZ, see intermental  development zone  Initiation, Response,  Feedback IRF  pattern  extended and  enhanced, 2934 identification of, 278 issues for  learning, 289 intermental  development zone  IDZ, 15 interthinking, 61 K Kirschner, P, 72 Kuhn, D, 82 L Lai, E, 81 Larkin, S, 22 Lefstein, A, 2 linguistic  ethnography, 5 linguistic research, 6 Lipman, M, 84 dialogic classroom  cont.

I n d e x   117
117 Littleton, K, 15, 60 M Major, L, 79 Maybin, J, 26, 57 McKeown, M, 66 Mehan, H, 27 Menzies, L, 19 Mercer, N, 5, 15, 60 meta-argument, 83 meta-argumentation, 83 metacognition, 80 metacognitive teacher  talk, 83 meta-comprehension,  83 meta-talk, 83 Michaels, S, 36 Millard, W, 19 motivation, 80 Murakami, K, 34 Murphy, P, 65 Myhill, D, 26, 28, 29 N National Oracy  Project, 18 O OConnor, C, 29 oracy  aspects of, 18 case study, wholeschool level, 223 definition of, 18 English Speaking  Union, 19 implementation  across  schools, 1922 National Oracy  Project, 18 optional pedagogical  strategy, 19 skills framework, 21 World Economic  Forum, 19 oral pedagogy, 19 P P4C, see Philosophy for  Children  Palinscar, A, 65 peer dialogue, 578 peer group work, 58 peer talk  categorising  talk, 5860 challenges, 723 collective sensemaking process, 61 embedding ground  rules, 702 evidence for  benefits, 646 exploratory talk, 601 learners and, 613 Perry, J, 80 Philosophy for Children  P4C, 86 Philpott, C, 3 Piaget, J, 12 Pino-Pasternak, D, 82 Poultney, V, 3 presentational talk, 60 psychological  argument, 2 Q quality talk, 85 R reciprocal teaching, 65 repertoires, 46 research field, 56 research map and  timeline, 6 Resnick, L, 5 Reznitskaya, A, 65, 81 Ritchhart, R, 84 Rogoff, B, 13, 15 S Sahlberg, P, 3 scaffolding, 14, 15 Schantz, F, 5 self-regulated learning  and metacognition  evidence linking,  824 importance of, 801 role of talk, 812 self-regulation, 80 sense of  community, 445 Sinclair, J, 27 Skidmore, D, 34 SLCN, see Speech,  Language and  Communications  Needs 
C l a s s r o o m   T a l k
118 Snell, J, 2 social constructivist  research, 6 socio-cognitive  conflict, 12 sociocultural  research, 5, 7 sociolinguistic  research, 6 sociological  argument, 2 speaking and listening,  see oracy  Speech, Language and  Communications  Needs SLCN, 16 spoken language, see  also oracy  educational application  of theory, 1416 importance in  schools, 1617 theories of learning  as social  activity, 1213 spoken language  competence  research, 6 structuring peer  discussion  ground rules, 67 group, 67 task, 68 teachers role, 6970 systematic research, 6 T talk and technology  embedding  technology,  7980 perspectives on, 76 stimulus for, 778 talking through and at  computers, 789 talking with and at  computers, 778 Tan, C, 85 teachers mediatedlearning  behaviours, 70 technology enhancing  dialogue, 77 Thinking Science  Adey, 52 Thinking Together  approach, 64 Todd, F, 61 twenty-first century  learning, 756 Tytler, R, 37 V Van de Pol, J, 14 Vass, E, 60 verbal strategies, 62 Vygotsky, L, 5, 12, 14 W Warren, P, 28 Webb, P, 64 Wertsch, J, 14 Westgate, D, 18 whole-class interaction  beyond IRF, 368 definition and  description of,  257 IRF pattern, see  Initiation,  Response, Feedback  IRF pattern  National Literacy  and Numeracy  Strategies, 26 Wiliam, D, 82 Wilkinson, A, 18 Willingham, D, 84 Wood, D, 14 Z Zepeda, C, 83 Zillmer, N, 82 Zimmerman, B, 80 zone of proximal  development ZPD, 13 ZPD, see zone zone  of proximal  development