The Classroom Teachers  Behavior Management  Toolbox

This page intentionally left blank.

The Classroom Teachers  Behavior Management  Toolbox INFORMATION AGE PUBLISHING, INC. Charlotte, NC  www.infoagepub.com Roger Pierangelo Long Island University George Giuliani Hofstra University

Copyright  2016 Information Age Publishing Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a  retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,  photocopying, microfilming, recording or otherwise, without written permission  from the publisher. Printed in the United States of America Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data   A CIP record for this book is available from the Library of Congress      http:www.loc.gov ISBN:	 978-1-68123-475-5 Paperback

978-1-68123-476-2 Hardcover

978-1-68123-477-9 ebook

v Contents

	 Introduction. xi S E C T I O N  I Understanding High Risk Behavior 	 1	 What is High Risk Behavior?. 3 	 2	 Symptoms Versus Problems. 5 	 3	 Examples of Symptomatic Behavior. 7 	 4	 Energy Drain and its Effect on Behavior and Learning. 9 Individuals With Low Levels of Tension and Stress. 9 Individuals With High Levels of Tension and Stress. 10 S E C T I O N  II How Ego Functions Effect a Childs Behavior 	 5	 How a Healthy Ego Functions.15 	 6	 How a Fragile Ego Functions.17 	 7	 Know Your Audience.19

vi    Contents S E C T I O N  III Self-Esteem 	 8	 What Is Self-Esteem?. 23 	 9	 Understanding the Foundations of Self-Esteem. 25 	 10	 Practical Suggestions to Improve Self-Esteem. 27 Be Solution Oriented. 27 Allow Children the Right to Make Decisions. 28 Offer Alternative Ways When Handling a Situation. 28 Teach Children the Proper Labels When Communicating Feelings.28 Allow Children the Opportunity to Repeat Successful Experiences.29 Allow Avenues for Disagreement.29 Help Your Students Set Realistic Goals.29 Use a Reward System to Shape Positive Behavior.30 Make Sure You Communicate to Parents Not to Pave Childrens  Roads.30 	 11	 Understand Avoidance Behavior Patterns as an Indication  of Low Levels of Confidence. 31 	 12	 Understand How Negative Energy Drains Confidence and  Effects Behavior and Learning. 35 S E C T I O N  IV Management Tools 	 13	 Behavior Crisis Management Tools.41 Pre-Empting Behavior. 41 Purpose.41 Examples. 41 What May Not Work.42 Try This.42

Contents    vii Proximity Teaching. 43 Purpose. 43 Examples. 43 What May Not Work. 43 Try This. 43 Use a Forced Choice Technique.44 Purpose. 44 Examples.44 What May Not Work.44 Try This.44 Learn What Triggers Certain Behaviors in Your Students:  Finding Each Childs Emotional Aura.45 Purpose. 45 Examples.45 What May Not Work.46 Try This.46 This Is Not Open for Discussion.46 Purpose. 46 Examples. 47 What May Not Work. 47 Try This. 47 Controlling Student Outcomes: You Do and Then You Get. 47 Purpose.47 Examples. 47 What May Not Work.48 Try This.48 Initiate a Vested Interest in the Students Desire   to Maintain Success. 49 Purpose.49 Example.49 What May Not Work. 49 Try This.49 Set Control Boundaries Several Times a Day. 51 Purpose.51 Examples. 51 What May Not Work. 51 Try This. 52

viii    Contents Avoid Placing Yourself in a Position of a Judge. 52 Purpose.52 Examples. 52 What May Not Work. 52 Try This. 53 Providing Students with a Level System Approach to Shape  Behavior. 53 Purpose.53 Examples. 53 What May Not Work. 54 Try This.54 Developing Manageable Consequences. 55 Purpose.55 Examples. 55 What May Not Work. 56 Try This. 56 Removal of the Audience. 57 Purpose.57 Examples. 58 What May Not Work. 58 Try This. 58 Dealing With Attention Seeking Students. 59 Purpose.59 Examples. 59 What May Not Work.60 Try This.60 Use Delay As a Discipline Tool.60 Purpose. 60 Examples. 61 What May Not Work. 61 Try This. 61 Find Alternate Methods to Spotlight Positive Behaviors or Skills. 62 Purpose. 62 Examples. 62 What May Not Work. 62 Try This. 62

Contents    ix Initiating Compliments. 63 Purpose.63 Examples. 63 What May Not Work. 63 Try This. 63 Drop Off.64 Purpose. 64 Examples.64 What May Not Work.64 Try This.65 S E C T I O N  V How to Help Students Feel Good About Themselves   in Order to Reduce Inappropriate Behavior 	 14	 Helping Students Feel Good About Themselves. 69 1  Empowerment. 70 2  Hope. 70 3  Autonomy. 71 4  Resiliency. 73 5  Accomplishment. 73 6  Recognition. 74 7  Perseverance. 75 S E C T I O N  VI Final Word 	 15	 Final Points.79

	 References. 83 Suggested Readings. 83

	 About the Authors. 89

This page intentionally left blank.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, page xi Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 xi Introduction T he Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox focuses on practical  and productive techniques that can be used in a variety of behavior  crisis situations that may occur in a classroom. Teachers have told us that  one of their major concerns has been dealing with severe behavior problems in the classroom and the fear of not knowing how to handle the various situations. While there are many different types of crisis situations that may occur, having the proper tools can prevent a situation from becoming even  worse. This book provides a variety of management tools for all types of situations. These tools have been gathered over the years and have been very  successful in actual classroom situations.

This page intentionally left blank.

S E C T I O N  I Understanding High Risk Behavior

This page intentionally left blank.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 34 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 3 1 What is High Risk Behavior? A s a special or general education teacher you will come in contact with a  variety of personality types in the classroom. For the most part, teachers  are put on the firing line with little or no training in why children do what  they do. They are expected to help children learn but are not trained in  understanding the numerous dynamic obstacles that prevent children from  reaching this objective. Most teachers have not taken courses on human  nature and dynamics and are not aware of symptomatic behavior and what  is means. This lack of understanding creates immense frustration which  only hinders the teachers progress in working with fostering childrens academic success. All teachers need to understand the inner workings of children who  are experiencing trouble in school. Understanding what causes children  to choose certain behavioral patterns can help reach them sooner and prevent long lasting scars. This book will present you with an easy to understand basis of why children do what they do. It is our hope that this insight will allow you to work  more effectively on the real issues that may be creating problems in and  SECTION I: Understanding High Risk Behavior
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox outside of school. We have also provided step by step suggestions on what to  do when a specific behavior occurs in your classroom. The suggestions are  only guidelines on what to do. It is critical to understand that patterns of  inappropriate behavior should always be shared with the school psychologist or child study team. We hope this book acts as reference tool for early  identification of problems seen in everyday classrooms.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 56 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 5 2 Symptoms Versus Problems D ynamic or internal problems i.e., conflicts, fears, insecurities, create  tension. The more serious the problem, the greater the level of tension experienced by a child. When tension is present, behavior is used to relieve the tension. The more serious the problems the greater the tension  and the behavior required to relieve this tension becomes more immediate.  As a result, the behavior may be inappropriate and impulsive rather than  well thought out. When tension is very high it may require a variety of behaviors to relive  the dynamic stress. These behaviors then become symptoms of the seriousness of the problem. That is why the frequency and intensity of the symptomatic behavior reflects the seriousness of the underlying problems. As the child becomes more confident or learns to work out his problems i.e., through therapy, the underlying problems become smaller. As  a result, they generate less tension and consequently less inappropriate,  impulsive or self-destructive behavior patterns. SECTION I: Understanding High Risk Behavior
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox If a child does not recognize or does not have the label for the problem  then the tension is usually released through some form of behavior. We call  these outlets of tension behavioral symptoms. These behavioral symptoms  are sometimes misidentified as problems and therefore treated as such.  When this occurs the problem only gets worse. If one sees a fever as the  problem, then treating that alone will exacerbate the problem. These behavioral symptoms become the first signal noticed by teachers, parents, and  professionals. Therefore, it is very important for teachers to understand the difference between symptoms and problems. If this is not fully understood, a  great deal of frustration will occur in trying to extinguish the symptom on  both the part of the child and the teacher. The identification of symptoms as an indication of something more  serious is another first step in helping children work out their problem.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 78 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 7 3 Examples of Symptomatic Behavior E xamples of typical symptomatic behavior patterns that may be indicative of more serious concerns may include those shown in Figure 3.1. While many of these symptoms may indicate the presence of a problem, several guidelines can be used to determine the seriousness of the  problems. 1.	 Consider how often the symptoms occur. The more serious the  problem the greater amount of tension generated. The greater  amount of tension the more frequent will be the need to release  this tension. Therefore, the greater the frequency of the symptom,  the greater chance that the problems are serious. 2.	 Consider how long the symptoms last. The more serious the problem the greater the degree of tension generated. The greater the  degree the longer it will take to release the tension. Therefore, the  longer the duration of the symptoms the more serious the problem SECTION I: Understanding High Risk Behavior
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox 3.	 Consider how serious the reactions are at the time of occurrence. The more serious the problem the more intense the level of  tension coming off the problem will be. Impulsivity Lies constantly frequently hands in incomplete work Awkward gives many excuses for inappropriate behavior fearful of adults constantly blames others for problems fearful of new situations panics easily verbally hesitant Distractible Hypoactive short attention span Hyperactive over-reactive fears criticism physical with others rarely takes chances Intrusive moody unable to focus on task defies authority Procrastinates anxious Squints not able to generalize turns head while listening insecure Disorganization trouble starting work Inflexibility tires easily Irresponsibility controlling poor judgment overly critical Denial forgetfulness Daydreaming painfully shy unwillingness to venture a guess overly social unwillingness to reason slow starter social withdrawal argumentative constant use of self-criticism destroys property bullies other children lazy needs constant reassurance inconsistency poor reader poor spelling Argumentative

Figure 3.1 

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 911 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 9 4 Energy Drain and its Effect   on Behavior and Learning Individuals With Low Levels of Tension and Stress Everyone possesses a certain amount of psychic energy to use in dealing  with the everyday demands and stresses of life. In normal development  there is a certain amount of stress but because of an absence of major conflicts which tend to drain energy, the individual has more than enough  to keep things in perspective. Consequently, the division of energy usually  results in what we call positive behavior symptoms. For instance, in school the child, will exhibit more often than not behaviors that include, good concentration, responsibility with school work,  consistency, age appropriate attention span, flexibility, appropriate memory, high frustration tolerance, appropriate peer interaction, organization  and an appropriate ability to focus on tasks.  One will hear these comments  from teachers and notice many at home when the child is involved with  homework. It is also important that it is kept in mind that not every child  who is conflict free will exhibit these symptoms all the time. Only become  concerned if patterns of behaviors reflect a potential problem. SECTION I: Understanding High Risk Behavior
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox If the child is conflict free, one will also notice certain positive behavior  patterns at home. These will include more often than not, normal strivings for parental approval, resiliency, willingness to reason, willingness to  try, appropriate judgment and normal responses to discipline. Again keep  in mind that these patterns may vary to some degree during adolescence  and still be within normal limits. If the child is not experiencing any major problems, heshe will usually  have little difficulty falling asleep. While they may have problems waking  up, as many of us do, it will not interfere in their ability to get to school. A  problem like this is only serious when it affects ones ability to function, usually referred to as a functional impairment. Such would be the case if a child  could not get up every morning and was consistently late to school. This type  of symptomatic behavior might be a signal of a more serious problem. Socially, the child will more often than not maintain social interactions; show a willingness to try new social experiences and treat hisher  peers appropriately. Individuals With High Levels of Tension and Stress However, when serious conflicts arise, the available energy must be drained  away to deal with the conflicts like white blood cells to an infection. Since  energy must be drained away there is less available energy to keep things  in perspective. When a parent or teacher observes a pattern of behaviors similar to  these, heshe should automatically become aware that some serious problem may exist. These symptoms are not the problems but an outgrowth of  a serious problem. It is therefore very important for the parent to try to  identify what the problem or problems are so that treatment can take place. If it is suspected that some difficulty exists, one should not hesitate initiating a referral or consultation with the school psychologist or contact a  local therapist for a consultation. Like an infection, waiting too long will  only aggravate the situation. Consequently, when such serious problems or conflicts arise, they will  drain off energy normally used for home and school.  As this energy is  drained away to deal with these serious issues, negative symptomatic behavior patterns will develop. Such symptoms should indicate to you that a  problem exists and needs to be defined as soon as possible. These negative  behavior patterns, indicating the presence of conflicts will be observed in  many areas of the childs life.

Energy Drain and its Effect on Behavior and Learning     11 For instance, at school the child may now exhibit negative symptoms  like inability to focus on task, procrastination, disorganization, denial, irresponsibility, inflexibility, projecting the reasons for problems on everyone  and everything else, selected forgetting, daydreaming and so on. At home a  parent may observe oversensitivity, over-reactions, forgetfulness, unwillingness to venture out, unwillingness to reason, stubbornness, lying, exaggeration and possible somatic complaints such as stomach aches, headaches  and so on. You may even begin to notice changes in the childs sleeping  patterns. Heshe may have great difficulty falling asleep since tension interferes with relaxation and may even begin sleep walking or showing other  signs of restless sleep. In the morning you may find extreme resistance in  getting up which may result in lateness or absence. More frequent nightmares may also be a signal of some unresolved inner conflicts. Socially, one may observe the child withdrawing from social situations,  constantly finding fault with peers, being unwilling to try new social experiences, expressing social fears or beliefs that no one likes himher and so on. Remember, that such symptoms only occur as a result of a deeper undefined problem. Once the problem is identified and resolved, the negative  symptomatic behavior will dissipate since the tension will be alleviated. If  caught early, most of these issues can be resolved in a relatively quick period of time. However, also be aware that even though the problem may be  identified, many months or years may have passed and will result in a longer  treatment period. If therapy is required be aware that it can be a long term process, especially if the problems have been around for a long period of time. However,  you can tell if your child is making progress in therapy by the reduction of  the negative symptomatic behavior patterns. As a child begins to verbalize  the issues and find better ways of coping, the tension becomes diminished.  As the tension is reduced, the need for symptomatic behavior is also reduced. Therefore, a reduction in the frequency, duration, and intensity of  negative symptoms will mean that the child is getting stronger and may be  on the right track.

This page intentionally left blank.

S E C T I O N  II How Ego Functions Effect a Childs Behavior

This page intentionally left blank.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 1516 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 15 5 How a Healthy Ego Functions W hen we think of an ego we think about the psychic system that filters the rules of society, social rules, awareness of our surroundings,  appropriate reactions and behavior to situations, appropriate emotional  reactions to situations, and so may more functions that come into play hundreds of times a day. A healthy ego should be seen like a strong fort with very thick walls that  can keep things out until the appropriate decisions on what to do can be  determined. Imagine that in this fort lives an ego team of people who always try to operate on logic, common sense, intellect, and farness. Further,  the ego team is responsible to filter and respond to things coming or being  thrown at the fort every day. Because it is a healthy ego and has strong walls,  the ego team can take their time in determining several factors for the best  response such as:

What exactly is being presented?

What are all the facts or issues that need to be considered?

What are the optional responses? SECTION II: How Ego Functions Effect a Childs Behavior
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox

How will the options affect others?

What do we know about the people involved in this situation?

What are the consequences of the responses?

What are the possible outcomes? Since the ego team has time to consider all these factors the chances of  a positive response and positive outcome increase dramatically. This is  made possible by the lack of tension and stress they are under because  of the strong walls of the fort. Being under such little stress allows them  to take their time and consider everything. Consequently, the appropriate  response to a situation will raise the ego teams confidence in their decision  making ability. Further, the ego teams reputation among all the inhabitants of the fort becomes stronger because they see how logical and fair the  responses are that are being made by the team every day. This commanded  respect respect gathered by the observation of good judgment further enhances how the team feels about itself. With every added positive response  the team grows in confidence and even if they should make a mistake, they  have no trouble fixing or apologizing since that would be the logical common sense thing to do. A healthy ego always tries to work on common sense  and logic and any response resulting from this will not confuse the ego.  This is not the case in the fragile ego. However, this does not mean that heshe will not make mistakes but  their ability to bounce back is greater. Examples of behaviors you will observe when dealing with a child with a healthy ego include:

Willingness to reason

Takes responsibilities for actions

Understands consequences

Is aware of how hisher behavior affects others

Able to apologize appropriately

Able to delay impulses

Asks for advice

Reactions appropriate for issue at hand

Not afraid to question

Does not get defensive when getting advice

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 1718 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 17 6 How a Fragile Ego Functions L ets take that same analogy about a fort used in the concept of a healthy  ego and what we see with a fragile ego is also a fort. However this fort is  decayed with many portions missing or filled with large holes which do not  provide the inhabitants or its ego team a clear sense of safety. When things  are thrown at the fort they come right in without any protection or time  to consider all the factors required for an appropriate response. Unlike  the healthy ego where the ego team has time to consider many factors, the  ego team in an unhealthy ego must respond immediately since its sense of  vulnerability and fear is so much greater. Consequently, the actions taken  are not well thought out and impulsive at best. As a result, the responses to  these actions are problematic and the inhabitants of the fort are not confident in the ego teams ability to take care of them. This lack of confidence  makes the ego team try to compensate to get back some respect but because  of their inability to delay or consider all the factors, their responses get  worse and have far greater negative consequences. When things come into  the fort through the holes they must act quickly usually using a deflection  method which means that they throw it back out quickly without awareness  SECTION II: How Ego Functions Effect a Childs Behavior
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox of what they are dealing with or the consequences of this action. The main  purpose is to rid the fort even if it is something that may actually be good  for the fort. This may occur frequently because of the lack of energy available to the ego team to discriminate good from bad, dangerous from safe,  mild from severe, minimal from harsh, etc. What you will observe from a  student with an unhealthy ego follows:

Procrastination

Impulsivity

Aggressiveness

Verbal abuse

Physically aggressive

Lying

Stealing

Fabrication

Rationalization

Denial

Projection on to others for their own behavior

Not taking responsibility for their actions

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 1920 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 19 7 Know Your Audience O ne of the best tools you can learn as a teacher is to know your audience. What this means is you will need to understand that what you  see is often driven by motives you cannot see, and the techniques you use  may need to focus on motive, rather than behavior, in order to help a student succeed. Sometimes students feel insecure, inadequate, frightened,  overwhelmed, anxious, confused, etc. All of these emotions are usually very  hard for children to express, so they may get insulated by withdrawal, anger,  or acting out behavior. Knowing your audience is taking the time to learn  about your students fears and inadequacies and understand that they may  need reassurance, not discipline, guidance, not punishment, further explanation or examples, not time outs, etc. However, no inappropriate behavior  should be condoned and the tools in this book will teach you how to deal  with those behaviors on one level. But on another level, a student may feel  inadequate many times during the day and the tension from this may come  out in the form of acting out or inappropriate behavior. Understanding  your audience means that you realize that all behavior has a trigger and it  is your responsibility to find that trigger e.g., insecurity, anxiety, or panic  SECTION II: How Ego Functions Effect a Childs Behavior
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox to name a few. When you see evidence of fragile ego functioning, you will  need to take precautions with a student in two very important ways: 1  making sure that assignments are constructed to ensure a sense of completion; and 2 sense of success. The practical tools in Section VI: How to  Help Students Feel Good about Themselves in Order to Reduce Inappropriate Behavior will assist you in accomplishing this for your students. Knowing your audience also means that you look past behavior rather  than react to it. You learn to figure out why your students do what they do.  Remember, no student wants to fail and many students may communicate  their state of mind, fears, and conflicts through behavior. Once you know  what the behavior means, finding answers will make the student feel safer  and more in control. Once you learn the real emotions behind behavior,  you should develop an emotional dictionary so that the student can communicate his or her feelings verbally rather than act them out behaviorally. Be aware that reactions may be due to a task being too difficult and  causing himher to deflect the inadequacy and fear of failure in some inappropriate behavioral fashion. In this case, knowing that all behavior has a  trigger look back to possible conditions that may have led up to the reaction. Understanding a students insecurities, fears, anxieties, and so forth,  will help short circuit inappropriate reactions.

S E C T I O N  III Self-Esteem

This page intentionally left blank.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, page 23 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 23 8 What Is Self-Esteem? S elf-esteem is feeling good about yourself. Because it is a feeling, self-esteem is expressed in the way that people behave. However, success is important for the growth of positive feelings about oneself. High self-esteem  will allow your students to keep failure situations in proper perspective.  Whether or not a failure situation is perceived as a learning experience, or  as a self-punishment, depends on ones level of self-esteem. Children as well as adults will vary in the type of self-esteem exhibited.  We all feel more confident on some days than others. Feeling low self-esteem from time to time is not a problem. However, a pattern of low selfesteem should be observed in order for there to be a concern. Teachers can  easily observe childrens self-esteem by seeing what they do and how they  accomplish it. SECTION III: Self-Esteem

This page intentionally left blank.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 2526 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 25 9 Understanding the Foundations   of Self-Esteem A Child With High Self-Esteem Will:

feel capable of influencing others opinions or behaviors in a  positive way

be able to communicate feelings and emotions in a variety of  situations

behave independently

approach new situations in a positive manner

exhibit a high level of frustration tolerance

take on and assume responsibility

keep situations in proper perspective

communicate positive feelings about himher

be willing to try a new situation without major resistance Such children will possess an internal locus of control. Consequently, they feel  whatever happens to them is a direct result of their own behavior or actions.  These children will therefore feel a sense of power over their environment. SECTION III: Self-Esteem
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox Children With Low Self-Esteem Will:

communicate self-derogatory statements

exhibit a low frustration tolerance

become easily defensive

listen to others judgment rather than hisher own

be resistant to new situations and experiences

constantly blame others for their failures and problems

have very little feeling of power and control

lose perspective easilyblow things out of proportion

avoid any situation that creates tension

be unwilling to reason Such children will possess an external locus of control. Consequently, these  children feel that whatever happens to them is the result of fate, luck, or  chance. In order to fully understand self-esteem, one must consider the factors  involved. Self-esteem occurs when children experience the positive feelings  of satisfaction associated with feeling: ConnectedA child feels good relating to people, places, and things  that are important to her and these relationships are approved and  respected by others. UniqueA child acknowledges and respects the personal characteristics  that make him special and different, and receives approval and respect from others for those characteristics. PowerfulA child uses the skills, resources, and opportunities that she  has in order to influence the circumstances of her own life in important ways.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 2730 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 27 10 Practical Suggestions   to Improve Self-Esteem T he following suggestions are offered to enhance childrens positive  feelings about themselves. These recommendations require consistency, genuineness, and discrimination on the part of teachers and parents. No  one suggestion by itself will have long lasting effects. A combination of techniques will have greater impact. However, you should always keep in mind  that many other factors, not within your control i.e., peer group, school  environmental factors, perception etc., will also contribute to childrens  self-esteem. However, the roles of teachers and parents are crucial and can  offset a childs difficulties in other areas. Be Solution Oriented An important step in building your students self-esteem is to teach solutions rather than blame. Some children are very blame oriented. When  something goes wrong, heshe is quick to point the finger at someone  else. Children who are blame oriented not only become easily frustrated,  but never learn how to handle obstacles. Teaching your students solutions  begins with simple statements like, Whos at fault is not important. The  SECTION III: Self-Esteem
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox more important question is what we can do so that it doesnt happen again.  Being solution oriented allows children a sense of control and resiliency  when confronted with situations that could be ego deflating and lower their  self-esteem. Allow Children the Right to Make Decisions While the statement, No one promised them a democracy may hold  true in some situations, allowing your students the right to make decisions  that affects their daily life can only enhance their self-esteem. Decisions  about decorating lockers, seating arrangements, and free-time activities,  and so forth, can make children feel some sense of control in what happens  to them. Coupled with solution orientation, mistakes can be used as a positive learning experience. A good technique to use here is a forced choice  technique. Provide the student with three options, all of which are acceptable to you, and ask them to choose which one they prefer. The student  will feel like they are making the decision but all of the choices will lead to  resolution and success. Offer Alternative Ways When Handling a Situation Some people know only one or two alternatives in handling situations.  After these fail, frustration occurs. Conditioning your students to see many  alternative ways of handling a situation or obstacle can also enhance their  self-esteem. Asking children what they have tried and offering those options  to other possible solutions, increases their tool box. The more tools we  have at our disposal, the easier life becomes. Individuals with limited tools  tend to use avoidance and flight as a means of coping with frustration. Teach Children the Proper Labels When Communicating Feelings The ability to correctly label ones feelings is a factor in self-esteem.  Children have a very difficult time communicating because they lack the  proper labels for their feelings. When children are unable to label an internal feeling, it becomes trapped and the frustration may become manifested  in behavior problems, physical symptoms and so on. When such feelings  are manifested in other forms, they are usually misunderstood or misinterpreted. Teachers can offer children the correct labels. For example, you  may want to say, While the feeling you are expressing sounds like anger,  it is really frustration and frustration is . . . Now that you know this, is there  anything that is causing you frustration?

Practical Suggestions to Improve Self-Esteem     29 Building an emotional vocabulary allows communication to flow more  easily and reduces a childs unwillingness to deal with situations. Allow Children the Opportunity to Repeat Successful Experiences Whenever possible, allow your students the chance to handle any job or  responsibility in which they have proven success. A foundation of positive  experiences is necessary for self-esteem. Since the child has mastered skills  required for the job, any opportunity to repeat success can only be ego inflating. Jobs such as collecting homework from other students, handing out  materials, cleaning the room, are examples of repetitive experiences that  will lead to a feeling of consistent success. However, in the cases of children  with severe disabilities, the activities chosen will have to take into consideration the limitations so as not to frustrate them. Allow Avenues for Disagreement Children with higher self-esteem will always feel they have an avenue to  communicate their concerns. Even though the result may not go in their  favor, the knowledge that a situation or disagreement can be discussed allows the child to feel some involvement in his destiny. This factor becomes  important when one sees that many children with low self-esteem feel a loss  of power in affecting change. Help Your Students Set Realistic Goals This is a very crucial issue in helping children improve their self-esteem. Some children will set unrealistic goals, fall short, and feel like a  failure. Repeated over a period of time, these unrealistic goals will result in  consistent failure leading to more unrealistic goals. This circular behavior  sometimes results with children becoming unwilling to venture out or take  chances. The more limited children become in their experiences, the less  chance for success. Avoidance, passivity, rejection of an idea or experience  will only reinforce feelings of inadequacy. Help your students by defining their objective. You may want to ask  them what they want to accomplish. After this, try to help them define the  steps necessary to accomplish the task and break down the task into smaller,  controllable tasks that have the greatest chance of success. Each step becomes a goal in itself. Children should not see one final goal, but a series of  smaller goals leading to a final point. In this way they will feel accomplishment at every step.
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox Use a Reward System to Shape Positive Behavior Punishment tells a child what not to do, while rewards inform them of  what to do. Rewarding positive behavior increases self-esteem. Children enjoy winning the approval of teachers, parents, and peers, especially when it  comes to a job or task. You may want to use rewards such as notes indicating  how proud you feel about what the child has accomplished. Rewards can  also be special time where the student can choose from a list of fun activities, lunch with the teacher etc. Make Sure You Communicate to Parents Not to Pave Childrens Roads Some parents make the mistake of reducing frustration for children to  the point where the child receives a distorted view of the world. Children  with high self-esteem get frustrated. However, they tend to be more resilient  because they have previously handled frustrating situations and worked out  the solutions themselves. When parents rush to the aide of their children,  finish assignments for them, or make excuses, they are changing the environment to prevent them from becoming frustrated. However, they are  unwittingly reinforcing childrens low self-esteem and creating feelings of  learned helplessness. After a while, children become dependent upon their  parents to bail them out when they are confronted with frustration. The  need to master the environment and find solutions to challenges is crucial  to positive self-esteem. The old saying, Catch me a fish and Ill eat today,  teach me to fish and Ill eat forever, seems to apply. In conclusion, improving your students self-esteem is a process that  needs to be viewed in a positive way. Altering feelings of low self-esteem offers children a more positive future.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 3133 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 31 11 Understand Avoidance Behavior Patterns  as an Indication of Low Levels   of Confidence S ome of the first signs that a child is experiencing problems with learning are avoidance behaviors. These are techniques used by children to  avoid what they perceive as a failure provoking or an ego-deflating situation. Children will often exhibit these symptoms at home and at school  to avoid loss of parental approval, peer humiliation, or failure. They are  avoiding:

showing their parents they are not capable

dealing with possible parental anger and frustration

coming face to face with their own inadequacy

dealing with peer pressure and possible ridicule Some of the more common avoidance behaviors are discussed in detail below: SECTION III: Self-Esteem
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox

Selective forgettingIf a child knows the batting averages of all  baseball players, the words from most songs on the radio, the  times of most TV shows, but habitually forgets to bring home  his or her math book the child is exhibiting selective forgetting.  The selectivity of the forgetfulness usually centers on areas of  learning that the child may find frustrating.

Forgetting to write down assignments day after dayThis symptom may continue even after repeated requests or threats. The  child exhibiting this symptom is most likely trying to avoid a  perceived-failure experience.

Taking hours to complete homework classworkIn this avoidance pattern the child seems to labor or procrastinates over  school-work. Frequent trips to the kitchen for food, or to the  bathroom, or to get a drink, or to sharpen a pencil, delay the  possibility of what the child perceives will be failure. This symptom also occurs if a child is under tension and having difficulty  concentrating for long periods of time.

Finishing homework or classwork very quicklyThe child exhibiting this symptom is trying to get the ego threatening situation  homeworkclasswork over as quickly as possible. The child  makes every attempt to rush through the assignments with  little if any care or patience. Getting it over as quickly as possible  almost makes it seem as if it never existed.

Not being able to get started with homework or classwork When a childs anxiety level is very high it is very difficult to start  the engine. He or she may spend a great deal of time getting  ready for homework by arranging books, sharpening pencils,  getting the paper out, opening the textbooks, getting a glass of  water, going to the bathroom, and so on. Once again, the child is  trying to avoid the task that he or she finds threatening.

Frequently bringing home unfinished classworkA child can  exhibit this symptom for several reasons. One reason could be  that the child has a low energy level and therefore has difficulty  dealing with tasks involving sustained concentration. The second  reason could be that the child is dependent upon parental assistance with homework. If the childs parents constantly sit next  to the child when he or she is doing homework the child can  become conditioned to their assistance and feel helpless without  it. Since the child misses such support in the classroom, the child  procrastinates in doing his classwork so that he or she can bring it  home do it with his or her parents. The third reason could be the 

Understand Avoidance Behavior Patterns     33 childs need for attention. Bringing home unfinished classwork  may necessitate a parents sitting with him or her to complete the  work. The child may see the parent as a captive audience and  stop working or complain that he or she cant do the work if the  parent tries to leave. Bringing home unfinished classwork extends  the period of attention the child receives from his or her parents;  however, these situations usually become more tense and negative  as the hours progress and the parents patience waivers.

Consistently leaving long term assignments until the last minuteAvoidance of school-related tasks, especially long-term  ones, is a frequent symptom of children with low energy levels.  The behavior is analogous to avoiding paying a big bill when  one has very little money. Another way one can avoid paying a  bill is to forget that the bill exists. Similarly, children who are  anxious about being able to complete an assignment successfully  try magical thinking; they try to wish the assignment out of  existence or believe that it will magically be finished without any  participation on their part.

Complaining of headaches, stomachaches, etc., before or after  schoolA childs very high tension levels over an extended  period of time may result in somatic bodily complaints. These  complaints, while real to the child, may indicate his or her avoidance of an uncomfortable or ego-deflating situation. The physical  discomfort or ailment becomes the excuse for not performing  well or not performing at all.

Exhibiting spotlight behaviorsSpotlight behaviors are behaviors that focus attention on the child-calling out, laughing out  loud, getting up out of seat, annoying other children. When a  child spotlights it is usually a release of tension. Some children  use spotlight behaviors to alleviate the tension of academic  inadequacy and may even hope to get into trouble to leave the  room. In this way they will not have to deal with possible academic failure. Another reason for spotlight behaviors is the  need on the part of the child to be in control. However, the more  controlling a child is, the more out of control that child may feel.  The third reason for spotlight behaviors is to gain the teachers  attention. However, in this way the child is determining when he  or she gets attention, not the teacher. It is better for the teacher  to spontaneously and randomly pay attention to such a child  when the child is not expecting it. In this way the teacher or the  parent can reduce the childs impulsive need to seek attention.

This page intentionally left blank.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 3537 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 35 12 Understand How Negative Energy   Drains Confidence and Effects   Behavior and Learning I f a child is experiencing many conflicts, problems, insecurities and so  forth, there will be an increase in the number, types, and degree of negative symptoms the child exhibits. All conflicts require energy, therefore, the  greater the frequency, duration, and intensity of the symptoms, the greater  the energy drain on the child. The energy required to deal with these conflicts must come from somewhere, and it tends to come from constructive  processes such as concentration, memory, attention and so on. Since these  constructive processesso necessary for success in schoolbecome threatened the child will begin to suffer. Everyone has a certain amount of psychic energy to use in dealing  with the everyday stresses of life. In normal development there is a certain  amount of stress, but, because of an absence of major conflicts that would  tend to drain energy, the individual has more than enough energy to keep  things in perspective. SECTION III: Self-Esteem
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox The division of energy and the generally positive symptoms that result  when a child is relatively conflict free may take on a certain pattern. As a  result, the child will exhibit behaviors that include good concentration, responsibility with school work, consistency, age appropriate attention span,  flexibility, appropriate memory, high frustration tolerance, appropriate  peer interaction, organization, and an appropriate ability to focus on tasks.  Parents will notice these behaviors at home when the child does homework  and educators will notice it at school. Not every child who is conflict free  will exhibit these symptoms all the time, but the childs habits and behaviors will be predominately positive and constructive. The child will also exhibit positive behavior patterns at home. These  will generally include normal strivings for parental approval, resiliency, and  willingness to reason, willingness to try, exercising appropriate judgment,  and responding normally to discipline. These patterns may vary to some  degree during adolescence and still be within normal limits. A relatively conflict-free child will usually have little difficulty falling  asleep. While he or she may have problems waking up, as many of us do, it  will not interfere in his or her ability to get to school. Socially, the child will  generally maintain social interactions; show a willingness to try new social  experiences and treat hisher peers appropriately. When a child is troubled by serious conflicts his or her available energy  must be pulled to deal with the conflicts, like white blood cells to an infection, and the child has less energy available to keep things in perspective.  In this case the resulting symptoms and behaviors take on a different look. Parents or educators, who suspect that a child is experiencing some difficulty because he or she exhibits some negative symptomatic pattern, do  not hesitate to contact the school psychologist or contact a local therapist  for a consultation. Following are examples of some of the causes of serious  problems which might result in negative symptomatic behavior: Intellectual Reasons

Limited intelligence; slow learner

Retardation Social Reasons 

Peer pressure

Peer rejection Emotional Reasons

Consistent school failure

Understand How Negative Energy Drains Confidence    37

Traumatic emotional development

Separation or divorce of parents

High parental expectations

Sibling performance

Health-related problems

Change in environment as a result of moving

Abuse

Dysfunctional family situation

Parental loss of job

Death in the family Academic Reasons

Learning disabilities

Poor academic skills-math, reading

Style of teacher incompatible with style of student

Language difficulties

Falling behind in school because of an imbalance in other areas  i.e., too social Negative behavior patterns such as those listed above will be evident in many  areas of the childs life. For instance, at school the child may be unable to  focus on task, may procrastinate, may daydream, may be disorganized, may  reject help, may be irresponsible, inflexible, and selectively forgetful, and  may project reasons for problems on everyone and everything else and so  on. At home the child may be oversensitive, forgetful, reclusive, unreasonable, overactive, stubborn, untruthful, exaggerative, and may express somatic complaints such as stomachaches, headaches, and so on. The childs  sleeping patterns may change. He or she may have great difficulty falling  asleep since tension interferes with relaxation and may even begin to sleep  walk or show other signs of restless sleep. The child may resist getting up  in the morning which may result in lateness or absence. More frequent  nightmares may also be a signal of some unresolved inner conflicts. Furthermore, the child may withdraw sociallyconstantly find fault with peers,  be unwilling to try new social experiences, express social fears or express  beliefs that no one likes him or her, and so on. It is important to remember that such symptoms only occur as a result of a deeper undefined problem. Once the problem is identified and  resolved and once the tension is alleviated, the negative symptomatic behavior will dissipate. If caught early, many such issues can be resolved in a  relatively quick period of time. However, if the underlying problem is not  identified for many months or years the treatment period will be longer.

This page intentionally left blank.

S E C T I O N  IV Management Tools

This page intentionally left blank.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 4165 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 41 13 Behavior Crisis Management Tools Pre-Empting Behavior Purpose This technique is a good tool to have when students are exhibiting  certain inappropriate behaviors in a classroom and asking them to stop in  front of the class has not worked. Examples Everyday certain students may exhibit behaviors that interfere in the  performance, concentration or facilitation of learning for both the teacher  and hisher peers. For instance, a student may continuously talk to another  student, interfere with hisher work, disrupt lessons, call out, or bring the  negative spotlight to himherself in some manner. These negative, attention seeking behaviors will disrupt the flow of teaching and place you in a  very difficult position. SECTION IV: Behavior Management Toolbox
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox What May Not Work Many teachers will confront the student in front of the other students.  This technique usually has very little success, especially with students who  have more serious issues. This technique will actually offer the student  more of a spotlight. Secondly, the student, who is already fragile, needs to  save face in front of his peers so that there is a good chance he will talk back  or become verbally resistant to your request. Try This The important issue here is to realize that a student who chooses this  type of behavior pattern is actually very fragile and feels powerless. Confronting himher in front of the audience provides himher power that  can prove to be a problem for both you and the student. You never want to  allow yourself to be caught as you would be if you discipline this type of  student in front of a crowd. What we suggest is that you allow the class to enter the room and ask  himher to stay behind outside. Have the assistant cover the class while behind closed doors in the hallway you speak to the student. What you have  now done is remove the audience and thereby removing a source of power  for the student. The next thing is to set the boundary. Many teachers make  the mistake by saying, I want you to stop doing what you are doing . . . If  the child was able to stop it he would, but since we already know that heshe  lacks internal controls saying it this way asks him to control his own behavior. What you need to immediately establish is who is in charge. Therefore,  you will need to say, I can no longer allow you to interfere with John when  he is working. I will no longer allow you to disrupt the class and my teaching. Then place the responsibility directly on the student by saying, And  if you choose to act inappropriately, I will take action to stop your behavior.  Do you understand? If the student conforms to the boundary then you will need to reward  himher verbally or through some classroom experience so that you begin  to shape hisher behavior. Remember reward tells a student what to do,  punishment tells him what not to do. Placing the responsibility for consequences on the part of the student by  making himher see that they are Choosing to behave inappropriately provides you with more power and control if they should continue their behavior.

Behavior Crisis Management Tools    43 Proximity Teaching Purpose The purpose of this tool is to establish a structure around a student who  is unable to maintain control over hisher behavior. Examples Every day in classrooms across the country some student is unable to  control hisher own behavior. As a result, heshe will present a problem  for the classroom teacher when lessons are taking place. For instance, the  student may tease or interfere in a students work, may daydream, may be  text messaging, may be making noises etc. For some students, this may be a  pattern of behavior that they are unaware of since they lack self-monitoring  skills. For others, it may be a release of tension, a lack of concentration, or  the need to be the center of attention. What May Not Work For many students with internal control issues, what will not work in  cases like this is setting boundaries from a distance through verbal directions. The greater the distance between the teacher and the student, the  weaker the command and desired outcome will be. For students with internal control issues, asking them to stop from a distance is like asking running water from a faucet to shut itself off. Try This What you will need to do without skipping a beat is to work your way  around the room while teaching until you are at the desk of the student who  is having difficulty setting hisher own boundary. Placing your hand on his her desk while teaching, will help in refocusing the student and center him her back on the lesson. However, in cases where the student has a pattern of  internal control issues, you will want to move himher close to your desk so  that when you move to proximity teaching you do not have far to go.
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox Use a Forced Choice Technique Purpose The purpose of this technique is to limit the behavior of students who  try to negotiate everything. Examples There are times when the behaviors of certain students are exhibited  by the need to negotiate everything you say or request. These students have  difficulties internalizing boundaries and attempt to set boundaries of their  own. This need usually stems from feeling out of control, since the more  out of control a student feels, the more controlling heshe becomes. The  need to control comes from vulnerability, anxiety or the fear of not knowing  how to deal with things that are not predictable. Therefore, in the students  minds, these fears or anxieties can only be relieved if everything is predictable. However, the problem comes in because they feel that controlling  everything will make things predictable and life does not always allow that  to happen. Students with this behavior pattern will constantly say things  like, Why cant I?, or Can I do this instead? or Dont I get a choice? What May Not Work What usually does not work is giving in to the demands, requests or  negotiations of controlling students when you have established what you  need to be done. While these students can be very aggressive, convincing or  assertive, they are still trying to control the environment. If you give in, you  will be reinforcing the students belief that they can control you and other  things in hisher environment and as a result reinforcement will increase  the frequency and intensity of such negotiation. You will then find yourself  becoming very angry at the student who you will see as more powerful than  you. However, keep in mind that it is not Look what he is doing to me, but  rather, Look what I am allowing to happen. Try This We must be sensitive to the feelings that are present and motivate this  need to control on the part of the student and try to direct it in a more  positive manner. What we should use instead is what we call a forced choice  technique. In this technique, the student who is trying to negotiate is offered two options, both of which are acceptable to you. It is sometimes 

Behavior Crisis Management Tools    45 preferable, especially if you know that a certain student has this pattern,  to initiate the forced choice technique before heshe tries to negotiate.  Choosing either one of your options will be fine, but the student feels he she is making the decision. A forced choice technique basically says to the  student, You can do this or you can do that. Which one do you prefer?  or You can do this before lunch or after lunch, which one do you prefer?  Again, the emphasis is on the forced choice. If the student says neither,  then you say, If you do not choose one of these, then I will choose for you,  but Id rather see you make the decision. Learn What Triggers Certain Behaviors in Your Students:  Finding Each Childs Emotional Aura Purpose The purpose of this technique is to learn how to prevent and short circuit potential outbursts and inappropriate behavior. Examples

John, an 11 year old student classified as a student with an  emotional disturbance, strikes out at the boy sitting next to him  without provocation.

Mary, an eight year old girl with impulse control issues, quickly  gets up out of her seat in the middle of a lesson and begins to  walk around the room.

Roberto, a 14 year old boy with behavior issues, begins to yell out  and make fun of another student in the class.

Zach, a six year old with emotional issues, gets frustrated and  begins to destroy things on his desk. Keep in mind that all of the above examples represent behaviors initiated  by the students rather than reactive behaviors to someone elses behavior. In all of these cases, the teacher first becomes aware of a problem at the  time of the explosive outburst. However, these children exhibited a prior  pattern of discomfort, tension or symptoms prior to the behavior which was  not observed by anyone. For instance, if I am traveling in a car at 60 miles  an hour and someone says, Did you see that? my first reaction will be,  No, we were traveling too fast. If we go five miles an hour, then I will see  everything. Well, behavior often travels at 60 miles an hour, and as a result,  we miss the signals given off by a student of an impending problem.
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox The symptoms exhibited prior to the emotional outburst are referred  to as emotional aura. For example, people with epilepsy will experience  auras prior to the episodes which may allow them to pull over if they are  driving, or take precautions not to hurt themselves when the episode occurs. While this aura may be a short period of time, it does provide an opportunity to do something that may prevent a more serious problem. What May Not Work What is often very frustrating for a teacher is disciplining the student  for the same pattern of behavior with the student never seeming to incorporate the disciplines into self-control. While you may not be able to do anything on the first or second outburst ever observed, after that, you should  have control over seeing what the trigger symptoms may be in order to step  in before the outburst. What does not work is constantly disciplining the  child after the behavior has occurred over and over and over. The childs  lack of ability to use internal controls is evident by the consistent pattern  of inappropriate behavior. Therefore, the better use of energy may be in  prevention rather than crisis management. Try This After a student has exhibited a certain behavior pattern, have your aide  or assistant closely observe himher, recording all behaviors which may  show discomfort, tension, or agitation to see which behaviors occur prior  to the outburst. If for some reason you do not have an aide or assistant ask  the school psychologist to come in and do a classroom observation to record the behaviors that precede the outburst antecedent behaviors. Once  these are recognized, you will have a prior indication of a potential problem. When you see these symptoms beginning e.g., restlessness, daydreaming, head down on desk, scribbling etc., take action immediately by either  going over to the desk and using proximity teaching, or have your aide take  himher for a walk or errand. Short circuiting an inappropriate behavior  and turning it into a positive experience will not only help you but offer the  student a more positive outcome. This Is Not Open for Discussion Purpose The purpose of this tool is to limit negotiation and control on the part  of students when you need something done without question.

Behavior Crisis Management Tools    47 Examples Students who have behavior issues will try and negotiate or control the  environment since that offers them some predictability. Keep in mind that  the more controlling a student is, the more out of control heshe actually  feels so control reduces hisher anxiety. The problem is that at times he she has a hard time relinquishing power and control to hisher teacher. This  sometimes results in negotiation, opposition, defiance, and so on. All too often, these behavioral symptoms occur when a teacher is directing a class to do  something and as a result the teacher gets into confrontation, threats, or disciplinary action in an attempt to get the students to conform. The problem here  is that students with behavioral issues sometimes need a very small canvas or  limited options in which to operate. The larger the canvas or the more options the greater the tension. This tension is what leads to the need to control. What May Not Work What does not work in this type of situation is not setting the rules beforehand when you definitely need the students to comply. Students with  behavioral issues will always feel they can negotiate, sometimes not very appropriately, since they themselves lack boundaries or regard for authority. Try This If you are directing something that needs to be done, limit the opportunity for reaction by first saying: What I am about to tell you is something  that needs to be done immediately. Therefore, it will not be open for discussion and I will not entertain any questions. I expect all of you to follow  through on this requirement. Controlling Student Outcomes: You Do and Then You Get Purpose The purposes of this technique is to control student outcomes and foster a sense of task completion and sense of accomplishment. Examples As a teacher, you will be confronted with many attempts by students  with emotional issues to control their environment by wanting things their 
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox way. In many cases, these students will want their needs provided for first  before they are willing to conform to your rules or requests. For instance:

a student may promise that if you let himher talk to a friend  heshe will do the math class work, or

if you let a student text message her friend she will do what you  are asking, or

if you just let them work on the computer they promise to do  what you are asking after they finish While these are just examples, many attempts at manipulating the environment are exhibited every day by these students and place the teacher in  difficult positions. What May Not Work What definitely does not work is allowing a student who is trying to manipulate you or the environment to determine the rules governing completion of rules or tasks. Some students can be persistent in their attempts to  get you to let them do it their way and eventually you may give in. However,  this will only reinforce the students beliefs that heshe can change your  rule at any time. Try This The best rule for this type of situation is not to necessarily deny his her request. After all, in some cases the request may be realistic and not  unreasonable but doing it before the task is not acceptable. After all, this  is very much like a child asking a parent for dessert before dinner but the  parent lets them know they can still have the dessert but after dinner. So  very calmly you tell the student, You do this first, and then you get that.  If the student comes up to you asking if heshe can now do what heshe  wanted, you ask himher, Did you complete . . . If heshe says that he she did not you simply say, Well come back to me when you have completed it and we will talk. This technique allows the student to understand  priorities and delay of gratification. The technique of You do and then  you get is an effort saving approach when working with students who have  issues of control.

Behavior Crisis Management Tools    49 Initiate a Vested Interest in the Students Desire   to Maintain Success Purpose The purpose of the tool is to help troubled students develop a sense of  accomplishment and build an investment in being successful. Example Billy a student with emotional problems has never been successful in  school because his issues prevent him from concentrating, focusing, attending to task, and completing assignments. His high levels of anxiety add to  his perception that school is a waste and has no meaning for him. However,  Billys perception of school is based on his beliefs reinforced by his failure  to succeed. With no investment or an identity that includes academic success, Billy will maintain the only identity he knows, a troubled, oppositional  defiant young man. What May Not Work What does not work is exposing these troubled students to more and  more work without first changing their negative perception of themselves  and school. The only thing you will be doing here is to build a house on  water and expect cooperation without first having a foundation of success. Try This Since success breeds success any child will welcome being validated in  a positive way when it comes to school work. However, most troubled children have behaviors that prevent them from focusing and taking chances  on doing academic work in which they have not been successful in the past.  As a result, they rarely experience success in school and have nothing to  lose since there is no investment or gains in their success bank account.  What is suggested is that you will need to initially present and use high  success rate tasks to develop a sense of success, motivation, and control.  The more consistent success a child has the less anxious they will be and  therefore the more invested they will become in school. Try to put as many  consecutive success rate tasks together about 2030 to begin changing  the childs perception of himherself and outlook on schoolwork.
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox High success rate tasks are adapted so that factors are added to increase  the childs sense of accomplishment and positive experience. The use of  changes in the following factors can greatly increase the rate of success  necessary for a child to develop a vested interest in school: 1.	 Amount: Adapt the number of items that the learner is expected  to learn or complete. For example: If student is to know the fifty  states, have students only be responsible for remembering a certain  number at a time. This would be dependent on the students level  of disability. 2.	 Length of Time Given for Assignment: Adapt the time allotted and  allowed for learning, task completion, or testing. For example: Allow  student additional time to complete timed assignments. However,  if the total project is due by a particular time, have the student  complete each portion of the project over various intervals with the  required finished project due at a later time. 3.	 Level of Teacher Support: Increase the amount of personal assistance with a specific learner. For example: Allow for peer teaching. Pair the slower students with the more advanced students in  order to provide support. Offer some sort of incentive to the more  advanced student for assisting others. Design some type of contract with students that they could show to their parents indicating  completion of their work and the assistance they are giving to others. Offer this as a bonus to their grades. 4.	 Types of Input: Adapt the way instruction is delivered to the  learner. For example: Provide students with an audio andor video  tape of the lesson. Allow for field trips, guest speakers, peer teaching, computer support, video productions performed by students,  incorporate lesson in other subjects areas. 5.	 Adjust Level of Difficulty: Adapt the skill level, problem type, or  the rules on how the learner may approach the work. For example:  Allow the student to be creative providing that task is completed according to instructors specifications. For example the student may  draw a picture of the assignment, do an interview, etc. depending  on subject. Allow the student to come up with the idea. Accept any  reasonable modifications. 6.	 Adapt Output Options: Adapt how the student can respond to  instruction. For example: Allow students to draw pictures, write an  essay, complete specific computer software program relating to  lesson. 7.	 Level of Participation of Student: Adapt the extent to which a  learner is actively involved in the task. For example: Tailor the stuBehavior Crisis Management Tools    51 dents participation in a task to his or her abilities, whether intellectual or physical. 8.	 Alternate Materials: Adapt the goals or outcome expectations while  using the same materials. For example: In a writing assignment, alter  the expectations for a disabled student who takes longer to write a  paragraph. 9.	 Substitute Curriculum: Provide different instruction and materials  to meet a students individual goals. For example: Instead of discussing the reasons for the civil war, have the disabled student work on  a puzzle showing the Union and Confederate states. Set Control Boundaries Several Times a Day Purpose The purpose of this tool is to establish behavioral boundaries with your  students in a realistic manner several times a day. Examples Mrs. Jones class is very excited to get into school in the morning and  everyone runs in to get to hisher locker first. As a result everyone is pushing and teasing. Mr. Williams class cant wait to get to lunch and closely watch the clock for  the bell to ring. Once that happens the class rushes out of the room to lunch.  Mrs. Ortizs class cant wait to get out of school and as a result they pack up  and run to the door before she has a chance to speak with them. Mr. Samuelsons class is every one for him or herself and never seems  to be centered. His style is loose, and as a result, his class is unstructured  and pretty much does what it wants without direction or plans. What May Not Work When working with children with special needs, one must always be  aware of the number of students that do not possess internal controls and  self-monitoring qualities. As a result, if left up to their own devices, they  will often operate on impulse, self-serving behaviors, control and resistance to tasks. When a class is not focused or grounded, you will have 8, 10,  15 etc. students all operating on their own schedule or needs. What they  need is a focus, a center, and a person in charge who leads the way and  establishes boundaries.
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox Try This Four times a day you will want to pull the class together in a group so that  you can create a feeling of control and a central starting and ending place  for the day. This procedure should occur at the beginning of the school day,  before lunch, after lunch and before the end of the school day. These four  boundary periods led by the teacher and the assistant will provide the necessary  boundaries, priorities, structure, and leadership from which many students  with special needs will benefit. During these group boundary meetings, you  will want to lay out the morning routine, discuss what will be done after lunch,  structure the afternoon, and provide guidance about what needs to be done  or brought in for the next day and a brief overview of the next days activities.  This may also be a good time for handouts to parents, to go over homework  required for the next day, and to provide a positive thought for the day. Avoid Placing Yourself in a Position of a Judge Purpose The purpose of this issue of the Classroom Management Series is to  provide guidelines when responding to an incident or altercation between  two children that the teacher has not personally witnessed. Examples Mrs. Jones is busy marking papers when she hears the children yelling  that two boys are fighting. Mrs. Jones goes over to the scene and calms everyone down. She then proceeds to ask the boys what happened and each  blames the other. Mrs. Jones knows that one of the boys has a history of  taunting the other students and acting aggressively so she tells him that this  is the last straw and there will be consequences. The other boy, a passive  child is told to return to his seat without consequence. Mr. Eggers turns the corner and sees two of his students screaming at  each other and pushing one another violently. He separates the two students and asks them what happened. Each blames the other and tries to  convince the teacher that the other should be punished. The teacher is  not sure who to believe so he continues to ask more questions in hopes of  determining who is at fault. What May Not Work What does not work in any of these cases is gathering information from  two unreliable, subjective, self-protective sources and trying to determine 

Behavior Crisis Management Tools    53 who may have started the altercation. Placing yourself in the position of being a judge in situations that you did not personally witness minimizes your  authority and the respect your students will have for you. It is one thing to  personally observe an altercation and see who started it. It is another to try  to determine who is at fault when you were not there. Try This If you begin from the position that two students fighting have both  chosen to use methods that are unacceptable, regardless of who started,  then the only position is that both students need to suffer consequences  for their choice of actions. After all, many other options may have existed  i.e., walking away, telling the teacher, talking it out, asking other students  to help out etc. The students need to know that inappropriate actions regardless of  motive have consequences. You should tell both students the following,  There is no way I can determine who started this and who is at fault since  I did not directly see what happened. However, the fact that both of you  chose to use actions that are not acceptable will result in consequences for  both of you. In the future I suggest you use other means to prevent this  from happening like . . . So, never allow yourself to be a judge in an altercation by students if you  did not see who started it. Providing Students with a Level System Approach  to Shape Behavior Purpose The purpose of this issue is to teach your students to choose positive  behaviors that will lead to classroom privileges. Examples John has been made aware by his teacher that certain behaviors will allow him classroom privileges while negative behaviors will prevent him from  having classroom options. John has been clearly informed that in order to  get extra time with the computer he must be able to sit in his seat for a specified period of time during a lesson. Once this behavior is successfully accomplished for a certain period of time John will have his right to use the  computer during free periods of the day. However, John will also learn that 
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox negative behaviors will cause him to be denied such fun activities. It is hoped  that John will learn to shape his behavior so that he receives positive rewards. Mary is in a classroom where everyone starts out with privileges and  can only lose them by acting inappropriately according to the teachers  standards. As long as Mary maintains positive classroom behavior she will  enjoy privileges. What May Not Work When it comes to shaping behavior, teachers who wait until the behavior has occurred to develop rules are not helping the student determine or  shape the outcome of their own behavior. A classroom where rules are not  clear, or not posted, or where rewards and consequences are not clear creates a difficult environment for students who have a difficult time monitoring their own behavior. Hoping for internal controls on the parts of some  children can be a costly mistake. While not all children may need external  boundaries of rewards and consequences, it is not a bad idea to begin this  process from the beginning of the school year since society works in the same  manner. In society, following laws and rules provides positive outcomes while  negative behavior choices can lead to serious social and legal difficulties. Try This With this system you have two possible choices. The first choice is called  the Privileges for All Concept. With this concept all students start off the  year with classroom privileges and are told they have them until they give  you a reason to take it away. However, the reasons to lose privileges have  to be posted i.e., running in the halls. In this way, everyone has a vested  interest in maintaining positive behavior. The second option is called the Point and Level System. With this concept of shaping behavior all students begin at Level I and have the option  of moving to Level II and then Level III. All levels are defined with both  privileges and behaviors that must be maintained in order to stay at that  level and behaviors that need to be accomplished to move to the next level.  All behaviors have a point value and the teacher sets point goals to move to  the next level. The behaviors listed can be designed to fit your class and the  needs of the children. According to Special Connections 2009 point and level systems are a  behavioral management approach that have been commonly recommended by educators, used in programs for students that exhibit challenging 

Behavior Crisis Management Tools    55 behavior, and discussed in the literature. They are designed to be an organizational framework for managing student behavior where students access  greater independences and more privileges as they demonstrate increased  behavioral control Heward, p. 306, 2012. Students learn appropriate behavior through clearly defined behavioral expectations and rewards, privileges, and consequences linked to those expectations. There are specific  criteria for advancement to the next level where the students enjoy more  desirable contingencies. It is intended that students who proceed through  the levels are more able to self-manage, capable of handling more responsibility and therefore enjoy greater independence. There are four main goals  of point and level systems: 1 increasing appropriate behavior; 2 promoting academic achievement; 3 fostering a students improvement through  self-management; and 4 developing personal responsibility for social,  emotional, and academic performance Farrell, Smith,  Brownell, 1998. Developing Manageable Consequences Purpose The purpose of this issue is to provide you with manageable and realistic guidelines for inappropriate behavior on the part of your students. Examples John is a student who has been giving Mrs. Green a difficult time all  day. John now does something minimal but because Mrs. Green has not  dealt with him all day she comes across very harshly with her consequences.  John does not understand because he does not see the incident as serious.  The consequence that Mrs. Green has given John is later realized by her as  too harsh and as a result of feeling guilty lets him off the consequence early. Mrs. Menendez has tried to ignore Julios attention seeking behavior all  day because that is what she was taught to do. However, she is now feeling  that it is getting out of control and feels she has waited too long to address it.  Because she feel inadequate and may have done the wrong thing she takes  it out on Julio with a very harsh consequence that is totally unmanageable. Mr. Longo has given William a consequence for an inappropriate behavior but William is a very manipulative young man. William cleans the  garbage off the floor, straightens out the desks and books around the room  all in sight of Mr. Longo. Mr. Longo then calls him up and says to him that  he does not have to serve the consequence because of his cooperative behavior. William has learned how to manipulate the system.
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox What May Not Work When it comes to providing consequences for inappropriate behavior,  you must be very realistic, timely, and have the sense of conviction that the  consequence you have chosen fits the behavior by the child. If this sense of  equality between consequence and the type of inappropriate action is not  met then you will be seen as over reactive, out of control, and your judgment will be questioned. Because some teachers wait too long to address a behavior pattern their  own frustration builds up and will sometime cloud the reality of the situation when they finally deal with it. Try This 1.	 Limits and Guidelines Are Very Necessary for a Childs Emotional  Development. For children, realistic, fair and well defined limits and guidelines represent a safety net within which they can  behave. Children will know that any act of poor judgment will be  brought to their attention if limits are well defined. Consequently,  they will be brought back to the safety net. Being a teacher should  not be a popularity contest. Such guidelines and limits should  come from both the home and classroom. However, in some cases  parents may not be equipped to provide the correct guidelines that  make a child feel secure and therefore the school becomes the  second chance for such options to be provided to the child. 2.	 All Behavior Should Have a Consequence. This means appropriate  behavior is rewarded and negative behavior given consequences.  Consistency, whether reward or consequence will assist the child in  developing a frame of reference on how to behave. 3.	 Consequences By Themselves Will Not Work. Consequences tell  children what not to do, but rewards tell children what behavior  is acceptable. If long term changes in behavior are desired, then  reward must be included. They can include verbal praise, written  notes of thanks, extended playtime or computer time, or lunch  with the teacher 4.	 Consequences Should Be Limited To Something That You Can  Control. Quantity or severity of consequence is not always important. The most important thing to remember with discipline is that  you begin it and you end it. Maintaining both boundaries is crucial.  In too many situations, the teacher may begin the discipline but  due to its harshness, unrealistic expectations of time, manipulation  by children or inability of the teacher to follow through, there is no 

Behavior Crisis Management Tools    57 closure. For young children with no concept of time, 2 minutes in a  time out chair controllable rather than 10 minutes uncontrollable is just as productive. For older children it is very crucial to  maintain realistic time limits since they can become more oppositional or defiant if the time is too long. 5.	 Never Trade a Consequence For a Reward. If children do something  inappropriate and then something appropriate, then the two incidents should be treated separately. If you begin to trade off, children  become confused and may be forced to become manipulative in  order to get out of the consequence. You can complement the child  for the good behavior and provide a reward but still explain that the  inappropriate behavior consequence must still be carried out. 6.	 Focus on Inappropriate Behavior, Not the Personality. Remember,  children are not stupid, their inappropriate behavior is unacceptable. You may want to use such phrases as poor judgment, inappropriate behavior, lapse of judgment, acting before thinking etc., when  confronting the act. Focusing on the act allows children to save face.  Children that tend to grow up in homes where personalities are attacked tend to model that behavior in their social relationships. 7.	 Choose Your Battlegrounds Wisely. Try to view energy like money.  In this way, you will be deciding whether an issue is worth 2.00  worth of energy or 200.00. Investing too much energy in situations may lead to early teacher burnout. However, it is very  important that both teachers and assistant teachers agree on the  priority of issues so that the child is not confused. 8.	 Try to Project a United Front. If one teacher should disagree with  the others tactics or reasoning, try to discuss it at a private moment. Open disagreement concerning a disciplinary action can  sometimes confuse children and place them in the uncomfortable  position of having to choose between teachers. 9.	 Delay a Consequence When You Are Angry. The use of delay allows for  a different perspective than that which is viewed at the height of anger.  Say, I am so upset now so go to your seat and Ill deal with you in 15  minutes. The use of delay will reduce impractical consequences. Removal of the Audience Purpose The purpose of this issue of the Classroom Management Series is to  explain how not to allow yourself to get caught in a confrontation with a  student who refuses to listen while in class.
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox Examples Mrs. Janus is getting frustrated because Alasandro has been talking all  day and is not getting her subtle looks or nonverbal indications to stop talking. She then asks him to please stop talking to his neighbor and the whole  class turns to him to see what he is going to do. He responds that he is not  and she cant make him. At this point Mrs. Janus is caught in a bind and  could lose if she handles it incorrectly. Mr. Stanos tells Maria to be quiet and pay attention. Matia, 14 years old  with emotional disturbance does not want to look bad in front of her peers  so she ignores him. Mr. Stanos get furious and threatens her with all sorts  of repercussions but she still doesnt back down. Mrs. Willow asks John politely to please try to not talk to the girl next  to him. John hears her and wants to comply but doesnt want to look weak  in front of the girl so he says, What if I dont want to? Mrs. Willow, despite  her sensitivity is caught in a bind. What May Not Work What may not work in any of these cases is to confront the individual  in front of the audience. Individuals with emotional problems have a very  hard time backing down when caught in front of their peers. While many  do not want to take it further, their weak self-esteem cannot offer them  suitable ways of backing off. Caught by a sense of public humiliation, peer  embarrassment versus teacher consequence, the individuals will usually opt  for teacher consequence. Needless to say this can present a very dangerous position for a teacher. Individuals who have a weak self-esteem draw  strength from an audience and have to play to that audience despite the  serious consequences. What this can mean for a teacher is that the student  will take it as far as possible without backing down. Try This Keeping in mind that the student draws power from the audience  you have several options to consider:

Step 1You should always offer the student the option of settling  himherself down. However, the problem as well as the solution  is all in your delivery. At first you can make a general statement  to the class about the difficulty you have in doing your job when  talking is going on. Pause and temporarily stare at the student 

Behavior Crisis Management Tools    59 after looking around the room. If that helps then the problem is  solved. If not go to Step II.

Step IIIf the student continues approach hisher desk See  Proximity Teaching Tool and teach the lesson right next to his her desk. That will hopefully help. If that does not go to step III.

Step IIIGo your desk, take a minute and write a note suggesting that heshe cooperate and that you cannot allow himher to  continue doing this. Continue teaching and place the note on  hisher desk. The privacy will allow the student to save face. If  this does not work and the student is defiant go to step IV.

Step IVGo over to the desk and ask to speak with the student  outside. If heshe follows then behind closed doors say, I can  no longer allow you to continue this behavior in class. If you  choose to continue I will be forced to take action. I hope you  do not choose to continue so I can do my job. Do you understand? Hopefully that will work. However, the ultimate nightmare is in Step V.

Step VYou might ask what happens if the student refuses to follow me outside? In that case ask the assistant to remove the class  except for the student. Ask the aid to take the class into the hall  and isolate the student. At that point follow Step IV. If heshe is  still defiant you will have no choice but to get an administrator  and let the student know that it is hisher decision not to follow  the rules and hisher decision to receive the consequence. Never  let them blame you for their opposition or defiance. Dealing With Attention Seeking Students Purpose The purpose of this issue of the Classroom Management Series is to  explain how to short circuit a students need for inappropriate attention. Examples John is a student who gets very little attention or validation at home  which has created feelings of insignificance and insecurity. As a result, he  constantly seeks the attention of the teacher at inappropriate moments. Mary is a girl who feels out of control, and as a result, needs to constantly be in control by clinging to the teacher during class time.
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox Jose is a boy who feels that if he is not noticed, he will feel alone and  isolated. He feels unable to relate to his peers so he uses the teachers time  to connect. However, the teacher has lost her patience with him because  he doesnt listen. What May Not Work What may not work in these cases is to constantly reject, reason or  ignore the behaviors of these students. Since all behavior is a message, one  must go beyond the behavior to try and understand what the student is trying to communicate. In these cases, as it will be in other similar cases, the  student is seeking attention and recognition. While there is nothing wrong  with these needs, it is the choice of fulfilling these needs that is creating the  problem, not the needs themselves. As a result, the student is the one determining when heshe wants to have hisher needs met, which will often  be at inappropriate times. Try This Since children who need attention will seek attention, the trick here is  to change the control from the child to the teacher. In this way, the timing  of the attention is in the hands of the teacher and can be done at appropriate times. What we suggest is that you go over to the child when heshe  is not expecting attention as often as possible and either compliment, see  how heshe is doing, make a positive observation, ask about something he she mentioned that was going on in hisher life, or ask himher to do a  job for you. This consistent action should alleviate the need for seeking out  attention at inappropriate times. Be aware however, that the child may not believe you will continue to  do this so it may take several attempts before they calm down and see that  they are getting what they need without asking inappropriately for it. Use Delay As a Discipline Tool Purpose The purpose of this Classroom Management Series is to allow you time  to make better decisions about the outcomes of inappropriate behaviors.

Behavior Crisis Management Tools    61 Examples Mrs. Carlos has had a very rough day with her students who are acting  inappropriately in class. Besides that, she is under stress because of other  issues in her private life. As a result her patience is wearing thin and her  energy is low. Ramon, a student in her class violates a serious rule. Mrs. Carlos yells at  him and punishes him with a very involved consequence that is not realistic. Mr. Edwards has had a very difficult night and is not feeling well. He  has come to class today with many things on his mind. A child acts up and  he quickly responds with a very punitive consequence that is a definite overreaction to the incident. What May Not Work There is no doubt that teachers are human beings first and with that  comes all the human frailties and issues that people struggle with on any  given day. Consequently, these issues may be so draining that they pull away  available energy from patience, a quality dependent on available energy. After all, the more energy we have, the more patience we have and vice-versa.  What may not work in this situation is allowing yourself to not be aware of  how drained you may be and how many issues you may be struggling with at  this time. Believing that on these days you can handle things that may blind  side you with good judgment is questionable. Try This Dont be afraid to delay a consequence when you are very angry. The  use of delay allows for a different perspective than that viewed at the height  of anger. There is nothing wrong with saying, I am so angry right now that  I dont want to deal with this situation. Go to your seat and Ill deal with you  in 15 minutes. The use of delay will also reduce impractical consequences. In conclusion, be aware that teaching is not a popularity contest but a  responsibility. The opportunity to select from a variety of tools when confronted with a positive or negative situation can only enhance the difficult  but rewarding job of teaching.
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox Find Alternate Methods to Spotlight Positive Behaviors   or Skills Purpose The purpose of this tool is to systematically focus on a students positive  qualities. Examples Mr. Carson is angry at Carlos for making jokes during class which the  class always finds funny. Mrs. Benson constantly has to tell Michael to stop  drawing in his notebook during lessons. Mrs. Valdez has to refocus Janice  back to the lesson because she is constantly writing stories or poems. Mr.  Stanos finds it very hard to deal with Manuels funny impressions of people  at the wrong time. What May Not Work All of these students are exhibiting positive qualities that define them  in some way but at the wrong time. If someone shows you beautiful photographs they have taken but does it during your wedding ceremony your  focus is on the inappropriateness not the beauty. This also may happen in  classrooms where students with special needs may not always act appropriately and many times positive aspects of their lives will be lost because of the  poor timing of the act. Every student, has positive qualities and strengths  that we must always look out for as teachers. While some students make it  difficult to see the positive because of the sheer frequency of inappropriate actions and behaviors, those positive traits are there none-the-less. If  we miss them, we miss an extraordinary opportunity to help build a childs  self-worth. Finding a positive skill or quality that a child can use to form a  more positive identity is crucial. Try This What you will need to do from the very first day is interview the students or hand out questionnaires that can detect skills that they find interesting or qualities that they possess that will add to a feeling of self-worth  or fulfillment. You will also need to find alternate ways of allowing these  children to express their skills. You may want to hold a magic, talent and  comedy session at the end of the school day for anyone who wishes to show  off some talents. You may have poetry, photography, writing or drawing 

Behavior Crisis Management Tools    63 contests once a month to bring out the talents of others. Trying to squelch  talent and positive skills will only frustrate the child more. Being in control  of finding positive outlets will provide both you and the students with a  positive feeling of validation. Initiating Compliments Purpose The purpose of this technique is to avert negative behaviors that students exhibit for attention. Examples John calls out for the teachers attention during a lesson and gets attention even though it is negative. Mary teases the student next to her and  looks to see if the teacher is watching her because she needs to feel noticed. Mario wants to be noticed by the teacher so shows off at inappropriate times and is very silly. What May Not Work What may not work is trying to stop the need for attention through  threats or serious disciplinary actions. This would be like trying to stop  someones hunger and need for food by threats. The asking may be temporarily contained but the need will eventually come out again, and may show  with even more intensity. Try This To avoid students seeking out attention on their terms which may be  in inappropriate and negative ways, go over to them as often as realistically  possible and compliment them or engage them in some conversation. Going over and complimenting or making them feel important by using spontaneous actions should reduce their need to try to gain your attention negatively. Also, you will want to quickly reinforce positive behaviors. However,  try to focus on ones that are observed by you that you can spontaneously  respond to so that the student feels you noticed the behavior even though  there was no intention on hisher part to do so. What may also work here is to teach these students how to ask for attention in healthy ways. What you will need to teach them is to ask you 
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox When will you have time to speak with me, since you can provide this  because you will determine a time that is right for both of you. Empowering students to ask for attention or reassurance is very healthy since they  will get their needs fulfilled. If a student cannot set hisher own boundaries and asks for this several  times you will need to set a limit for the day and explain that you have to  share your time with everyone but that heshe is important so use your  request wisely. Empowering children with options to ask for attention when they want,  even if its limited, usually reduces their need for attention since they can  get it anytime they want. Power is not having to use it, it is just the knowledge that you have it. Drop Off Purpose The purpose of this technique is to avert impulsive inappropriate decisions on the part of the student. Examples You need to tell Jose that he will have to be responsible for finishing his  classwork assignment which you understand was difficult so you adapted it  for him. However, in order to teach him the sense of completion he must  finish the adapted assignment. Jose is prone to over-reactions and blowing  things out of proportion. What May Not Work What may not work in this case is calling Jose over and telling him  directly that he will be responsible for finishing the classwork assignment  during free time. Direct notification for reactive students only causes them  to use the fragile skills of deflection see fragile ego section which occur  without thinking and to avoid feeling inadequate or a failure. What Jose  hears if you are direct is that you are a failure, cannot do what the others  can do, and lack ability. Even though you never implied this a fragile ego  always distorts what is being said because that is what Jose actually feels  about himself.

Behavior Crisis Management Tools    65 Try This With students like Jose use what we call a drop off approach. A drop  off approach in this case may go like this: Jose before I give you this note I want to make it clear that I know you are  trying very hard. I have seen many great things from you like  and   . I know school is difficult at times but it is my job to help you succeed. Therefore, I want you to go to your seat and read my note. We can talk  about it in 10 minutes. Do you understand? The note may say something like this: Dear Jose, I realized that the class assignment we did this morning was difficult for  some students. There are several things I can do as a teacher to make it  more understanding and easier for all of you to finish. I did just that and  have attached the part that you need to finish. I want you to think carefully  about this since finishing it now will make you feel much better about yourself and help you understand what you need to do the next time. The only  time I can have you do this in our schedule is when we have free time. However, if you choose to finish it the way I have indicated, then I will arrange  for you to have some personal free time this week. I hope you make the right  decision since it must be completed. Sincerely yours, Mrs.  The Drop Off technique allows the more rational side of Jose to come  forward since we are allowing him time to consider alternative. Presenting  it directly will only be met by the impulse reactive side.

This page intentionally left blank.

S E C T I O N  V How to Help Students Feel Good About Themselves  in Order to Reduce Inappropriate Behavior

This page intentionally left blank.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 6976 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 69 14 Helping Students Feel Good   About Themselves C onfident children seem to share certain characteristics. In their relationships with both teachers and parents, they show in many ways that  they are empowered, hopeful, autonomous, resilient, and secure. They are  also accomplished, receive recognition for their accomplishments, and persevere even when things dont go as they would like. Finally, for the most  part they genuinely seem to enjoy life, both at school and at home. The  ideas described here, if practiced in the classroom, will help students enjoy  the environment they are in and believe in themselves as they never have  before. The building of confidence in your students should be a process  rather than a hit and miss approach. The following suggestions will enhance the factors in the human condition that lead to a sense of self-worth  and overall confidence. Further, improving self-esteem will greatly reduce  the need for tension related behavior patterns. Remember, confidence is based on actual successful experiences, not  just telling a student that he or she is intelligent, creative etc. so providing  SECTION V: How to Help Students Feel Good About Themselves in Order to Reduce  Inappropriate Behavior
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox these opportunities will be crucial. The main goals in building confidence  are to provide tasks and an environment that results in sense of completion  and a sense of accomplishment. 1  Empowerment Empowerment means being given the authority or power to act as you wish.  For many students, knowing they are empowered is actually more important than actually exercising that power. In the classroom, the empowerment that comes from having educational tools they can turn to promotes  a sense of security and helps build the foundation of confidence. Without  a sense of empowerment, students may become rigid and hesitant, always  waiting for you to tell them what to do next or how to solve problems. Children who do not feel empowered:

May be unwilling to try new things

Hesitate initiating activities

Procrastinate or use avoidance out of fear of asking questions

Lack resources to solve problems

Do not have the ability to see solutions

Exhibit learned helplessness Classroom Practices to enhance empowerment allow:

Math tables and formulas during tests

Calculators to check work

Computer resources to find answers

Dictionaries for in class writing assignments and spelling

A thesaurus to help find words for writing assignments Giving several examples similar to upcoming problems or questions

Permitting students to collaborate on finding answers

Providing several alternate ways of responding to a task 2  Hope Hope is desire accompanied by the belief in ones ability to complete of a  task. When students feel hopeless, they feel powerless. If they have hope and  believe they can succeed, students will tend to take more risks and chances. Students who feel hopeless:

Tend to give up easily

Helping Students Feel Good About Themselves     71

Tend to negate his or her progress or ability

Are unwilling to try things or take a chance

Are resistant

Are external in their thinking and believe, why bother it really  doesnt matter anyway Classroom Practices to foster hope

Provide shorter but more frequent assignments to increase  chances of completion and success.

Check small groups of problems at a time rather than waiting  until the end so that students can correct any mistakes they are  making in the process prior to completing the entire task.

Prove students with short, positive daily progress reports.

Send parents reports on progress areas rather than problem  areas. Word problem areas as areas being worked on or areas  in need of further attention. The language of a letter or note  home can have positive or negative results and in turn affect the  hope and motivation of the student to continue trying.

Bridge areas that may give students trouble so that they can move  on and complete the task. Teach them to ask for a helping  bridge from you if they are stuck and not sure how to proceed. 3  Autonomy Another important quality found in confident children is a sense of autonomy, or the belief that you have the ability to govern yourself. Individuals  seek a quality of human functioning that has at its core the desire to determine their own behavior; they have an innate need to feel autonomous  and to have control over their lives. This need for self-determination is  satisfied when individuals are free to behave of their own volitionto engage in activities because they want to, not because they have to. At its core  is the freedom to choose and to have choices, rather than being forced or  coerced to behave according to the desires of another James P Raffini,  1996; Shaffer, 2015, 150 Ways to Increase Intrinsic Motivation in the Classroom. Compared to students of controlling teachers and to pawn-like students,  students of autonomy-supportive teachers and origin-like students show the  following positive educational and developmental outcomes:

Higher academic achievement

Greater perceived competence
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox

Higher sense of self-worth and self-esteem

Enhanced conceptual learning

Greater creativity

Preference for challenge

More positive emotional tone

Increased school attendance and retention  Deadlines, threats, competition, imposed goals, surveillance, and evaluations were all found to undermine intrinsic motivation. . . . It seemed that if  controlling peoplethat is, pressuring them to behave in particular ways diminishes their feelings of self-determination, then giving them choices  about how to behave ought to enhance them. . . . Research has confirmed  that choice enhances peoples intrinsic motivation, so when people participate in decisions about what to do, they will be more motivated and committed to the taskto being sure that the task gets done well. . . . People who  were asked to do a particular task but allowed the freedom of having some  say in how to do it were more fully engaged by the activitythey enjoyed it  morethan people who were not treated as unique individuals. . . . It is thus  important that people in positions of authority begin to consider how to provide more choice. . . . Why not give students choice about what field trips to  take and what topics to write their papers about, for example. Edward Deci Why We Do What We Do Students who lack autonomy will:

Be more dependent

Have problems offering opinions

Be easily influenced by others

Change their opinion if it is unpopular even if it is right

Lack direction or a plan of action Classroom Practices to Enhance Autonomy

Give students time to do independent work, enjoy hobbies, or  pursue areas of interest and curiosity

Allow students to work on their own ideas

Allow students choices or options for projects rather than telling  them what must be done

Allow students to share their own ideas and areas of interests with  others

Helping Students Feel Good About Themselves     73

Give students responsibility for aspects of their own learning  i.e., determining the order of lessons, types of evaluation measures used, timelines for completion 4  Resiliency Resiliency is the ability to bounce back from unsuccessful experiences and  maintain a perspective that requires the student to think about what needs  to be done to change the outcome the next time. A student with high resiliency who fails a test is likely to be willing to look at the factors that contributed to his lack of success, then try again. Resiliency is an important  component of self-confidence and success. Students who lack resiliency:

Give up easily

Have low frustration tolerances

Pout

Become stubborn and withdrawn when confronted with frustration

See everything as negative

Become blame oriented

Become self-deprecating Classroom Practices to Enhance Resiliency

Provide repeated successful experiences even if the task or job  being given was given and successfully completed several times  before

Provide students with the opportunity to correct their work to  master concepts and improve their grades

Give students the opportunity to drop their lowest grade so that  one bad score does not destroy hisher motivation

Teach the child to set realistic attainable goals 5  Accomplishment A feeling of accomplishment is the sense that you have brought something  about by your own efforts. Confidence is the belief that ones behavior will,  for the most part, lead to successful completion of tasks or projects. In Positive Restructuring this sense of accomplishment is enhanced by assigning  work that will ensure students success.
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox Feeling a sense of accomplishment does not mean that a task or assignment must be completed in its entirety. A child can feel good about him  or herself because heshe was able to find a specific answer to part of an  assignment, persevered in hisher work, or gave it hisher best effort. A sense of accomplishment provides closure, a necessary factor in believing in ones ability and ones capacity to be successful. Children who lack a sense of accomplishment will:

Procrastinate

Avoid

Give up very easily on a task

See every task as too hard Classroom Practices to Enhance a Sense of Accomplishment

Have parents check homework every night so that all assignment  are complete when the child comes to school

Provide tasks, in whatever form possible, that allow for the highest chance of accomplishment and closure

Provide assignments, projects, and tasks in such a way as to control successful outcomes

Have students use a step by step approach to tasks and assignments  so that they can feel successful at the completion of every step

Provide sufficient time for students to complete work or extra  time for students who need it. Remember a sense of accomplishment is the key

Give students a checklist of work they have completed rather  than lists of work they need to complete. 6  Recognition Everyone needs to be recognizedto receive special notice or attention.  Parents normally provide much of a childs need for recognition. However,  teachers are a very close second to parents when it comes to a childs desire  to please and be recognized for performance and effort. Without recognition, students may lose their desire to try, believing that no one cares  what they do. Recognition enhances motivation, especially intrinsic motivationthat is, choosing to do an activity not for external rewards but for the  internal satisfaction derived from the activity itself. Although recognition is  an extrinsic or external reward, over time it becomes internalized.

Helping Students Feel Good About Themselves     75 Children who do not feel a sense of recognition will:

Crave attention at inappropriate times

Use spotlight behaviors i.e., class clown to derive negative recognition

May exhibit frequent visits to the nurse

Put down other students who are getting recognition in positive  ways

Find negative ways to gain recognition i.e., bully Classroom Practices That Enhance a Feeling of Recognition

Provide frequent verbal or written validation e.g., Thanks for  helping Billy yesterday, Good job in keeping your desk neat

Give spontaneous notes of praise and leave them on the students  desk

Write positive notes and letters to parents

Go to students with complements rather than them always feeling  they have to do something to get recognition

Share a students success outside of school with the class

Have a positive recognition day where everyone gets to share nice  things they have done 7  Perseverance Perseverance means to pursue a goal in the face of difficulty, discouragement,  frustration, or opposition. Continuing when the going is rough means that  students have built enough confidence to have internalized the belief that  there is a direct relationship between effort and achievement. Once students  have internalized this belief, they are less frustrated and more resilient, solution oriented, willing to take chances and be goal oriented. Children who lack perseverance will:

Give up easily

Throw tantrums or pout when frustrated

Verbally beat themselves up

Be resistant to new activities Classroom Practices to Enhance Perseverance

Provide rewards for trying

Recognize sustained effort
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox

Break down long term assignments into manageable steps

Have students work in teams to have a sense of group accomplishment and help each other through hard times

Give rewards at several steps along the way to enhance the desire  to stick with something to the end In conclusion, you have the power to provide a wonderful environment  where children can grow, learn, and most of all feel great about themselves  and their ability. Confidence does not happen by chance, and your role,  especially in todays society is so very crucial in determining the outcome of  a childs self-worth and feelings about hisher future.

S E C T I O N  VI Final Word

This page intentionally left blank.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 7981 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 79 15 Final Points L et recap the main points to keep in mind when working with children  in the classroom. These issues are crucial if you are going to create  a safe environment for everyone and one with very clear fair boundaries  within which children can learn and prosper. 1.	 Limits and Guidelines Are Very Necessary for a Childs Emotional  Development. For children, realistic, fair, and well defined limits and guidelines represent a safety net within which they can  behave. Children will know that any act of poor judgment will be  brought to their attention if limits are well defined. Consequently,  they will be brought back to the safety net. Setting boundaries and  creating rewards and consequences for inappropriate behavior can  never be a popularity contest. 2.	 All Behavior Should Have a Consequence. This means appropriate  behavior is rewarded and negative behavior punished. Consistency  of consequence, whether reward or punishment will assist the child  in developing a frame of reference on how to behave. SECTION VI: Final Points
The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox 3.	 Discipline by Itself Will Not Work. Punishment tells children what  not to do, but rewards tell children what behavior is acceptable.  If long term changes in behavior are desired, then reward must  be included. Rewards can include verbal praise, written notes of  thanks, extended free time or computer time, special trip or lunch  with the teacher. 4.	 Punishment Should Be Limited to Something That You Can  Control. Quantity or severity of punishment is not always important. The most important thing to remember with discipline is  that a teacher begins it and the teacher ends it. Maintaining both  boundaries is crucial. In some situations a teacher may begin the  discipline but due to its harshness, unrealistic expectations of  time manipulation by children or inability of the teacher to follow  through, there is no closure. For young children with no concept  of time, two minutes in a time out chair controllable rather  than 30 minutes uncontrollable is just as productive. 5.	 Never Trade a Punishment for a Reward. If children do something  inappropriate and then something appropriate, then the two incidents should be treated separately. If you begin to trade off, children become confused and may be forced to become manipulative. 6.	 Focus on Inappropriate Behavior, Not the Personality. Remember,  children are not stupid, their inappropriate behavior is unacceptable. You may want to use such phrases as poor judgment, inappropriate behavior, lapse of judgment, acting before thinking etc.,  when confronting the act. Focusing on the act allows children to  save face. Children that tend to grow up in homes where personalities are attacked tend to model that behavior in their social relationships. 7.	 Choose Your Battlegrounds Wisely. Try to view energy like money.  In this way, you will be deciding whether an issue is worth 2.00  worth of energy or 200.00. Investing too much energy in situations may lead to early teacher burnout. However, it is very  important that both the teacher and the assistant teacher agree on  the priority of issues so that the child is not confused. 8.	 Try to Use a Forced Choice Technique Whenever Possible. Choose  two options, solutions, and alternatives etc. that are acceptable to  you. Then say to the child, You may do . . . or . . . Which do you  prefer? Using a forced choice technique allows children to feel  that they are making the decision and creates less problems than  an open ended question such as, What would you like? 9.	 Delay a Consequence When You Are Angry. The use of delay allows  for a different perspective than that which is viewed at the height 

Final Points    81 of anger. Say, I am so angry now that I dont want to deal with this  situation. Go to your seat and Ill deal with you in 15 minutes. The  use of delay will reduce impractical consequences.

This page intentionally left blank.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 8388 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 83 References Farrell, D. T., Smith, S. W.,  Brownell, M. T. 1998. Teacher perceptions of  level system effectiveness on the behavior of students with emotional or  behavioral disorders. The Journal of Special Education, 322, 8998. Heward, W. L. 2012. Exceptional children: An introduction to special education  10th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, Inc. Raffini, J. P. 1995 150 ways to increase intrinsic motivation in the classroom. Upper  Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, Inc. Shaffer, S. C. 2015. Motivation and personal autonomy. Retrieved on September  230, 2015 from: http:www2.yk.psu.edusitesscs15teaching-learningresources2teaching-learning-topics-resourcesmotivation Suggested Readings Alberto, P. A.,  Troutman, A. C. 2006. Applied behavior analysis for teachers  7th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. Alderman, T. W. 1991. The discipline a total approach resource book: Classroom  disciplines greatest hits. Beaufort, SC: Author. Alderman, T. 2000. Classroom discipline: The effective use of negative consequences.  Beaufort, SC: Resources for Professionals. American Psychological Association Zero Tolerance Task Force. 2008. Are  zero tolerance policies effective in the schools? An evidentiary review and  recommendations. American Psychologist, 63, 852862. Baer, G. G. 2015. Preventative classroom strategies. In E. T. Emmer  E. J.  Sabornie Eds., Handbook of classroom management 2nd ed. pp. 1539.  New York, NY: Taylor  Francis Group.
References Bender, W. W.,  Mathes, M. Y. 1995. Students with ADHD in inclusive classrooms: A hierarchical approach to strategy selection. Intervention in School  and Clinic, 30, 226234. Bjorklund, D. 2005. Childrens thinking: Cognitive development and individual differences. Belmont, CA: WadsworthThomson Learning. Hawthorn Educational Services, Inc. Bluestein, J. 2001. Creating emotionally safe schools: A guide for educators and parents. Deerfield Beach, FL: Health Communications, Inc. Boniecki, K. A.,  Moore, S. 2003. Breaking the silence: Using a token economy to reinforce classroom participation. Teaching of Psychology, 30, 224 227. Bradshaw, C. 2014 Positive behavioral interventions and supports. In Slavin,  R. E. Ed., Classroom management and assessment pp. 99104. Thousand  Oaks, CA: Corwin. Brady, K., Forton, M. B., Porter, D.,  Wood, C. 2003. Rules in school. Turners  Falls, MA: Northeast Foundation for Children, Inc. Brophy, J. 2006. History of research on classroom management. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 1743. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Buisson, G. J., Murdock, J. Y.,  Reynolds, K. E. 1995. Effects of tokens on response latency of students with hearing impairments in a resource room.  Education and Treatment of Children, 184, 408421. Burke, J. 2008. Classroom management. New York, NY: Scholastic, Inc. Canter, L. 2010. Lee Canters assertive discipline: Positive behavior management for  todays classroom. Bloomington, IN: Solution Tree, Inc. Carpenter, L. B. 2001. Utilizing travel cards to increase productive student behavior, teacher collaboration, and parent-school communication. Education and Training in Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities, 363,  318322. Cavalier, A. R., Ferretti, R. P.,  Hodges, A. F. 1997. Self-management within a  classroom token economy for students with learning disabilities. Research  in Developmental Disabilities, 183, 167178. Cooper, J. O. 1987. Token economy. In J. O. Cooper, T. E. Heron,  W. L.  Heward Eds., Applied behavior analysis. Columbus, OH: Merrill. Crone, D. H.,  Horner, R. H. 2003. Building positive behavior support systems in  schools: Functional behavioral assessment. New York, NY: Guilford. Crone, D. H., Horner, R. H.,  Hawken, L. S. 2004. Responding to behavior  problems in schools: The behavior education program. New York, NY: Guilford. Cummings, C. 2001 Managing to teach: A guide to classroom management. Edmonds, WA: Teaching, Inc. Curwin, R. L.,  Mendler, A. N. 2008. Discipline with dignity. Alexandria, VA:  Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Cushman, K.,  Rogers, L. 2008. Fires in the bathroom: Advice for teachers from  middle schoolers. New York, NY: The New Press. Note: A separate book is  written from the high school perspective.

References    85 DeBruyn, R. L.,  Larson, J. L. 1992. You can handle them all quick-action card  deck. Manhattan, KS: The Master Teacher, Inc. Note: The cards are cheaper, but the book that goes with this has been updated as of 2008. Denton, P. 2007. The power of our words: Teacher language that helps children  learn. Turners Falls, MA: Northeast Foundation for Children, Inc. Durlak, J. A., Weissberg, R. P., Dymnicki, A. B., Taylor, R. D.,  Schellinger,  K. B. 2011. The impact of enhancing students social and emotional  learning: A meta-analysis of school-based universal interventions. Child  Development, 82, 405432. Emmer, E. T.,  Sabornie, E. J. Eds. 2015. Handbook of classroom management  2nd ed. New York, NY: Routledge. Emmer, E. T.,  Evertson, C. M. 2009. Classroom management for middle and  high school teachers. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. Emmer, E., Evertson, C. M.,  Anderson, L. 1980. Effective management at  the beginning of the school year. Elementary School Journal, 80, 219231. Evertson, C. M.,  Weinstein, C. S. 2006. Classroom management as a field of  inquiry. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom  management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 316. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Evertson, C. M.,  Emmer, E. 1982. Effective management at the beginning  of the year in junior high school classrooms. Journal of Educational Psychology, 74, 485498. Filcheck, H. A., McNeil, C. B., Greco, L. A.,  Bernard, R. S. 2004. Using a  whole-class token economy and coaching of teacher skills in a preschool  classroom to manage disruptive behavior. Psychology in the Schools, 43,  351361. Freiberg, H. J.,  Lapointe, J. M. 2006. Research-based programs for preventing and solving discipline problems. In C. M. Evertson and C. S. Weinstein  Eds. Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 735786. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Glasser, W. 2008. Every student can succeed. Chatsworth, CA: William Glasser,  Inc. Haggart, W. 2009. Discipline and learning styles: An educators guide. Cadiz, KY:  Performance Learning Systems, Inc. Harlan, J. C.,  Rowland, S. T. 2002. Behavior management strategies for teachers: Achieving instructional effectiveness, student success, and student motivationEvery teacher and any student can! Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas  Publisher, Ltd. Higgins, J. W., Williams, R. L.,  McLaughlin, T. F. 2001. The effects of a  token economy employing instructional consequences for a third-grade  student with learning disabilities: A data-based case study. Education and  Treatment of Children, 421, 99106. Hubb, S. D. A.,  Reitman, D. 1999. Improving sports skills and sportsmanship in children diagnosed with attention-deficithyperactivity disorder.  Child and Family Behavior Therapy, 213, 3551.
References Huitt, W. 2004. Maslows hierarchy of needs. Educational Psychology Interactive.  Valdosta, GA: Valdosta State University. Retrieved April 22, 2009 from  http:chiron.valdosta.eduwhuittcolregsysmaslow.html. Jensen, E. 2009. Teaching with poverty in mind: What being poor does to kids brains  and what schools can do about it. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Johnston, B. D. 1995. Withitness: Real or fictional? The Physical Educator,  521, 2228. Jones, F. H., Jones, P.,  Jones, J. L. 2007. Tools for teaching: discipline, instruction, motivation 2nd ed. Santa Cruz, CA: F.H. Jones  Associates. Kahng, S. W., Boscoe, J. H.,  Byrne, S. 2003. The use of escape contingency  and a token economy to increase food acceptance. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 36, 349353. Kern, L.,  Clemens, N. H. 2007. Antecedent strategies to promote appropriate classroom behavior. Psychology in the Schools, 44, 6575. Kottler, J. A. 2002. Students who drive you crazy: Succeeding with resistant, unmotivated, and otherwise difficult young people. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin  Press. Kounin, J. 1970. Discipline and group management in classrooms. New York, NY:  Holt, Rinehart,  Winston. Lannie, A. L.,  Martens, B. K. 2004. Effects of task difficulty and type of  contingency on students allocation of responding to math worksheets.  Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 37, 5365. Levin, J.,  Nolan, J. F. 2003. What every teacher should know about classroom  management. Boston, MA: Pearson Education, Inc. Lewis, T. J., Mitchell, B. S., Trussell, R.,  Newcommer, L. 2015. In E. T. Emmer  E. J. Sabornie Eds., Handbook of classroom management 2nd ed.  pp. 4059. New York, NY: Taylor  Francis Group. Lindberg, J. A., Kellye, D. E.,  Swick, A. S. 2005. Common-sense classroom management for middle and high school teachers. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin  Press. MacKenzie, R. J. 2003. Setting limits in the classroom: How to move beyond the  dance of discipline in todays classrooms. New York, NY: Three Rivers Press. Marzano, R. J., Gaddy, B. B., Foseid, M. C. Foseid, M. P.,  Marzano, J. S. 2003.  A handbook for classroom management that works. Alexandria, VA: Association  for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Marzano, R. J., Marzano, J. S.,  Pickering, D. J. 2003. Classroom management  that works: Research-based strategies for every teacher. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. McCarney, S.  Wunderlich, K. 2006. Pre-referral intervention manual. Columbia, MO: Hawthorne Educational Services, Inc.  McLeod, J., Fisher, J.,  Hoover, G. 2003. The key elements of classroom management: Managing time and space, student behavior, and instructional strategies.  Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.

References    87 Mendler, A. N. 2001. Connecting with students. Alexandria, VA: Association for  Supervision and Curriculum Development. Mendler, A. N. 2012. When teaching gets tough: Smart ways to reclaim your game.  Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Moore, J. W., Tingstrom, D. H., Doggett, R. A.,  Carlyon, W. D. 2001. Restructuring an existing token economy in a psychiatric facility for children. Child and Family Behavior Therapy, 233, 5157. Ridnouer, K. 2006. Managing your classroom with heart: A guide for nurturing  adolescent learners. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Quinn, P. 2009. Ultimate RTI: Everything a teacher needs to know to implement  RTI. Singer, WI: Ideas Unlimited Seminars, Inc. Robinson, S. L.,  Griesemer, S. M. R. 2006. Helping individual students with  problem behavior. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook  of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 787 802. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Rothstein-Fisch, C.,  Trumbull, E. 2008. Managing diverse classrooms: How to  build on students cultural strengths. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Savage, T. V. 1999. Teaching self-control through management and discipline 2nd  ed. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn  Bacon. Savage, T. V.,  Savage, M. K. 2010. Successful classroom management and discipline: Teaching self-control and responsibility 3rd ed. Los Angeles, CA:  Sage. Scott, T. M., Mclntyre, J., Liaupsin, C., Nelson, C. M., Conroy, M.,  Payne,  L. D. 2005. An examination of the relation between functional behavior  assessment and selected intervention strategies with school-based teams.  Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 7, 205215. Shellard, E., Protheroe, N.,  Turner, J. 2005. What we know about: Effective  classroom management to support student learning. Arlington, VA: Educational Research Service. Slavin, R. E. Ed. 2014. Classroom management  assessment. Thousand Oaks,  CA: Corwin Press. Smith, R. 2004. Conscious classroom management: Unlocking the secrets of great  teaching. San Rafael, CA: Conscious Teaching Publications. Sugai, G.,  Simonsen, B. 2015. Supporting general classroom management:  Tier 23 practices and systems. In E. T. Emmer  E. J. Sabornie Eds.,  Handbook of classroom management 2nd ed. New York, NY: Taylor  Francis Group. Truchlicka, M., McLaughlin, T. F.,  Swain, J. C. 1998. Effects of token reinforcement and response cost on the accuracy of spelling performance  with middle-school special education students with behavior disorders.  Behavioral Interventions, 13, 110.
References Walker, J. R. 2012. Interventions that work with high school students. Atlanta, GA:  Jordan Reeves Associates, Inc. Weissberg, R. P., Kumpfer, K. L.,  Seligman, M. E. P. 2003. Prevention that  works for children and youth: An introduction. American Psychologist, 58,  425432. Whyte, D. 2008. You cant teach a class you cant manage. Peterborough, NJ: Crystal Springs Books.

The Classroom Teachers Behavior Management Toolbox, pages 8991 Copyright  2016 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.	 89 About the Authors Dr. Roger Pierangelo Dr. Roger Pierangelo is a Full Professor in the Department of Special Education and Literacy at Long Island University. He has been an administrator  of special education programs, served for 18 years as a permanent member  of Committees on Special Education, has over 30 years of experience in the  public school system as a general education classroom teacher and school  psychologist, and a consultant to numerous private and public schools, PTA  and SEPTA groups. Dr. Pierangelo has also been an evaluator for the New  York State Office of Vocational and Rehabilitative Services, director of a private clinic and special education consultant to CNN News and US News and  World Report. He is a New York State licensed clinical psychologist and has  been in private practice for over 25 years, certified school psychologist, and  a Board Certified Diplomate Fellow in Child and Adolescent Psychology  and Forensic Psychology.  Dr. Pierangelo currently holds the office of Executive Director of the National Association of Special Education Teachers  NASET, Executive Director of The American Academy of Special Education Professionals AASEP, and Vice-President of The National Association of Parents with Children in Special Education NAPCSE. Dr. Pierangelo earned his BS from St. Johns University, MS from Queens  College, Professional Diploma from Queens College, PhD from Yeshiva  University, and Diplomate Fellow in Child and Adolescent Psychology and  Forensic Psychology from the International College of Professional Psychol90    About the Authors ogy. Dr. Pierangelo is a member of the American Psychological Association,  New York State Psychological Association, Nassau County Psychological Association, New York State Union of Teachers, and Phi Delta Kappa. Dr. Pierangelo is the author of the Special Educators Survival Guide and  the Special Education Teachers Book of Lists, published by Jossey Bass and author of 301 Ways to be a Loving Parent, published by SPI Publishers. He is is  the co-author of The Educators Diagnostic Manual of Disabilities and Disorders  EDM, The Special Educators Comprehensive Guide to 301 Diagnostic Tests, and  The Special Educators Complete Guide to 109 Diagnostic Tests, all published by  Jossey Bass; the co-author of college textbooks titled, Assessment in Special  Education: A Practical Approach 4th ed.; Transition Services in Special Education: A Practical Approach; and Learning Disabilities: A Practical Approach to  Foundations, Diagnosis, Assessment, and Teaching, all published by Allyn and  Bacon; co-author of Why Your Students Do What They DoAnd What to Do  When They Do ItGrades K5; Why Your Students Do What They DoAnd What  to Do When They Do ItGrades 612; Creating Confident Children in the Classroom: The Use of Positive Restructuring, and What Every Teacher Should Know  about Students with Special Needs, all published by Research Press; co-author  of The Big Book of Special Education Resources, and the co-author of an eight  book The Educators Step-by-Step Guide to . . . 10-book series, with the titles:  The Educators Step-by-Step Guide to IEP Development, The Educators Step-by-Step  Guide to the 100 Most FAQ Asked by About Special Education the Special Education  Process, The Educators Step-by-Step Guide to Eligibility in Special Education, The  Educators Step-by-Step Guide to Assessment in Special Education, The Educators  Step-by-Step Guide to Working with Students with ADHD, The Educators Step-byStep Guide to Response to Intervention RTI, The Educators Step-by-Step Guide  to Classroom Management for Students with Emotional and Behavioral Disorders,  The Educators Step-by-Step Guide to Setting Up Your Special Education Classroom,  The Educators Step-by-Step Guide to Classroom Management for Students with Autism, and The Educators Step-by-Step Guide to Classroom Management for Students  with Learning Disabilities. Dr. George Giuliani Jr. Dr. George Giuliani is an Associate Professor at Hofstra Universitys School  of Education and former Director of the Graduate School programs in Special Education. He is also an Adjunct Professor at Hofstra Universitys Maurice A Deane School of Law where he teaches the course, Special Education  Law. Dr. Giuliani earned his BA from the College of the Holy Cross, MS  from St. Johns University, JD from City University of New York School of  Law and MA and PsyD from Rutgers University. He earned Board CertificaAbout the Authors    91 tion as a Diplomate Fellow in Advanced Child and Adolescent Psychology,  Board Certification as a Diplomate Fellow in Forensic Sciences from the  International College of Professional Psychology and Board Certification  in Special Education from the American Academy of Special Education  Professionals. Dr. Giuliani is a member of the American Psychological Association,  Education Law Association, New York State Psychological Association,  American Bar Association, Suffolk County Psychological Association, Psi  Chi, American Association of University Professors, and the Council for  Exceptional Children. Dr. Giuliani is the Executive Director of The National Association of Special Education Teachers, Executive Director of the  American Academy of Special Education Professionals, and President of  the National Association of Parents with Children in Special Education. He  has been a consultant for school districts and early childhood agencies, and  has provided numerous workshops for parents, teachers and other professionals on a variety of special education and psychological topics. Dr. Giuliani is the co-author of various articles in the New York State Family Law Review of the New York State Bar Association. He is the co-author  of The Educators Diagnostic Manual of Disabilities and Disorders EDM, The  Special Educators Comprehensive Guide to 301 Diagnostic Tests, and The Special  Educators Complete Guide to 109 Diagnostic Tests, all published by Jossey Bass;  the co-author of college textbooks titled, Assessment in Special Education: A  Practical Approach 3rd ed.;Transition Services in Special Education: A Practical  Approach; and Learning Disabilities: A Practical Approach to Foundations, Diagnosis, Assessment, and Teaching, all published by Allyn and Bacon; co-author  of Why Your Students Do What They DoAnd What to Do When They Do It Grades K5; Why Your Students Do What They DoAnd What to Do When They  Do ItGrades 612; Creating Confident Children in the Classroom: The Use of  Positive Restructuring, and What Every Teacher Should Know about Students with  Special Needs, all published by Research Press; co-author of The Big Book of  Special Education Resources, Teaching Students With Learning Disabilities; Teaching in a Special Education Classroom; Teaching Students With Autism Spectrum  Disorders; Classroom Management for Students With Emotional and Behavioral  Disorders; Frequently Asked Questions About Response to Intervention; Classroom  Management Techniques for Students With ADHD; Understanding Assessment in  the Special Education Process; Understanding, Developing, and Writing Effective  IEPs; Special Education Eligibility: and 100 Frequently Asked Questions About the  Special Education Process, all published by Corwin Press. Dr. Giuliani recently completed his latest book with Jessica Kingsley  Publishers, The Comprehensive Guide to Special Education Law.