CLASSROOM BEHAVIOR, CONTEXTS, AND INTERVENTIONS

ADVANCES IN LEARNING AND BEHAVIORAL DISABILITIES Series Editors: Bryan G. Cook, Melody Tankersley and Timothy J. Landrum Series Editors Vols. 724: Thomas E. Scruggs and Margo A. Mastropieri Recent Volumes: Volume 14: Educational Interventions  Edited by Thomas E. Scruggs and Margo A. Mastropieri Volume 15: Technological Applications  Edited by Thomas E. Scruggs and Margo A. Mastropieri Volume 16: Identication and Assessment  Edited by Thomas E. Scruggs and Margo A. Mastropieri Volume 17: Research in Secondary Schools  Edited by Thomas E. Scruggs and Margo A. Mastropieri Volume 18: Cognition and Learning in Diverse Settings  Edited by Thomas E. Scruggs and Margo A. Mastropieri Volume 19: Applications of Research Methodology  Edited by Thomas E. Scruggs and Margo A. Mastropieri Volume 20: International Perspectives  Edited by Thomas E. Scruggs and Margo A. Mastropieri Volume 21: Personnel Preparation  Edited by Thomas E. Scruggs and Margo A. Mastropieri Volume 22: Policy and Practice  Edited by Thomas E. Scruggs and Margo A. Mastropieri Volume 23: Literacy and Learning  Edited by Thomas E. Scruggs and Margo A. Mastropieri Volume 24: Assessment and Intervention  Edited by Thomas E. Scruggs and Margo A. Mastropieri

ADVANCES IN LEARNING AND BEHAVIORAL DISABILITIES VOLUME 25 CLASSROOM BEHAVIOR, CONTEXTS, AND INTERVENTIONS EDITED BY BRYAN G. COOK University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA MELODY TANKERSLEY Kent State University, Kent, OH, USA TIMOTHY J. LANDRUM University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA United Kingdom  North America  Japan India  Malaysia  China

Emerald Group Publishing Limited Howard House, Wagon Lane, Bingley BD16 1WA, UK First edition 2012 Copyright r 2012 Emerald Group Publishing Limited Reprints and permission service Contact: permissionsemeraldinsight.com No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without either the prior written permission of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying issued in the UK by The Copyright Licensing Agency and in the USA by The Copyright Clearance Center. No responsibility is accepted for the accuracy of information contained in the text, illustrations or advertisements. The opinions expressed in these chapters are not necessarily those of the Editor or the publisher. British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library ISBN: 978-1-78052-972-1 ISSN: 0735-004X Series

CONTENTS LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS ix CLASSROOM BEHAVIOR, CONTEXT, AND INTERVENTIONS: THE SEARCH FOR SOLUTIONS TO COMPLEX PROBLEMS xiii TARGETS OF SELF-MONITORING: PRODUCTIVITY, ACCURACY, AND ATTENTION Andrew Bruce, John Wills Lloyd and Michael J. Kennedy 1 ISSUES RELATED TO IDENTIFYING AND IMPLEMENTING EVIDENCE-BASED SOCIAL SKILLS INTERVENTIONS FOR STUDENTS WITH HIGH-INCIDENCE DISABILITIES Frank M. Gresham, Natalie Robichaux, Haley York and Kristen OLeary 23 COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTIONS TO PREVENT AGGRESSION OF STUDENTS WITH EMOTIONAL AND BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS Stephen W. Smith, Gregory G. Taylor, Tia Barnes and Ann P. Daunic 47 ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER AND ACADEMICS Robert Reid 71 v

TEACHER EXPECTATIONS FOR STUDENT PERFORMANCE: LESSONS LEARNED AND IMPLICATIONS FOR RESEARCH AND PRACTICE Kathleen Lynne Lane, Erik W. Carter, Eric Common and Adam Jordan 95 ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT FOR STUDENTS WITH LEARNING DISABILITIES AND BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS: THE PROMISE OF SOCIAL EMOTIONAL LEARNING Allison B. Dymnicki, Kimberly T. Kendziora and David M. Osher 131 BEYOND GRADE RETENTION AND SOCIAL PROMOTION: TOWARD SUPPORTING STUDENTS WITH LEARNING AND BEHAVIORAL DISABILITIES Shane R. Jimerson, Aaron Haddock and Jacqueline A. Brown 167 UNIVERSAL SYSTEMS FOR PREVENTING BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS Terrance M. Scott 191 PREVENTING AND RESPONDING TO BULLYING AND HARASSMENT IN SCHOOLS: WHAT WE KNOW AND WHAT CAN BE DONE Jeffrey Sprague and Vicki Nishioka 217 PREPARING TEACHERS TO EFFECTIVELY DELIVER READING INSTRUCTION AND BEHAVIORAL SUPPORTS IN RESPONSE TO INTERVENTION FRAMEWORKS Mary T. Brownell, Alexandra Lauterbach, Amber Benedict, Jenna Kimerling, Elizabeth Bettini and Kristin Murphy 247 CONTENTS vi

TEACHERS CAUSAL ATTRIBUTIONS FOR STUDENT PROBLEM BEHAVIOR: IMPLICATIONS FOR SCHOOL-BASED BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTIONS AND RESEARCH Andrew L. Wiley, Melody Tankersley and Andrea Simms 279 TREATMENT INTEGRITY IN INTERVENTION RESEARCH: MODELS, MEASURES, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS Carl J. Liaupsin, Jolenea B. Ferro and John Umbreit 301 Contents vii

LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS Tia N. Barnes School of Special Education, School Psychology and Early Childhood Studies, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA Amber Benedict Department of Special Education, School Psychology, and Early Childhood Studies, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA Elizabeth Bettini Department of Special Education, School Psychology, and Early Childhood Studies, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA Jacqueline A. Brown Department of Counseling, Clinical, and School Psychology, University of California-Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA Mary T. Brownell Department of Special Education, School Psychology, and Early Childhood Studies, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA Andrew Bruce Department of Curriculum, Instruction, and Special Education, University of Virginia, Curry School of Education, Charlottesville, VA, USA Erik W. Carter Department of Special Education, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA ix

Eric Common School of Education, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel, NC, USA Bryan G. Cook Special Education Department, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA Ann P. Daunic School of Special Education, School Pscyhology and Early Childhood Studies, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA Allison B. Dymnicki Education, Human Development  the Workforce, American Institutes for Research, Washington, DC, USA Jolenea B. Ferro Department of Disability and Psychoeducational Studies, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA Frank M. Gresham Department of Psychology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA Aaron Haddock Santa Barbara Gevirtz Graduate School of Education, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA Shane R. Jimerson Santa Barbara Gevirtz Graduate School of Education, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA Adam Jordan School of Education, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel, NC, USA Kimberly T. Kendziora Education, Human Development  the Workforce, American Institutes for Research, Washington, DC, USA Michael J. Kennedy Department of Curriculum, Instruction and Special Education, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA x LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

Jenna Kimerling Department of Special Education, School Psychology, and Early Childhood Studies, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA Timothy J. Landrum Department of Special Education, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA Kathleen Lynne Lane Department of Special Education, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, USA Alexandra Lauterbach Department of Special Education, School Psychology, and Early Childhood Studies, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA Carl J. Liaupsin Department of Disability and Psychoeducational Studies, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA John Wills Lloyd Department of Curriculum, Instruction, and Special Education, Curry School of Education, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA Kristin Murphy Department of Special Education, School Psychology, and Early Childhood Studies, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA Vicki Nishioka Education Northwest, Portland, OR, USA Kristen OLeary Department of Psychology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA David M. Osher Human and Social Development, American Institutes for Research, Washington, DC, USA List of Contributors xi

Robert Reid Special Education and Communication Disorders, University of NebraskaLincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA Natalie Robichaux Department of Psychology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA Terrance M. Scott Department of Special Education, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA Andrea Simms Lifespan Development and Educational Sciences, Kent State University, Kent, OH, USA Stephen W. Smith Department of Special Education, School Psychology, and Early Childhood Studies, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA Jeffrey Sprague The University of Oregon Institute on Violence and Destructive Behavior, Eugene, OR, USA Melody Tankersley Lifespan Development and Educational Sciences, Kent State University, Kent, OH, USA Gregory G. Taylor Department of Special Education, University of Illinois, College of Education, Champaign, Illinois John Umbreit Department of Disability and Psychoeducational Studies, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA Andrew L. Wiley Lifespan Development and Educational Sciences, Kent State University, Kent, OH, USA Haley York Department of Psychology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA xii LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

CLASSROOM BEHAVIOR, CONTEXT, AND INTERVENTIONS: THE SEARCH FOR SOLUTIONS TO COMPLEX PROBLEMS Consumers of the popular media  radio, television, newspapers  undoubtedly develop a sense that our streets and schools are beset by frequent and extreme forms of violence from a generation of youth who are out of control. While the rare instances of extreme violence e.g., school shootings receive perhaps inordinate media attention, in truth school violence showed a steady decline in the rst decade of the 21st century e.g., Mayer  Furlong, 2010. In contrast, the most common problems teachers face on a daily basis include bullying, disrespect, truancy and tardiness, and general classroom disruption see Sprague  Nishioka, this volume; also see DeVoe et al., 2004; McFadden, March, Price,  Hwang, 1992; Morgan-DAtrio, Northup, LaFleur,  Spera, 1996. Although these problems may be less severe in nature than overt acts of physical violence, their trajectory toward development of more harmful behaviors and their frequency makes addressing them critical to the effective and efcient functioning of schools, especially if we envision schools as positive learning environments in which children thrive see Scott, this volume. Indeed, teachers consistently report that challenging behaviors of these sorts are the most stressful and demanding aspects of their work see Furlong, Morrison,  Dear, 1994; Lane, Carter, Common,  Jordan, this volume. Extreme violence certainly demands attention, and its prevention should be a high priority, but it seems logical that the more common problems observed  problems that we know cost students and teachers valuable instructional time, and moreover can be precursors to the later development of more serious antisocial behavior see Walker, Ramsey,  Gresham, 2004  may be the most logical targets for our interventions. xiii

To intervene effectively with these highly troubling, persistent problems, attention to at least three facets of the problem seems warranted: behavior, context, and interventions. Although usually interdependent and complex in their relationship, these facets require considerable attention as we seek to intervene effectively with students with learning and behavioral difculties. In the following sections, we pose several key questions related to behavior, context, and interventions, and preview how the authors in this volume sought to address them. BEHAVIOR Several questions guide our analysis of behavioral concerns. First, are there in fact differences in children that predispose them to difcult behavior in school? For example, are there endogenous learning or behavioral characteristics, or learned behaviors that children bring to school, which make some children more likely to succeed in navigating the complex social and academic environments they will encounter? If so, can these characteristics be altered, can behaviors be changed, or can their impact be ameliorated through intervention? Reid this volume addressed many of these questions in his chapter on Attention Decit Hyperactivity Disorder ADHD, especially as the questions relate to academics. Using Barkleys 2006 theoretical work as a framework, and recent descriptive and longitudinal data, Reid discusses the academic status and trajectory of students with ADHD. Looking closely at possible causal factors for academic problems, Reid identies and describes promising interventions, such as computer-assisted instruction, peer tutoring, and strategy instruction. In considering factors that may inuence behavior and learning, Dymnicki, Kendziora, and Osher this volume reviewed literature on the social, emotional, and behavioral development of adolescents, looking specically at how development may differ in students with versus without learning or behavioral disabilities. Dymnicki et al. outline and discuss a number of challenges youth face, and then introduce and review the potential benets of social and emotional learning SEL for adolescents with learning and behavioral disabilities. SEL provides a unifying concept for organizing and promoting school-based programs that have a positive impact on these domains of development. Dymnicki et al. offer a comprehensive review of SEL programs and describe a number of outcomes that have demonstrated positive impact on successful adolescent development. CLASSROOM BEHAVIOR, CONTEXT, AND INTERVENTIONS xiv

The chapters in this volume by Reid and Dymnicki et al. look at characteristics associated with specic groups of learners and connect those characteristics to important elements of intervention. They show us how specic interventions can indeed be implemented in school contexts and result in signicant positive outcomes for adolescents Dymnicki et al. and students with ADHD Reid. CONTEXT Our second set of questions revolves around the context in which teaching and learning occur. What factors associated with the environment students are asked to navigate might either hinder or facilitate their success? The social and academic demands, the curriculum they are exposed to and standards to which they are held, and the teacher expectations for students to be responsible, independent, self-sufcient learners are all contextual elements that impact students. How can we know what contextual factors predict success rather than failure? Can we ultimately alter these contextual elements in ways that promote success? Certainly, the context of the school includes important factors that may inuence learners behavior. Sprague and Nishioka this volume describe the background of bullying and harassment in schools and provide current data on the extent to which it occurs and the impact it has on all students  the bully, the victim, and bystanders. Amid the worrisome account of the context of many schools, Sprague and Nishioka describe school-wide solutions that have been effective in both preventing and responding to bullying and harassment, and offer key steps for developing a culture of respect. According to Sprague and Nishioka this volume, one of the critical components of developing a school context that is bully-free is to base interventions within a school-wide positive behavior support PBS program. Scott this volume addresses this recommendation with precision as he presents the key features of effective universal systems designed to prevent behavior problems from arising in schools. Scott systematically organizes the steps of developing, implementing, and sustaining PBS programs in schools, while providing examples that can be brought directly to school personnel to immediately enhance the context of their schools. A number of other factors inuence the context of schooling. In addition to programs that promote a positive climate and prevent bullying and harassment, schools must consider the contexts of policies within which schools operate. Jimerson, Haddock, and Brown this volume remind us of Classroom Behavior, Context, and Interventions xv

the context of educational standards and accountability under which schools now operate. Unfortunately, within this context the practice of grade retention has risen. Jimerson et al. review the results of grade retention practices over the past 100 years and highlight the deleterious outcomes of the practice. The authors pay particular attention to the implications of grade retention for students with learning and behavioral disabilities. To provide contrast to the negative outcomes of grade retention, Jimerson et al. also identify evidence-based alternatives to grade retention. The context of schooling is inuenced not only by students and policies, but by teachers as well. Teachers bring many personal attributes into their classrooms and school buildings that also shape the context. Lane et al. this volume review the literature on teacher expectations for student behavior with a historical lens  noting how expectations have shifted in the changing educational contexts that legislation and inclusive practices have brought about. Through their comprehensive review, they not only identify expectations, but also describe how those expectations can facilitate programming, transitions, prevention, and intervention. The research on teacher expectations must also be considered in light of teacher attributions for problem behavior. Wiley, Tankersley, and Simms this volume present the notion that the use of effective interventions for problem behavior may be closely related to teachers attributions for why the problem behavior occurs. Using attribution theory to show how the causes individuals teachers assign to the behavior of others students inuence whether they will respond to the problem, Wiley et al. argue that many teachers may require help to change their causal attribution of problem behavior before they will adopt and sustain the use of evidencebased interventions. Both Lane et al. this volume and Wiley et al. this volume highlight the importance of exploring teachers cognitions about expectations and attributions. Teacher training programs may provide opportunities to do just that. And as Brownell et al. this volume propose, teacher education both preservice and inservice; general and special education needs to be coordinated so that teachers can integrate the knowledge necessary to respond to students learning and behavioral challenges. Specically, Brownell et al. discuss the importance of a practice-based approach to teacher education that allows teachers to design and implement core and tiered evidence-based practices. The context in which students learn and teachers teach has been referred to as messy Bruner, 1996  classrooms, school climate, teacher factors, and policies, to name only a few, vary tremendously across schools and CLASSROOM BEHAVIOR, CONTEXT, AND INTERVENTIONS xvi

undoubtedly impact student outcomes. However, the authors of this volume show that even within messy contexts, we have practices that are effective and promote positive outcomes for students. INTERVENTION Decades of research have yielded considerable data on effective intervention for learning and behavioral problems e.g., Forness, Kavale, Blum,  Lloyd, 1997. Despite this, persistent challenging behavior remains the norm in many classrooms, and academic failure continues at a high rate for students identied with, or at risk for, learning and behavioral disabilities e.g., Landrum, Tankersley,  Kauffman, 2003; McEvoy  Welker, 2000. Among questions that remain unanswered are these: Are interventions supported by research truly as effective as we assume them to be? Can interventions be implemented in classrooms with integrity? Gresham, Robichaux, York, and OLeary this volume look at the effectiveness of social skills training interventions and conclude that for about 65 of students receiving such interventions, the outcomes are positive. The authors highlight Social Skills Instruction: SSIS-Intervention Guide as one approach to social skills training. In addition to providing an overview of the research to date and describing a specic approach, Gresham et al. also critique methodological and conceptual issues in social skills training interventions and suggest directions for future research in this area. Similarly, Smith, Taylor, Barnes, and Daunic this volume describe the value of cognitive-behavioral interventions CBIs to reduce student aggression in school settings. Not only do Smith et al. present a summary of the overall effectiveness of CBIs, but they also describe a specic schoolbased curriculum, Tools for Getting Along, as an example. Both Gresham et al. and Smith et al. respond to the question of intervention effectiveness and provide an example of how interventions can be implemented with delity in the classroom. Adding to the list of effective interventions, Bruce, Lloyd, and Kennedy this volume discuss the ample evidence that self-monitoring, a robust and well-studied self-control procedure that is routinely used in schools with students with learning and behavioral disabilities, results in meaningful outcomes for students. To dig deep into what is most effective in implementing self-monitoring, Bruce et al. specically address the question of whether focusing self-monitoring of attention to task or self-monitoring of academic performance will produce superior outcomes. As our knowledge Classroom Behavior, Context, and Interventions xvii

of interventions continues to grow, we must begin to determine features of the interventions that are crucial components for producing the best change, as Bruce et al. did. Producing the best change is unquestionably the aim of intervention. But how do we know if interventions are actually implemented as they are intended to be implemented? Liaupsin, Ferro, and Umbreit this volume discuss the importance of assessing treatment integrity  the extent to which a given intervention is implemented as designed. As we expand and rene our evidence base regarding intervention research, we must ensure that we provide conrmation of treatment integrity. Liaupsin et al. describe models and measurement techniques for doing so, along with critical next steps for scholars as they labor to address the research-topractice gap. THIS VOLUME The impetus for Volume 25 of Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities was to offer evidence-based solutions to complex problems of behavioral concerns in schools. But as we considered the myriad areas of behavioral concern that are evident in schools, our questions lead us simultaneously in many different directions. We realized these were not simple questions about identifying individual solutions to specic behavioral challenges, but rather that it would be essential to consider the contexts of schools and the characteristics of learners and teachers if we were to approach a meaningful, coherent framework for analyzing and addressing behavior in classrooms. We were fortunate to have leading authorities on learner behavior, school contexts, teacher variables, and interventions contribute to this volume. The bodies of work represented by the scholars who have authored chapters have individually and collectively moved our eld forward in dramatic ways, and we are grateful to each of them for sharing their knowledge and expertise here. We hope their contributions, taken as a whole, provide a useful framework for not only analyzing, but ultimately solving the most pressing behavioral challenges teachers face in schools. Melody Tankersley Timothy J. Landrum Bryan G. Cook Editors CLASSROOM BEHAVIOR, CONTEXT, AND INTERVENTIONS xviii

REFERENCES Barkley, R. A. 2006. Attention-decit hyperactivity disorder: A handbook for diagnosis and treatment 3rd ed. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Bruner, J. 1996. The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. DeVoe, J., Peter, K., Kaufman, P., Miller, A., Noonan, M., Snyder, T.,  Baum, K. 2004. Indicators of school crime and safety, 2004. National Center for Education Statistics, U.S. Department of Education, and Bureau of Justice Statistics, Ofce of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice. Washington, DC. Forness, S. R., Kavale, K. A., Blum, I. M.,  Lloyd, J. W. 1997. Mega-analysis of metaanalysis: What works in special education and related services. Teaching Exceptional Children, 29, 49. Furlong, M. J., Morrison, G. M.,  Dear, J. D. 1994. Addressing school violence as part of schools educational mission. Preventing School Failure, 383, 1017. Landrum, T. J., Tankersley, M.,  Kauffman, J. M. 2003. What is special about special education for students with emotional or behavioral disorders? The Journal of Special Education, 37, 148156. Mayer, M. J.,  Furlong, M. J. 2010. How safe are our schools? Educational Researcher, 39, 1626. McEvoy, A.,  Welker, R. 2000. Antisocial behavior, academic failure, and school climate: A critical review. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 8, 130140. McFadden, A. C., March, G. E., II., Price, B. J.,  Hwang, Y. 1992. A study of race and gender bias in the punishment of handicapped school children. The Urban Review, 24, 239251. Morgan-DAtrio, C., Northup, J., LaFleur, L.,  Spera, S. 1996. Toward prescriptive alternatives to suspensions: A preliminary evaluation. Behavioral Disorders, 21, 190200. Walker, H. M., Ramsey, E.,  Gresham, F. M. 2004. Antisocial behavior in the classroom. Belmont, CA: ThomsonWadsworth. Classroom Behavior, Context, and Interventions xix

TARGETS OF SELF-MONITORING: PRODUCTIVITY, ACCURACY, AND ATTENTION Andrew Bruce, John Wills Lloyd and Michael J. Kennedy ABSTRACT Self-monitoring has become one of the most widely employed self-control procedures in special education for students with learning disabilities and emotional or behavioral disorders. Although its success has been documented across age groups, settings, and diverse applications, researchers have continued to study the question of whether focusing self-monitoring on certain target behaviors  particularly attention to task or academic performance  will yield superior outcomes for students. We review 11 available studies that have examined this issue, classifying each study according to the ways in which the researchers had students monitor their own behavior. The results show only small differences among the different methods and indicate a need for teachers to continue exercising professional judgment in planning the use of self-monitoring. People may behave differently simply because they know they are being observed, are being assessed, or are participating in a research project Classroom Behavior, Contexts, and Interventions Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, Volume 25, 121 Copyright r 2012 by Emerald Group Publishing Limited All rights of reproduction in any form reserved ISSN: 0735-004Xdoi:10.1108S0735-004X20120000025004 1

Haynes  Horn, 1982; Kazdin, 2010; Webb, 1966. Reactivity to assessment makes it difcult for scientists to extrapolate from experimental situations, where behavior was observed, to the natural situations, where behavior usually happens without obvious observation. Reactivity limits external validity in most research, making it difcult to generalize results from the contrived experimental situation to the normal, everyday situation. Pioneers in self-monitoring, however, stood reactivity on its head by using reactivity to assessment as a means of treatment e.g., Johnson  White, 1970; Kanfer, 1970, 1975. If having people monitor their own behavior caused the behavior to change, so be it! When clinicians asked smokers to count cigarettes smoked or puffs puffed, smokers smoked or puffed less often, and when they asked people to count spoons-full consumed, people ate less Mahoney, Moura,  Wade, 1973; McFall, 1970; McFall  Hammen, 1971; Romanczyk, Racey, Wilson,  Thorpe, 1973. Since the 1970s, research on self-recording or self-monitoring of behavior has increased dramatically. Those early reports from clinical psychologists included some applications with children. For example, Maletzky 1974 tested self-monitoring with children such as a 9-year-old boy who raised his hand repeatedly in class, waving it furiously in response to his teachers questions, despite not know the answers on many such occasions p. 109 and an 11-year-old girl who was noted to be constantly out of her seat in class p. 110. Other researchers in the 1970s correctly hypothesized that interventions including self-recording and self-monitoring might also inuence outcomes for students with disabilities. This research proliferated across the years and continues today Lloyd  Landrum, 1990; Maag, 1998; Mooney, Ryan, Uhing, Reid,  Epstein, 2005; Reid, 1996; State  Kern, 2012. Whereas only a few studies examined the effects of self-monitoring with children with disabilities before 1980, a quick search of databases in 2012 revealed almost 1,000 references. In summary, clinical applications of self-recording or selfmonitoring are commonplace in special and general education. Furthermore, efforts to teach students to record their own behavior  with varying degrees of detailed and precise training  occur every day in schools around the world. The extensive research, beginning in the 1970s e.g., Broden, Hall,  Mitts, 1971; Gottman  McFall, 1972; Hallahan, Lloyd, Kosiewicz, Kauffman,  Graves, 1979; Lovitt, 1973 and continuing in the 2000s e.g., Legge, DeBar,  Alber-Morgan, 2010; Rafferty  Raimondi, 2009; Rock, 2005 resolved many important questions, but left others unanswered. In this laconic review, we provide background about self-monitoring, review ANDREW BRUCE ET AL. 2

some of those key ndings, and focus on one of the important unresolved issues: What is the appropriate target for students to record when they monitor their own behavior? SELF-MONITORING AS A COMPONENT OF OR A COMPLETE TREATMENT Self-monitoring is one of several self-control or cognitive-behavior treatment methods that gained popularity among researchers and practitioners during the 1970s and 1980s. Other interventions include self-instruction, self-reinforcement, goal-setting, and combinations of each Kurtz  Neisworth, 1976; Lovitt, 1973; Meichenbaum, 1977. Some researchers add others e.g., self-evaluation to this list or distinguish among them in a more ne-grained manner self-assessment versus self-recording or selfmonitoring for theoretical reasons or for the purposes of making explicit comparisons among components e.g., Hallahan, Lloyd, Kneedler,  Marshall, 1982. Educators may employ self-monitoring as a stand-alone intervention or as a component of other more comprehensive interventions. Self-monitoring is used as a stand-alone intervention when the targeted behavior is the ultimate goal of the intervention. That is, the reactivity effects of selfmonitoring can be utilized as the sole means of behavioral change. Alternatively, self-monitoring can be used as part of a package in order to increase implementation of a treatment component, or when the desired behavior is more complex in nature e.g., constructing a paragraph. Self-Monitoring as an Intervention Though self-monitoring has been conceptualized and implemented in different ways, there are certain characteristics common to all self-monitoring procedures. No matter the target of self-monitoring, students need to be trained to implement the procedure with accuracy and consistency. Training must also provide clear examples and nonexamples of the targeted behavior. The student must be uent when making assessments of behavior to minimize interference with their academic work or misperceptions about their actual behavior. After training, students implement the self-monitoring technique in their classroom. The rst step in implementation is for the student to assess Targets of Self-Monitoring 3

whether the targeted behavior has occurred. This can be done in an intermittent or summative manner. In intermittent assessment, the students are prompted through an audible tone or by a mark on a worksheet to stop and compare their behavior to the targeted behavior e.g., on-task, accuracy of work. In summative assessment, the student works on a task for a specied amount of time and only assesses his or her behavior at the end. After assessing behavior, the student is required to record his or her assessment. How this recording is done is dependent upon the targeted behavior. Most versions of self-monitoring require the student to have a premade sheet of paper where he or she can systematically record behavior occurrences. If monitoring attention, the student would check yes if he or she were paying attention, or no if not paying attention when the tone sounded. If monitoring performance, a yes or no procedure no longer makes sense. Instead, a student monitoring productivity would record the number of problems completed or words written in the allotted time. If the student were monitoring accuracy, he or she would write a ratio of problems completed, or words written accurately, over the total number of problems or words attempted. All studies included in this chapter tested the effects of self-monitoring procedures during academic seat work i.e., math problems, spelling words, story writing, and not during other classroom activities. This focus makes sense as academic seat work provides an easily measured dependent variable against which different self-monitoring methods can be tested. Though selfmonitoring of performance SMP does not lend itself to use outside of academic seat work there is no work to monitor during instruction, there is no reason that self-monitoring of attention SMA cannot be used through an entire class period. Components Analyses Researchers have conducted extensive analyses of the components of selfmonitoring. Heins, Lloyd, and Hallahan 1986 found that boys levels of attending was higher under cued than noncued self-monitoring conditions, indicating that the cues for self-recording were important in producing higher levels of reactivity. Hallahan et al. 1982 demonstrated that when a student monitored his own behavior, his levels of on-task behavior were higher than when his teacher judged whether he was attending and then recorded his teachers decision. So the self is important in selfmonitoring. Further research demonstrates that the recording component ANDREW BRUCE ET AL. 4

of self-monitoring leads to gains in on-task behavior over self-assessment alone Lloyd, Hallahan, Kosiewicz,  Kneedler, 1982. Self-monitoring has been applied in diverse settings and across age groups. Participants have been as young as 4 years of age Workman, Helton,  Watson, 1982 and as old as adolescents e.g., Hughes et al., 2002 and adults Rudrud, Ziarnik,  Colman, 1984. Not only have the procedures been used in schools e.g., McLaughlin, 1984, but they have also been in childrens homes e.g., Axelrod, Zhe, Haugen,  Klein, 2009 and in juvenile justice facilities Young, Birnbrauer,  Sanson-Fisher, 1977 and athletic venues e.g., Critcheld  Vargas, 1991. Self-monitoring has proven effective at increasing achievement Sagotsky, Patterson,  Lepper, 1978, on-task behavior Marshall, Lloyd,  Hallahan, 1993; Thomas, 1976, class participation Gottman  McFall, 1972, productivity Harris, 1986; Wolfe, Heron,  Goddard, 2000, and academic accuracy Maag, Reid,  DiGangi, 1993; Roberts  Nelson 1981 as well as other behaviors see Joseph  Eveleigh, 2011; Shapiro  Cole, 1999. Furthermore, self-monitoring has been shown to be an effective intervention for students with learning disabilities LD; Lloyd et al., 1982; Reid

Harris, 1993, emotional and behavioral disorders EBD; McLaughlin, Krappman,  Welsh, 1985, attention decit hyperactivity disorders ADHD; Christie, Hiss,  Lozanoff, 1984; Harris, Friedlander, Saddler, Frizzelle,  Graham, 2005, intellectual disabilities ID; Morrow, Burke,  Buell, 1985, and for students with no identied disability Sagotsky et al., 1978; Thomas, 1976. In sum, self-monitoring has been shown to be a robust and effective stand-alone intervention. Self-Monitoring as Component Sometimes, however, self-monitoring is used not as an intervention by itself but as a feature in a more comprehensive intervention. Probably the most widely known example of this use of self-monitoring is its use in Self-Regulated Strategy Development SRSD; Harris  Graham, 1999. As Harris and Graham detail, their full model of SRSD incorporates strategy instruction with self-monitoring and goal-setting in the Discuss It, Model It, Memorize It, Support It, and Independent Performance components of the model. Similarly, Montagues 2003 Solve It mathematics program adopts a cognitive strategy approach that includes a selfmonitoring step in which students check their work at many of the stages of the strategy. Targets of Self-Monitoring 5

In contrast to interventions where self-monitoring stands alone as an intervention, in the cases of Solve It and SRSD, the purpose of selfmonitoring is not to increase or decrease a specic behavior but to increase implementation of the targeted strategies. Even though self-monitoring is not the primary intervention, a meta-analysis of strategy instruction studies identied self-monitoring as one of the three most powerful elements of strategy instruction in SRSD De la Paz, 2007. Self-monitoring is an effective means of increasing implementation of a targeted behavior, and as such it has the potential to be incorporated into a wide array of comprehensive interventions. Summary From these brief examinations of the research on self-monitoring, it is clear that the procedure has been applied across a wide range of general conditions. Not only do we know that it has worked with students who differ in many ways age, gender, disability, and so forth and that certain of its components are important for its success, but we also know that selfmonitoring can be applied to different target behaviors. That is, students can be taught to monitor attention to task, various forms of behavior, academic performance, and many other actions. This last matter, the targets of self-monitoring, is the primary focus of our analysis for the remainder of this chapter. COMPARISONS OF TARGETS FOR SELF-MONITORING The relative benets of SMA and SMP have been discussed repeatedly by scholars interested in this area of research e.g., Snider, 1987 as well as the authors of experiments to which we shall turn in the subsequent section of this chapter. In this section, we will discuss the theoretical assumptions underlying SMA and SMP before turning our attention to the different methods for assessing and recording SMP. Before we examine the relative benets of SMA and SMP, it is necessary to dene what behaviors these interventions seek to change. The three main behavior targets that emerge from the literature examined for this study are on-task behavior, academic productivity, and academic accuracy. SMA and SMP both attempt to affect behavioral change in these three ANDREW BRUCE ET AL. 6

dependent variables, but they do so operating under different theoretical assumptions. Examination of these theoretical assumptions will help frame the questions we seek to answer through the rest of the chapter. First, is attention a prerequisite to academic production? In other words, are the academic benets observed from teaching moderated by whether or not the student was paying attention? Second, does academic production rst require attention, or can a students production increase while attention remains level? Third, is accuracy dependent upon increases in attention, or is some other factor concurrently affecting both variables? Fourth, does targeting one behavioral outcome necessarily lead to improvements in other behavioral outcomes? Would increased accuracy, for example, mean that there was also increased on-task behavior and productivity? Lastly, is attention just an ancillary benet to self-monitoring procedures? Maybe attention is such a popular behavioral target because of its social validity. Teachers, parents, and others consider attention to be important but is it logically and scientically less important than productivity? We examined the research about alternative targets for self-monitoring to ascertain whether it provided a consensus about which specic target was the most appropriate for practice or whether conditional statements based on subject characteristics, methods, or other factors could be made. METHODS In our literature search, we entered the terms self-monitoring, and attention or performance, and, when possible, restricted the search results to the eld of education. We searched the Academic Search Complete, PsycINFO, Web of Science, and Google Scholar databases for relevant articles. We read the abstracts for all articles that mentioned self-monitoring of attention, or self-monitoring of performance and included all articles that directly tested the differential effects of self-monitoring of attention versus some form of self-monitoring of performance. Next, we reviewed the reference lists for the included articles using the same criterion i.e., the article must report an actual study examining the differential effects of self-monitoring of attention and self-monitoring of performance. Finally, we used the Google Scholar database to examine the studies that had cited our already included works to determine if any newer research had been missed. A total of 11 articles covering 13 comparisons between SMA and a form of SMP met our criterion and were included in our review. Targets of Self-Monitoring 7

From each study, we extracted basic descriptive data e.g., students characteristics, settings. We also classied the procedures according to the different ways in which the self-monitoring methods were dened and implemented. Virtually no difference was found in the way in which selfmonitoring of attention was implemented across the studies; with the exception of Roberts and Nelson 1981, and Rafferty and Raimondi 2009, all of the studies employed essentially the same procedure for self-monitoring of attention. Rafferty and Raimondi stated they were following the same procedures as Hallahan et al. 1979, which many of the articles cite as a guide, but they used a 5-minute xed interval for their cues rather than the 45-second average range 1090 seconds interval tones employed by Hallahan et al. Most studies reported interobserver agreement, had clear denitions of the dependent variables, described observer training procedures, and reported the accuracy of student self-monitoring. Because there was such little variation in these study characteristics, we did not include them in our analysis. Although SMA was implemented in a relatively uniform manner, SMP differed across studies in two ways. The rst distinction was whether SMP focused on productivity or accuracy. Some early studies focused simply on productivity e.g., Harris, 1986; Lloyd, Bateman, Landrum,  Hallahan, 1989, but more recent studies focused on the number of items completed correctly e.g., Harris, Graham, Reid, McElroy,  Hamby, 1994; Rafferty  Raimondi, 2009; Selznick  Savage, 2000. The second distinction among the procedures for self-monitoring of performance was the method in which the recording took place. As can be seen in Table 1, in ve of the studies, students were intermittently prompted with a tone to assess and record their progress. The remaining eight studies see Table 1 eschewed the use of prerecorded tones and had the students assess their performance in a summative assessment. These two distinctions created four different methods of self-monitoring of performance as shown in Table 2. There could be further theoretical distinctions made e.g., the difference between accuracy and uency, recording total correct versus percent correct, but there have not yet been enough studies to make those ne distinctions in a review of the literature. We classied the methods of self-recording performance as follows: 1. Summary production: In the method we are calling summary production, the researchers had the students record the number of items they had completed at the end of a given time period. This is a summative recording; it is only done once during a session. The earliest exemplar of ANDREW BRUCE ET AL. 8

Table 1. Relative Effects of Self-Monitoring Procedures. Method Studies Using the Method Results Compared to Self-Monitoring of Attention On-task outcomes Production outcomes Accuracy outcomes Summary production: At the end of time period, students record the number of items completed. Harris 1986 SMA  SMP SMA  SMP NA Harris et al. 1994, experiment 2 SMA  SMP SMA  SMP NA Summary accuracy: At the end of time period, students record the number of items completed correctly. Harris et al. 2005 SMA  SMP NA SMAWSMP Harris et al. 1994, experiment 1 SMA  SMP NA SMPWSMAa Rafferty and Raimondi 2009 SMA  SMP SMPWSMA SMPWSMA Reid and Harris 1993 SMA  SMP SMPWcontrol SSPWSSA Intermittent production: At irregular intervals, students record the number of items completed since the previous monitoring action. Lloyd et al. 1989 SMA  SMP NA SMAWSMPb Lam, Cole, Shapiro, and Bambara 1994 SMP  SMA NA SMPWSMA Maag et al. 1993 SMA  SMP SMPWSMA SMA  SMPc Intermittent accuracy: At irregular intervals, students compare their answers to those on an answer sheet and record whether their answers are correct. Rooney, Polloway, and Hallahan 1985 SMA  SMP SMA  SMP SMA  SMP Roberts and Nelson 1981 SMA  SMP SMA  SMP SMA  SMP Maag et al. 1993 SMA  SMP SMA  SMP SMA  SMPc Selznick and Savage 2000 SMA  SMP SMA  SMP SMA  SMP aWe decided the results favored SMP although our decision was based on differences observed in the choice condition of one of the participants. Some might interpret the results differently due to order of effects. bAlthough three of the ve participants favored SMA, one of the participants was close to the criteria for favoring SMP. cDifferent effects between 4thand 6th-grade participants confounded results based upon our criterion. Monitoring productivity increased three out of four 4th-grade students accuracy, while both 6th-grade students completed assignments with higher accuracy while monitoring accuracy. Targets of Self-Monitoring 9

this method was employed by Harris, who reported that the teacher in her study met with the student, explained the idea of self-monitoring spelling practice and then, the student was instructed to count the number of times his or her spelling words had been written at the end of the period, and then to record this number on a graph in his or her spelling le 1986, p. 419. 2. Summary accuracy: In summary accuracy, students assess and record how well they had done on their work at the end of a time period. Generally, a student is given an answer sheet and asked to correct his or her work before reporting only those items that were done correctly. For example, Rafferty and Raimondi 2009 used summary accuracy during a math activity. They gave each student a folder with an answer sheet, and at the end of the activity the students graded their work and graphed how many problems they had completed correctly. 3. Intermittent production: In intermittent production the student records how much she or he has completed periodically throughout the session. Rather than occurring only once, the student makes multiple observations about productivity. In this way, the procedure is more similar to the attention-to-task procedure. Lloyd et al. described one such procedure, saying that at the time of the tone, the students were taught to ask themselves how much work they had completed. To make this judgment, at the tone they marked the problem on which they were working, counted how many problems they had completed since the previous cue, and recorded this number on prepared recording sheets 1989, p. 318. 4. Intermittent accuracy: In the method we call intermittent accuracy, students compare the accuracy of their work to a standard e.g., an answer sheet and record whether their answer was correct. For example, while working on arithmetic practice pages in the study by Rooney et al. 1985, when a student came to a problem with a letter next to it, he or Table 2. Four Methods for Self-Monitoring Performance. Intermittent Summative Production Students monitor their performance repeatedly during a period of time. Students assess their performance at the end of a period of time. Accuracy Students monitor the accuracy of their work repeatedly during a period of time. Students assess the accuracy of their work at the end of a period of time. ANDREW BRUCE ET AL. 10

she was instructed to uncover the correct answer and was then to indicate the accuracy of his work on a YesNo recording sheet. Maag et al. 1993 used a different procedure, but it still essentially required the students to stop periodically and compare their answers to a standard. Procedures may vary depending on whether students are required to correct errors immediately, later, or at all. Once we sorted the studies into these four categories, we coded the population of students each study examined, the disabilities of the participants in each study, where the intervention took place, and the subject area on which the self-monitoring procedure was focused. We also coded each studys dependent variable, classifying the variables according to whether each assessed attention, productivity, or accuracy. Every study included on-task behavior, which was reported as percent of time-on-task, and we classied these as measures of attention. Although some studies denitions of on-task behavior were slightly different from each other, overall the denitions were similar. When a study reported the number of items completed as a dependent variable, we identied this as a measure of productivity. Researchers measured either the number of math problems completed or the number of words written in spelling or composition. Productivity was used as a dependent variable in nine of the studies we examined for this chapter. The productivity condition had no measure for the accuracy of those problems or words. However, when researchers assessed items or units of work completed correctly, we classied their dependent variables as measures of accuracy. Research assessed accuracy in three different ways across the studies we examined. Harris 1986, Harris et al. 2005, and Rafferty and Raimondi 2009 reported the number of problems completed or words written correctly in their studies. Lloyd et al. 1989 reported accuracy as the number of correct movements a student displayed per minute, introducing an element of uency into the accuracy measure. Last, Maag et al. 1993 conceptualized accuracy as the percentage of problems a student completed correctly. We grouped these three different interpretations of accuracy together because of the limited number of studies implementing the rate and percentage forms of accuracy measures. Finally, we analyzed the graphs and results sections of each study to determine if the study showed whether any procedure produced improvement in each different outcome area. Reid and Harris 1993 reported the only group-contrast study included in this review. We simply adopted their analysis of that studys results based on the signicance of their statistical Targets of Self-Monitoring 11

analysis. For the single-subject studies in this corpus to be judged as lending support to a self-monitoring procedure, we adopted the following criteria. First, the data for more than half of the participants in a study had to demonstrate effects favoring the same treatment condition. Second, intervals in multiple baseline procedures must show a level change, and show a sustained change in slope i.e., each phase needs multiple data points indicating a trend. Third, when interpreting results from an alternating treatment multielement design, element A was considered more effective than element B if there was separation such that one condition consistently resulted in higher levels of performance than the other i.e., at least 80 of the data points were higher than their counterparts in a phase. This last matter is the key question. Does SMA produce improvements in attention, but only in attention outcomes while SMP produces improvements in attention as well as performance? Or, does SMP produce improvements in performance and only in performance? How about SMP when accuracy is the target? What does it improve? There are important possible comparisons that need to be made and the farther researchers go with these examinations, the more detailed these comparisons become. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Given that there are only 11 studies and 1 of them used a group-contrast design Reid  Harris, 1993, we are drawing from a limited database and can only make preliminary inferences about the questions at hand. In total, the 11 studies reported 13 direct comparisons between SMA and SMP. Harris et al. 1994 conducted two experiments, and Maag et al. 1993 compared two different forms of SMP to SMA. The 13 studies reported results for different subject areas: 8 for math Lam et al., 1994; Lloyd et al., 1989; Maag et al., 1993, comparisons 1 and 2; Rafferty  Raimondi, 2009; Roberts  Nelson, 1981; Rooney et al., 1985; Selznick  Savage, 2000, 4 for spelling Harris, 1986; Harris et al., 1994, study 1; Harris et al., 2005; Reid  Harris, 1993, and 1 for story composition Harris et al., 1994, experiment 2. Participating students ages ranged from 8 to 14 years. Although there were more studies of students with LD than any other category, there were too few of any other category e.g., ADHD to permit us to make comparisons by category. Table 1 presents the main results of our review, and it shows that the data are quite mixed. Although the data do not show that focusing selfmonitoring on attention or productivity either accuracy or quantity yields ANDREW BRUCE ET AL. 12

consistently superior results, we can draw some broad conclusions from these studies. We describe the effects of SMA and SMP individually before comparing the two self-monitoring procedures. Self-monitoring of attention proved to be an effective means of increasing student time-on-task, productivity, and accuracy. SMA increased student on-task rates over baseline in every study examined in this review. Productivity was measured as a dependent variable in 9 of the 13 studies we examined. SMA led to increased productivity in seven Harris, 1986; Harris et al., 1994, experiment 2; Maag et al., 1993; Rafferty  Raimondi, 2009; Reid  Harris, 1993; Rooney et al., 1985 of the nine studies. Roberts and Nelson 1981 and Selznick and Savage 2000 reported high levels of variability across all conditions that masked any treatment effect that may have occurred. Eleven studies included measures of academic accuracy. Of those 11 studies, 8 Harris et al., 1994, experiment 1; Harris et al., 2005; Lam et al., 1994; Lloyd et al., 1989; Maag et al., 1993, comparisons 1 and 2; Rafferty  Raimondi, 2009; Rooney et al., 1985 showed SMA improving accuracy over the baseline condition. Variability, again, led to the lack of a treatment effect for two studies Roberts  Nelson, 1981; Selznick  Savage, 2000, but Reid and Harris 1993 found that spelling accuracy decreased in the SMA condition, though the difference was not signicantly below the control group. Similarly, the evidence is strong that SMP procedures increase attention, productivity, and accuracy over baseline conditions. SMP led to higher rates of on-task behavior in all 13 reported studies. As with SMA, seven Harris, 1986; Harris et al., 1994, experiment 2; Maag et al., 1993; Rafferty  Raimondi, 2009; Reid  Harris, 1993; Rooney et al., 1985 of the nine studies examining productivity reported that SMP resulted in observed levels higher than the baseline condition. Again, the same two studies Roberts  Nelson, 1981; Selznick  Savage, 2000 did not allow us to draw conclusions about SMPs effects on productivity or accuracy. In 8 Harris et al., 1994, experiment 1; Harris et al., 2005; Lam et al., 1994; Lloyd et al., 1989; Maag et al., 1993, comparisons 1 and 2; Rafferty  Raimondi, 2009; Rooney et al., 1985 of the 11 studies that reported accuracy data, students showed signicant increases over baseline. In the one group-contrast study, Reid and Harris 1993 found that SMP produced higher levels of accuracy than the control condition, though the difference was not signicant. Overall these data support 30-plus years of self-monitoring research. Both SMA and SMP are effective methods to increase student on-task behavior. The data also show that student productivity and student accuracy are increased by both SMA and SMP. But did either of these methods Targets of Self-Monitoring 13

distinguish themselves from the other? We compared SMA to SMP as a whole before comparing each of the four SMP subcategories i.e., Intermittent Production, Intermittent Accuracy, Summative Production, and Summative Accuracy to SMA. Although we examined 11 published studies and 13 individual comparisons of the effects of SMA versus SMP, we are left with no clear best procedure. No study reported a difference in the level of on-task behavior under the SMA or SMP treatment condition. Of the nine studies reporting productivity as a dependent variable, two favor SMP over SMA Maag et al., 1993; Rafferty  Raimondi, 2009; one of those two Rafferty  Raimondi used a longer time interval for the SMA condition 5 minutes than other studies in the corpus. The only group-contrast study, Reid and Harris 1993, found students on-task behavior was signicantly higher under SMP than the control condition and SMA was not, but there was not a signicant difference between SMP and SMA. There were 11 comparisons between SMP and SMA on the accuracy of student responses. Of these, two favor SMA Harris et al., 2005; Lloyd et al., 1989, four favor SMP Harris et al., 1994, experiment 1; Lam et al., 1994; Rafferty  Raimondi, 2009; Reid  Harris, 1993, and ve show no difference between treatment conditions Maag et al., 1993, comparisons 1 and 2; Roberts  Nelson, 1981; Rooney et al., 1985; Selznick  Savage, 2000. Due to the limited number of studies and the conicting results, we cannot make an overall judgment on the effects of SMP procedures versus SMA on the accuracy of students performance. According to our classication procedures only two studies employed Summary Production as the target of self-monitoring Harris, 1986; Harris et al., 1994, experiment 2. In both studies, students counted the number of words that they had written during the allotted time for an activity i.e., spelling and story writing. Neither of these studies showed effects favoring one condition over another. Four studies used our Summary Accuracy method Harris et al., 1994, experiment 1; Harris et al., 2005; Rafferty  Raimondi, 2009; Reid  Harris, 1993. The Summary Accuracy group provided the most divided results of the four categories. Three of these studies favored SMP procedures over SMA, but the fourth Harris et al., 2005 favored SMA over SMP. Upon examination, students in the three studies favoring SMP had been diagnosed with LD two studies and EBD one study and students in the study favoring SMA were diagnosed with ADHD Harris et al., 2005. Harris speculated that There may be somewhat of an aptitudeby-treatment response with these two groups, as students with ADHD ANDREW BRUCE ET AL. 14

tended to do better on academic responding in the SMA condition whereas students with LD tended to do better in the SMP condition p. 154. Three studies utilized Intermittent Production as a target variable Lam et al., 1994; Lloyd et al., 1989; Maag et al., 1993, comparison 1. Of the three, only Maag et al. assessed productivity without an element of accuracy. They found that students utilizing SMP completed more math problems than students utilizing SMA. Results were mixed for monitoring accurate productivity. Lam et al. reported that SMP procedures outperformed SMA procedures, but Lloyd et al. found that SMA produced slightly greater accuracy in student math problems. Although Maag et al. showed increased productivity, results were inconclusive for accuracy due to differential effects between students of different ages. Again, evaluation of Intermittent Production does not show that one procedure clearly yields superior outcomes. Four studies employed the method we are calling Intermittent Accuracy Maag et al., 1993; Roberts  Nelson, 1981; Rooney et al., 1985, comparison 2; Selznick  Savage, 2000. Of these four studies, two actually showed no increase over baseline in either productivity or accuracy Roberts  Nelson, 1981; Selznick  Savage, 2000, and the other two showed no difference between SMA and SMP. These results paint an uneven picture of the comparative effects of SMP and SMA, making it difcult to argue that one procedure is superior to the other. SMP might be ahead by a bit, if one simply counts the number of times that one condition is greater than the other, as shown in Table 1. However, the number of times when the two are essentially equal makes that lead look small. Why is this the case? Are the procedures equivalent? Is one more effective under some circumstances and the other more effective under others? An alternative possibility is that there are idiopathic outcomes. That is, selfmonitoring effects may interact with individual students characteristics; for a certain subset of students, self-monitoring of one target behavior will be more effective, but for a different subset of students, self-monitoring of another target behavior will be more effective. Harris et al. 2005 suggested this possibility after nding results that conicted with an earlier study. Our data set is not yet robust enough to establish decision rules about interactions using different self-monitoring methods depending on students characteristics. Indeed, educators have not yet established decision rules for those differentiating instruction on the basis of learner characteristics in general cf., Cronbach  Snow, 1977; Kavale  Forness, 1987; Pashler, McDaniel, Rohre,  Bjork, 2008. Targets of Self-Monitoring 15

Questions about whether the target or focus of intervention should be attention or performance are not limited to self-monitoring interventions. A similar debate arose in the 1970s in the behavior analysis community and led to highly focused studies. For example, Ferritor, Buckholdt, Hamblin, and Smith 1972 directly assessed the matter of bidirectional effects between attention and performance using an operant paradigm. While measuring attention, disruptive behavior, productivity, and accuracy in each of two experiments, they reinforced attention in one condition, correct work in another condition, and both attention and correct work in a third condition. They found that only one contingency trumped the other uniformly. Ferritor et al. concluded: Contingencies that increase attending behavior and reduce disruption do not necessarily increase student performance y. Contingencies on attending alone increased attending behavior and decreased disruptive behavior, but had little effect on the measures of correct work accomplished. Reinforcement contingencies for correct work alone increased the accuracy of work but had little effect on attending behavior and appeared to correlate with increased disruptive behavior. Only when reinforcement was contingent both for attending behavior and for correct work accomplished did we nd increased attending, decreased disruptions, along with increased number of problems worked correctly. 1972, p. 16 What can we learn from this parallel? Perhaps it is that, in the case of selfmonitoring interventions, as in many other areas, we should not continue to pursue the one simple and pure method. There may be no one, right-and-true target for self-monitoring, no magic bullet. Instead, it may be that selfmonitoring is a good component of broader interventions e.g., SRSD and, when self-monitoring is introduced as an intervention that is to stand on its own, we should heed the ndings of Ferritor et al. 1972 and plan to focus on multiple target behaviors. How teachers would implement a multicomponent self-monitoring procedure sounds like a challenge. And then there is the challenge of how researchers would assess its effects relative to all the other possible alternative variants of self-monitoring. In the course of our research for this chapter, we found two studies Rooney et al., 1985; Wolfe et al., 2000 that combined SMA and SMP into one procedure. Rooney et al. compared SMA and SMP separately before combining them for one phase of their study. Results for neither study were conclusive. More research needs to be conducted comparing combined treatments to SMA and SMP individually. Students with learning and behavior disorders characteristically have difculties in academic performance and associated areas, one of which is attention to task Hallahan, Lloyd, Kauffman, Weiss,  Martinez, 2005; ANDREW BRUCE ET AL. 16

Kauffman  Landrum, 2009. Although parents, teachers, clinicians, psychologists, and others are often interested in the nature, causes, and assessment of these problems, the most pressing concern to everyone who knows children and youths with these difculties is what to do to improve educational outcomes. Attention may be an epiphenomenon, a by-product of productive work, or it may be a precursor. The two may be so closely intertwined that it is impossible to separate them completely, making it even more important to focus interventions on whatever produces effects for given individuals. Thus, teachers, psychologists, and others who use selfmonitoring  and just about any other intervention, for that matter  should routinely monitor its effects to ensure that the students with whom it is being employed are beneting from it. Our overall conclusion is that this literature is unsettled. Our colleagues and we have worked on it for many years. Although they may have better insights into it than do we, the answers to the questions we pose seem to lead us on an adventure  through a twisty set of caves. At present, we hope that teachers and other clinicians using self-monitoring will, in the spirit of the US individual educational program, focus any application of selfmonitoring on the target behaviors of greatest concern for each individual student when using it as a specic treatment and recognize it as an important component of broader treatments when they see it in packages. In both cases, we hope it will be implemented with delity and kindness. REFERENCES Axelrod, M. I., Zhe, E. J., Haugen, K. A.,  Klein, J. A. 2009. Self-management of on-task homework behavior: A promising strategy for adolescents with attention and behavior problems. School Psychology Review, 38, 325333. Broden, M., Hall, R. V.,  Mitts, B. 1971. The effects of self-recording on the classroom behavior of two eighth-grade students. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 4, 191199. Christie, D. J., Hiss, M.,  Lozanoff, B. 1984. Modication of inattentive classroom behavior: Hyperactive childrens use of self-recording with teacher guidance. Behavior Modication, 8, 391406. Critcheld, T. S.,  Vargas, E. A. 1991. Self-recording, instructions, and public self-graphing: Effects on swimming in the absence of coach verbal interaction. Behavior Modication, 15, 95112. Cronbach, L. J.,  Snow, R. 1977. Aptitudes and instructional methods: A handbook for research on interactions. New York, NY: Irvington. De La Paz, S. 2007. Managing cognitive demands for writing: Comparing the effects of instructional components in strategy instruction. Reading and Writing Quarterly, 23, 249266. Targets of Self-Monitoring 17

Ferritor, D. E., Buckholdt, D., Hamblin, R. L.,  Smith, L. 1972. The noneffects of contingent reinforcement for attending behavior on work accomplished. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 5, 717. Gottman, J. M.,  McFall, R. M. 1972. Self-monitoring effects in a program for potential high school dropouts: A time-series analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 39, 273281. Hallahan, D. P., Lloyd, J. W., Kauffman, J. M., Weiss, M.,  Martinez, E. A. 2005. Learning disabilities: Foundations, characteristics, and effective teaching 3rd ed. Boston, MA: Allyn  Bacon. Hallahan, D. P., Lloyd, J. W., Kneedler, R. D.,  Marshall, K. J. 1982. A comparison of the effects of self-versus teacher-assessment of on-task behavior. Behavior Therapy, 13, 715723. Hallahan, D. P., Lloyd, J. W., Kosiewicz, M. M., Kauffman, J. M.,  Graves, A. W. 1979. Self-monitoring of attention as a treatment for a learning-disabled boys off-task behavior. Learning Disability Quarterly, 4, 407413. Harris, K. R. 1986. Self-monitoring of attentional behavior versus self-monitoring of productivity: Effects on on-task behavior and academic response rate among learning disabled children. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 19, 417423. Harris, K. R., Friedlander, B. D., Saddler, B., Frizzelle, R.,  Graham, S. 2005. Selfmonitoring of attention versus self-monitoring of academic performance: Effects among students with ADHD in the general education classroom. The Journal of Special Education, 39, 145156. Harris, K. R.,  Graham, S. 1999. Programmatic research: Illustrations from the evolution of self-regulated strategy development. Learning Disability Quarterly, 22, 251262. Harris, K. R., Graham, S., Reid, R., McElroy, K.,  Hamby, R. S. 1994. Self-monitoring of attention versus self-monitoring of performance: Replication and cross-task comparison studies. Learning Disability Quarterly, 17, 121139. Haynes, S. R.,  Horn, W. F. 1982. Reactivity in behavioral observation: A review. Behavioral Assessment, 4, 369385. Heins, E. D., Lloyd, J. W.,  Hallahan, D. P. 1986. Cued and non-cued self-recording of attention to task. Behavior Modication, 10, 235254. Hughes, C., Copeland, S. R., Agran, M., Wehmeyer, M. L., Rodi, M. S.,  Presley, J. A. 2002. Using self-monitoring to improve performance in general education high school classes. Education  Training in Mental Retardation  Developmental Disabilities, 37, 262272. Johnson, S. M.,  White, G. 1970. Self-observation as an agent of behavioral change. Behavior Therapy, 2, 488497. Joseph, L. M.,  Eveleigh, E. L. 2011. A review of the effects of self-monitoring on reading performance of students with disabilities. The Journal of Special Education, 45, 4553. Kanfer, F. 1970. Self-monitoring: Methodological limitations and clinical applications. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 35, 148152. Kanfer, F. H. 1975. Self-management methods. In F. H. Kanfer  A. P. Goldstein Eds., Helping people change: A textbook of methods pp. 309356. New York, NY: Pergamon. Kauffman, J. M.,  Landrum, T. L. 2009. Characteristics of childrens behavior disorders 9th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill Prentice-Hall. Kavale, K. A.,  Forness, S. R. 1987. Substance over style: A quantitative synthesis assessing the efcacy of modality testing and teaching. Exceptional Children, 54, 228234. ANDREW BRUCE ET AL. 18

Kazdin, A. E. 2010. Single-case research designs: Methods for clinical and applied settings 2nd ed. New York, NY: Oxford. Kurtz, P. D.,  Neisworth, J. T. 1976. Self-control possibilities for exceptional children. Exceptional Children, 42, 212217. Lam, A. L., Cole, C., Shapiro, E. S.,  Bambera, L. 1994. Relative effects of self-monitoring on-task behavior, academic accuracy, and disruptive behavior. School Psychology Review, 23, 4458. Legge, D. B., DeBar, R. M.,  Alber-Morgan, S. R. 2010. The effects of self-monitoring with a MotivAiders on the on-task behavior of fth and sixth graders with autism and other disabilities. Journal of Behavior Assessment  Intervention in Children, 1, 4352. Lloyd, J. W., Bateman, D. F., Landrum, T. J.,  Hallahan, D. P. 1989. Self-recording of attention versus productivity. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 22, 315323. Lloyd, J. W., Hallahan, D. P., Kosiewicz, M. M.,  Kneedler, R. D. 1982. Reactive effects of self-assessment and self-recording on attention to task and academic productivity. Learning Disabilities Quarterly, 5, 216227. Lloyd, J. W.,  Landrum, T. J. 1990. Self-recording of attending to task: Treatment components and generalization of effects. In T. E. Scruggs  B. Y. L. Wong Eds., Intervention research in learning disabilities pp. 235262. New York, NY: SpringerVerlag. Lovitt, T. 1973. Self-management projects with children with behavioral disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 6, 138150. Maag, J. W. 1998. Teaching children and youth self-control: Applications of perceptual control theory. Reston, VA: Council for Children with Behavior Disorders. Maag, J. W., Reid, R.,  DiGangi, S. A. 1993. Differential effects of self-monitoring attention, accuracy and productivity. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 26, 329344. Mahoney, M. J., Moura, N. G.,  Wade, T. C. 1973. Relative efcacy of self-reward, selfpunishment, and self-monitoring techniques for weight loss. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 40, 404407. Maletzky, B. M. 1974. Behavior recording as a treatment: A brief note. Behavior Therapy, 5, 107111. Marshall, K. J., Lloyd, J. W.,  Hallahan, D. P. 1993. Effects of training to increase self-monitoring accuracy. Journal of Behavioral Education, 3, 445459. McFall, R. M. 1970. Effects of self-monitoring on normal smoking behavior. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 35, 135142. McFall, R. M.,  Hammen, C. L. 1971. Motivation, structure, and self-monitoring: The role of nonspecic factors in smoking reduction. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 37, 8086. McLaughlin, T. F. 1984. A comparison of self-recording and self-recording plus consequences for on-task and assignment completion. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 9, 185192. McLaughlin, T. F., Krappman, U. F.,  Welsh, J. M. 1985. The effects of self-recording for on-task behavior of behaviorally disordered special education students. Remedial and Special Education, 64, 4245. Meichenbaum, D. 1977. Cognitive-behavior modication and integrative approach. New York, NY: Plenum. Montague, M. 2003. Solve It! A practical approach to teaching mathematical problem solving skills. Reston, VA: Exceptional Innovations, Inc. Targets of Self-Monitoring 19

Mooney, P., Ryan, J. B., Uhing, B. M., Reid, R.,  Epstein, M. H. 2005. A review of selfmanagement interventions targeting academic outcomes for students with emotional and behavioral disorders. Journal of Behavioral Education, 3, 203221. doi:10.1007s10864005-6298-1 Morrow, L. W., Burke, J. G.,  Buell, B. J. 1985. Effects of a self-recording procedure on the attending to task behavior and academic productivity of adolescents with multiple handicaps. Mental Retardation, 23, 137141. Pashler, H., McDaniel, M., Rohre, D.,  Bjork, R. 2008. Learning styles: Concepts and evidence. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 9, 105119. Rafferty, L. A.,  Raimondi, S. L. 2009. Self-monitoring of attention versus self-monitoring of performance: Examining the differential effects among students with emotional disturbance engaged in independent math practice. Journal of Behavioral Education, 18, 279299. Reid, R. 1996. Research in self-monitoring with students with learning disabilities: The present, the prospects, the pitfalls. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29, 317331. Reid, R.,  Harris, K. R. 1993. Self-monitoring of attention versus self-monitoring of performance: Effects on attention and academic performance. Exceptional Children, 60, 2940. Roberts, R. N.,  Nelson, R. O. 1981. The effects of self-monitoring on childrens classroom behavior. Child Behavior Therapy, 3, 105120. Rock, M. 2005. Use of strategic self-monitoring to enhance academic engagement, productivity, and accuracy of students with and without exceptionalities. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 7, 317. Romanczyk, R. G., Racey, D. A., Wilson, G. T.,  Thorpe, G. L. 1973. Behavioral techniques in the treatment of obesity: A comparative analysis. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 11, 629640. Rooney, K. J., Polloway, E.,  Hallahan, D. P. 1985. The use of self-monitoring procedures with low IQ learning disabled students. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 18, 384389. Rudrud, E. H., Ziarnik, J. P.,  Colman, G. 1984. Reduction of tongue protrusion of a 24-year-old woman with Down syndrome through self-monitoring. American Journal of Mental Deciency, 88, 647652. Sagotsky, G., Patterson, C. J.,  Lepper, M. R. 1978. Training childrens self-control: A eld experiment in self-monitoring and goal setting in the classroom. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 25, 242253. Selznick, L.,  Savage, R. C. 2000. Using self-monitoring procedures to increase on-task behavior with three adolescent boys with brain injury. Behavioral Interventions, 15, 243260. Shapiro, E. S.,  Cole, C. L. 1999. Self-monitoring in assessing childrens problems. Psychological assessment, 11, 448457. Snider, V. 1987. Use of self-monitoring of attention with LD students: Research and application. Learning Disability Quarterly, 10, 139151. State, T.,  Kern, L. 2012. A comparison of video feedback and in vivo self-monitoring on the social interactions of an adolescent with Asperger syndrome. Journal of Behavioral Education, 21, 1833. Thomas, J. D. 1976. Accuracy of self-assessment of on-task behavior by elementary school children. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 9, 209210. abstract. ANDREW BRUCE ET AL. 20

Webb, E. J. 1966. Unobtrusive measures: Nonreactive research in the social sciences. New York, NY: Rand McNally. Wolfe, L. H., Heron, T. E.,  Goddard, Y. L. 2000. Effects of self-monitoring on the on-task behavior and written language performance of elementary students with learning disabilities. Journal of Behavioral Education, 10, 4973. Workman, E., Helton, G.,  Watson, P. 1982. Self-monitoring effects in a four year old child: An ecological behavior analysis. Journal of School Psychology, 20, 5764. Young, P., Birnbrauer, J. S.,  Sanson-Fisher, R. W. 1977. The effects of self-recording on the study behavior of female juvenile delinquents. In B. C. Etzel, J. M. LeBlanc  D. M. Baer Eds., New developments in behavioral research: Theory, method, and application pp. 559577. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Targets of Self-Monitoring 21

ISSUES RELATED TO IDENTIFYING AND IMPLEMENTING EVIDENCEBASED SOCIAL SKILLS INTERVENTIONS FOR STUDENTS WITH HIGHINCIDENCE DISABILITIES Frank M. Gresham, Natalie Robichaux, Haley York and Kristen OLeary ABSTRACT Social skills decits characterize a large proportion of students with or at risk for social, emotional, and behavioral disabilities. Social skills are viewed as academic enablers in that they are attitudes and skills that enable students to benet from academic instruction. Alternatively, problem behaviors are viewed as academic disablers because they compete with the acquisition and performance of academic and social skills. Students lacking social skills and exhibiting competing problem behaviors are in need of systematic social skills interventions to remediate their social skills decits. This chapter describes what is currently known about the efcacy of social skills interventions using data from both narrative Classroom Behavior, Contexts, and Interventions Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, Volume 25, 2345 Copyright r 2012 by Emerald Group Publishing Limited All rights of reproduction in any form reserved ISSN: 0735-004Xdoi:10.1108S0735-004X20120000025005 23

reviews and meta-analyses of the social skills training literature. Based on these reviews, social skills interventions are effective with approximately 65 of students receiving these interventions. Randomized studies produce higher effect sizes, with 82 of students showing improvement compared to only 58 of students in nonrandomized studies. An example of a social skills instructional model using the Social Skills Improvement System-Intervention Guide concludes the chapter. Children and youth with serious emotional, behavioral, and social difculties present substantial challenges for schools, teachers, parents, and peers. These challenges cut across disciplinary, instructional, and interpersonal domains and frequently create chaotic home, school, and classroom environments. Children with or at risk for emotional and behavioral disorders, attention-decithyperactivity disorder, and specic learning disabilities often overwhelm the capacity of schools to effectively accommodate their instructional and disciplinary needs Walker, Ramsay,  Gresham, 2004. Schools must teach an increasingly diverse student population in terms of prevailing attitudes, beliefs, behavioral styles, and racialethnic and language backgrounds. In addition, pressures for higher academic standards and outcomes for all students are rapidly reaching nearly unattainable levels for students with severe emotional, behavioral, and social challenges. Students with or at risk for emotional and behavioral challenges experience signicant difculties in developing and maintaining satisfactory interpersonal relationships, displaying prosocial behavior patterns, and achieving social acceptance of peers and teachers Gresham, 1997, 1998; Maag, 2005, 2006; Walker et al., 2004. These social competence decits lead to short-term, intermediate, and long-term difculties in educational, psychosocial, and vocational domains of functioning Kupersmidt, Coie,  Dodge, 1990; Newcomb, Bukowski,  Pattee, 1993; Parker  Asher, 1987. The fact that these children exhibit severe social competence decits dictates that school professionals design and implement effective, evidence-based intervention strategies to remediate these decits. The purpose of the current chapter is to review and detail evidence-based practices in social skills interventions for children with or at risk for emotional, behavioral, and social difculties. Much of the content of this chapter draws from the meta-analytic literature that has investigated the most effective social skills instructional strategies. Methodological and conceptual issues in social skills interventions are described and critiqued as well. FRANK M. GRESHAM ET AL. 24

CONCEPTUALIZATION OF SOCIAL COMPETENCE An important distinction in the theoretical conceptualization of social behavior is between the concepts of social skills, social tasks, and social competence. Social skills can be conceptualized as a specic class of behaviors that an individual exhibits in order to successfully execute a social task. Social tasks are tasks that require the successful use of a social skill, such as peer group entry, having a conversation, making friends, or playing a game with peers. Social competence is an evaluative term based on judgments by social agents that an individual has adequately performed a social task. Given this conceptualization, social skills are specic behaviors exhibited in specic situations that lead to judgments by others that these behaviors are competent or incompetent in accomplishing social tasks Gresham, 2010. Competence does not imply exceptional performance; it only indicates that a given social performance was adequate McFall, 1982. Gresham 1986 suggested that evaluations of social competence could be based on three criteria: a relevant judgments of an individuals social behavior e.g., by peers, teachers, parents, b evaluations of social competence relative to explicit, pre-established criteria e.g., number of steps successfully performed in the completion of a social task, and c social-behavioral performances relative to a normative standard e.g., scores on normreferenced social skills rating scales. It should be noted that social behaviors in and of themselves cannot be considered socially skilled apart from their impact on the judgments of social agents in a given social environment. Social Skills as Academic Enablers Researchers have documented meaningful and predictive relationships between childrens social behaviors and academic achievement DiPerna  Elliott, 2002; Malecki  Elliott, 2002; Wentzel, 2009. Wentzel 2009 documented that children who have positive interactions and relationships with peers are more academically engaged and have higher levels of academic achievement. The notion of academic enablers evolved from the work of researchers who explored the relationship between students nonacademic behaviors e.g., social skills and motivation and their academic achievement Gresham  Elliott, 1990; Malecki, 1998; Wentzel, 2005, 2009; Wentzel  Watkins, 2002. Evidence-Based Social Skills Interventions 25

Researchers make a distinction between academic skills and academic enablers. Academic skills are viewed as the basic and complex skills that are the primary focus of academic instruction e.g., phonemic awareness. In contrast, academic enablers are the attitudes and behaviors that allow students to participate in and ultimately benet from academic instruction in the classroom. Research using the Academic Competence Evaluation Scales ACES; DiPerna  Elliott, 2000 showed that academic enablers were moderately related to students academic achievement as measured by standardized achievement tests median r  .50. In a longitudinal study, Caprara et al. found that teacher ratings of prosocial behavior in 3rd grade were better predictors of 8th-grade academic achievement than 3rd-grade academic achievement Caprara, Barbaranelli, Pastorelli, Bandura,  Zimbardo, 2000. Most researchers have concluded that positive peer interactions promote display of competent forms of social behavior that promote successful academic performance. Behaviors such as cooperation, following rules, and getting along with others are related to efcient classrooms and allow students to benet from academic instruction Gresham  Elliott, 2008; Walker, Irvin, Noell,  Singer, 1992. Displays of prosocial behavior patterns and restraint from disruptive and antisocial forms of behavior have been consistently and positively related to peer acceptance, achievement motivation, and academic success Wentzel, 2009. Socially competent behavior provides the essential basis for learning that allows students to maximally benet from classroom instruction DiPerna  Elliott, 2002; Elliott  Gresham, 2007; Wentzel  Looney, 2007. Problem Behaviors as Academic Disablers Whereas social skills or prosocial behaviors function as academic enablers, problem behaviors, particularly externalizing behavior patterns, interfere or compete with the acquisition andor performance of both social and academic skills Gresham, 2010; Gresham  Elliott, 2008; Walker et al., 1992. In short, these competing problem behaviors function as academic disablers in that they are associated with decreases in academic performance. Children with externalizing behaviors such as aggression, noncompliance, andor teacher deance often have moderate to severe academic skill decits that are reected in below-average academic achievement Coie  Jacobs, 1993; Hinshaw, 1992; Offord, Boyle,  Racine, 1989; Reid, 1993. It is unclear whether these academic problems FRANK M. GRESHAM ET AL. 26

are primarily the causes or consequences of problem behaviors; however, there is little doubt that problem behaviors greatly exacerbate academic skill difculties. As children with problem behaviors progress through their school careers, their academic decits and achievement problems become even more severe and are predictive of school truancy, discipline referrals, and eventually school dropout Walker et al., 2004; Walker, Severson,  Seeley, 2010. Classication of Social Skills Decits An important consideration in designing and delivering social skills interventions is the distinction between social skills acquisition decits and performance decits Elliott  Gresham, 2008; Gresham, 1981a, 1981b; Gumpel, 2007. This distinction is important because different intervention approaches and venues are indicated in remediating these decits. More details regarding this distinction, how it can be assessed, and how it affects the choice of intervention strategies are described later. Acquisition decits can result from a lack of knowledge about how to perform a given social skill, an inability to uently enact a sequence of social behaviors, or difculty in knowing which social skills are appropriate in specic situations Gresham, 2002, 2010. Based on this conceptualization, social skill acquisition decits can result from decits in social-cognitive abilities, difculties in integrating uent behavior patterns, andor decits in appropriate discrimination of social situations. Acquisition decits can be characterized as cant do problems because the individual cannot perform a given social skill under the most optimal conditions of motivation. Remediation of these types of decits requires direct instruction of social skills in protective settings that will promote the acquisition of socially skilled behavior patterns. Performance decits can be conceptualized as the failure to perform a given social skill at an acceptable level even though the individual knows how to perform the social skill. These types of social skills decits can be thought of as wont do problems because the child knows what to do, but chooses not to perform a particular social skill in given situations. These types of social skill decits are best conceptualized as motivational or performance problems rather than learning or acquisition problems. As such, remediation of these types of decits requires manipulation of antecedents and consequences in naturalistic settings to increase the frequency of these behaviors. Evidence-Based Social Skills Interventions 27

Role of Competing Problem Behaviors Another important consideration in the conceptualization of social skills decits is the inuence of competing problem behaviors on the acquisition and performance of social skills Gresham  Elliott, 1990, 2008. Competing problem behaviors effectively compete with, interfere with, or block the acquisition or performance of a given social skill. Competing problem behaviors can be classied broadly as either externalizing behavior patterns e.g., noncompliance, aggression, impulsive behaviors or internalizing behavior patterns e.g., social withdrawal, anxiety, depression. For example, a child with a history of noncompliance, oppositional, and impulsive behavior may not have learned prosocial alternatives e.g., sharing, cooperation, self-control because of the absence of opportunities to learn these behaviors caused by the competing function of these externalizing behaviors Eddy, Reid,  Curry, 2002. Similarly, a child with a history of social anxiety, social withdrawal, and shyness may not have learned appropriate prosocial behaviors because of avoidance of peer groups and a corresponding absence of opportunities to learn peer-related social skills Gresham, Van,  Cook, 2006. Social skills performance decits were previously described as being due primarily to motivational variables rather than a lack of knowledge or learning concerning how to perform a given social skill. One of the most conceptually powerful learning principles that can be used to explain the relationship between social skills performance decits and competing problem behaviors is the Matching Law Herrnstein, 1961, 1970. The Matching Law states that the relative rate of any given behavior matches the relative rate of reinforcement for that behavior. In other words, response rate matches reinforcement rate. Matching is studied in concurrent schedules of reinforcement that refer to an experimental arrangement in which two or more behaviors are reinforced according to two or more simultaneous, but quantitatively different, schedules of reinforcement i.e., concurrently. For example, if a problem behavior is reinforced, on average, every 5 times it occurs and a prosocial behavior, on average, is reinforced every 15 times it occurs, the problem behavior will occur 3 times more frequently than the prosocial behavior 155  3. Matching deals with choice behavior in that behaviors having a higher rate of reinforcement will be chosen more frequently than behaviors reinforced at a lower rate. Research in naturalistic classroom environments has consistently shown that behavior rates under concurrent schedules of reinforcement closely follow the Matching Law Martens, 1992; Martens  Houk, 1989; Martens, Lochner,  Kelly, 1992; Snyder  Stoolmiller, 2002. FRANK M. GRESHAM ET AL. 28

Maag 2005 suggested that one way to decrease the frequency of competing problem behaviors is to teach positive replacement behaviors, or what he called replacement behavior training RBT. RBT may help solve many of the problems with social skills training SST such as poor generalization and maintenance, modest effect sizes, and social invalidity of target behavior selection. The goal of RBT is to identify a prosocial behavior that will replace the competing problem behavior. Conceptually, RBT depends on identifying functionally equivalent behaviors. Behaviors are functionally equivalent if they produce similar amounts of reinforcement from the environment Horner  Billingsley, 1988. EFFICACY OF SOCIAL SKILLS INTERVENTIONS The importance of social competence for children with or at risk for highincidence disabilities has been translated into various service delivery and instructional approaches to remediate decits in social skills functioning. SST is designed to remediate childrens acquisition and performance decits and to reduce or eliminate competing problem behaviors Elliott  Gresham, 2008; Gresham  Elliott, 2008; Gresham, Sugai,  Horner, 2001. Between the late 1970s and early 1980s, SST interventions targeted poorly accepted or rejected children, linking these interventions to the developmental literature, research on interpersonal dynamics, and the longitudinal course of poor peer relations Bierman  Powers, 2009; Parker  Asher, 1987. By the early 1990s, SST was incorporated into epidemiologically based, long-term, multicomponent interventions targeting children with signicant behavior problems such as conduct disorder and ADHD Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 1992; MTA Cooperative Group, 1999. Since 2000, SST research has focused on promoting behavior change in special needs populations and has often been embedded in disorder-specic multicomponent intervention models. Despite these advances, a comprehensive framework that facilitates the identication of theoretical and methodological common ground across SST studies is currently lacking, thereby creating disparate empirical literature on social skills interventions Bierman  Powers, 2009. SST Literature Reviews At least 12 narrative reviews of the SST literature using both group and single case experimental designs have been conducted over the past 30 years Evidence-Based Social Skills Interventions 29

Ager  Cole, 1991; Coleman, Wheeler,  Webber, 1993; Gresham, 1981b, 1985; Hollinger, 1987; Landrum  Lloyd, 1992; Mathur  Rutherford, 1991; McIntosh, Vaughn,  Zaragoza, 1991; Olmeda  Kauffman, 2003; Schloss, Schloss, Wood,  Kiehl, 1986; Templeton, 1990; Zaragoza, Vaughn,  McIntosh, 1991. These narrative reviews reached the following general conclusions: a the most effective SST instructional strategies appear to be a combination of modeling, coaching, behavioral rehearsal, and procedures derived from applied behavior analysis; b evidence for cognitive-behavioral approaches e.g., social problem solving and selfinstruction appeared to produce weaker effects, particularly on direct measures of social behavior in naturalistic settings; and c the greatest weakness in the SST literature was the absence of consistent and durable gains in prosocial behavior across situations and settings and over time. Ten meta-analyses of the SST literature have been conducted since 1985 Ang  Hughes, 2002; Beelmann, Pngsten,  Losel, 1994; Chenier et al., 2011; Cook et al., 2008; Godbold et al., 2010; Gresham, Cook, Crews,  Kern, 2004; Losel  Beelmann, 2003; Quinn, Kavale, Mathur, Rutherford,  Forness, 1999; Schneider, 1992; Schneider  Byrne, 1985. These metaanalyses involved approximately 464 studies and included over 28,000 children and youth ages 318 years who experienced behavioral difculties. Based on these meta-analyses, there appears to be consistency in how the construct of social skills has been dened for research purposes. These studies suggest that the social skills construct can be divided into three major categories: social interaction, prosocial behavior, and social-cognitive skills. Further, correlates of social skills fall into two categories: problem behaviors externalizing and internalizing and academic achievement performance. These social skill categories and behavioral correlates are consistent with other work in the area of social skills conducted by other researchers Caldarella  Merrell, 1997; Coie, Dodge,  Coppotelli, 1982; Dodge, 1986; Gresham, 2010; Gresham  Elliott, 1990, 2008; Walker et al., 1992; Walker  McConnell, 1995. Averaging the effect sizes from 9 of the 10 meta-analyses above showed a grand mean effect size r  .29 g  .60, suggesting that approximately 65 of the participants in SST groups improved compared to 35 of those individuals in control groups based on the binomial effect size display or BESD Rosenthal  Rosnow, 1991. Results of the meta-analysis by Quinn et al. 1999 are inconsistent with the other nine meta-analyses listed above and were not included in the calculation of the grand mean effect size. This meta-analysis purported to use only children served in special education under the category of emotionally disturbed; however, only 2 of FRANK M. GRESHAM ET AL. 30

the 35 studies in the meta-analysis included this population. These researchers reported an overall mean effect size of r  .10 across the 35 studies, which is small and signicantly lower than the average effect size reported in the above 9 meta-analyses r  .29. Because of several methodological aws in the Quinn et al. meta-analysis, it should not be interpreted as reective of the status of SST with children and youth in terms of construct validity, internal validity, external validity, and social validity see Cook et al., 2008, and Gresham et al., 2004, for more in-depth discussion of these issues. A recent meta-analysis by Godbold et al. 2010 of 34 studies published between 2000 and 2008 found that studies using random assignment to groups produced the largest effect size g  .67 compared to studies not using random assignment quasi-experimental studies g  .16. In short, better-controlled studies with high internal validity appear to produce the largest effect sizes, with randomized studies showing that 82 of children receiving SST improve compared to only 58 of children in the nonrandomized studies using the BESD. The single case meta-analysis by Chenier et al. 2011 included 40 studies and showed a large overall effect size g  3.06 with effect sizes varying by type of social skills intervention procedure. Specic SST procedure effect sizes ranged from 2.17 reinforcement-based procedures to 3.94 social stories. The largest effect sizes were observed for children with autism spectrum disorders g  4.04 and the smallest effect sizes for children with disruptive behavior disorders ODDADHD; g  2.31. Effect sizes also varied by type of outcome measure, with academic engaged time showing the smallest effect sizes g  1.57 and cooperative play showing the largest effect size g  5.54. Summary Both narrative and meta-analytic reviews of the literature over the past 30 years suggest that SST is a moderately effective intervention for children and youth with social and behavioral difculties. The majority of studies in both narrative and meta-analytic studies should be considered as selected, or Tier 2, interventions because these interventions have typically been delivered on an individual or small pullout group basis. No studies in the above reviews could be considered universal, or Tier 1, interventions and none of the studies could be considered intensive, or Tier 3, interventions. Quantitative or meta-analytic reviews of the SST literature suggest that approximately two-thirds of children receiving SST improved compared to only one-third of children in control groups. This effect size is higher in Evidence-Based Social Skills Interventions 31

randomized SST studies than in nonrandomized or quasi-experimental SST studies. Depending on the degree of internal validity, SST studies produce medium to large effect size estimates using conventional standards for interpreting effect sizes Cohen, 1988. Despite these encouraging ndings, several important methodological and conceptual issues have not been addressed in the SST literature. These issues are discussed in the following section. METHODOLOGICAL AND CONCEPTUAL ISSUES IN SST SST has been shown to produce, on average, medium effect sizes based on meta-analytic reviews of the literature. These effect sizes suggest that almost two-thirds of children and youth receiving SST will improve their socialbehavioral competencies. Four major issues have been proffered repeatedly in the literature to account for these SST outcomes: a matching treatment type to the type of social skill decit, b treatment integrity issues, c type of outcome measures collected, and d distinction in assessment of social skills acquisition and performance decit Ang  Hughes, 2002; Beelmann et al., 1994; Gresham, 1997, 1998; Gresham et al., 2001; Maag, 2005, 2006; Schneider, 1992. Matching Interventions to Types of Decits Studies in the various meta-analyses described earlier failed to match specic types of social skills decits to specic types of intervention strategies. Most social skills intervention studies deliver an intervention to children and youth with an almost complete disregard for the types of social skills decits that are displayed Gresham, 1998. In fact, most research suggests that there is little, if any, systematic effort devoted to specically assessing whether children should be taught the specic target behaviors that are targeted in SST programs. As described earlier, an important distinction in conceptualizing social skills decits is the difference between acquisition and performance decits cant do versus wont do, respectively. Instructional strategies for remediating acquisition decits are fundamentally different from those strategies for remediating performance decits. Instructional procedures for acquisition decits assume the child does not have a social skill in his or her FRANK M. GRESHAM ET AL. 32

repertoire or does not know a critical step in performing a social skill in a sequence of behaviors. As such, intervention procedures for these types of decits must directly teach the social skill in question using direct instructional procedures such as modeling, coaching, and behavioral rehearsal Elliott  Gresham, 2008. These interventions are typically delivered in small-group, pullout settings using a combination of direct instructional strategies. Procedures for remediating performance decits are based on arranging antecedents and consequences to encourage the performance of desired prosocial behaviors. These interventions are typically delivered in naturalistic settings e.g., classrooms, playgrounds, hallways using a combination of antecedent-based and consequence-based procedures Cooper, Heron,  Heward, 2007; Crone, Hawken,  Horner, 2010; Elliott  Gresham, 2008. Treatment Integrity Issues There is little evidence in the meta-analyses of the SST literature of the degree to which these interventions were implemented as planned or intended. As such, one cannot judge from the extant SST literature whether the interventions examined were implemented with integrity. Treatment integrity is typically conceptualized as involving three dimensions: a treatment adherence, or the degree to which an intervention is implemented as planned or intended; b interventionist competence, or the interventionists skill and experience in implementing a particular treatment; and c treatment differentiation, or the extent to which interventions differ on critical dimensions Nezu  Nezu, 2008; Perepletchikova, Treat,  Kazdin, 2007. Conceptually, treatment adherence represents a quantitative dimension of treatment integrity in that it can be measured in terms of the number of critical treatment components that are implemented Gresham, 1989, 2009. Therapist or interventionist competence might be conceptualized as more of a qualitative dimension of treatment integrity because it reects the quality with which the treatment procedures are delivered. Finally, treatment differentiation represents theoretical distinctions among different aspects of two or more treatments. The relationship between treatment adherence and interventionist competence can be confusing because competence presupposes adherence, but adherence does not presuppose competence. One can adhere to a particular intervention with perfect integrity; yet do so in an incompetent manner. A breakdown in treatment integrity in this case would dictate training and Evidence-Based Social Skills Interventions 33

performance feedback to ensure a more competent delivery of the treatment. A breakdown in adherence would suggest performance feedback regarding the implementation of key components of the treatment Noell, 2008. Given the paucity of treatment integrity data in the SST literature, we do not know if a given SST was either ineffective or less effective because it was a poor treatment or if it would have been effective if it were implemented with high integrity. Additionally, because data on interventionist competence is sparse in the SST literature, we do not know the degree to which competence moderates the outcomes of SST. Types of Outcome Measures The magnitude of effect sizes reported in the various meta-analyses of the SST literature varies as a function of the type of outcome measure used in particular studies. For example, the meta-analysis by Beelman et al. 1994 showed the largest effect size for social-cognitive tests d  .77 followed by direct observations d  .49. The smallest effect sizes were reported for peer sociometrics d  .13 and parentteacher reports d  .10. In contrast, the meta-analysis by Ang and Hughes 2002 reported identical effect sizes for behavior ratings, behavioral observations, and self-reports d  1.09. Clearly, the interpretation of the effects of SST interventions is inuenced greatly by the type of outcome measure used in a given study. Outcome measures in SST can be classied based on a social validity criterion Gresham, 1983; Gresham et al., 2001; Wolf, 1978. In this classication system, measures represent a socially valid treatment goal because social systems e.g., schools, mental health agencies and signicant others e.g., teachers, parents refer children based on these treatment goals. Measures are socially valid in the sense that they predict long-term outcomes that are important to society and include events such as school dropout, delinquency, adult mental health difculties, and arrest rates Kupersmidt et al., 1990; Parker  Asher, 1987; Walker et al., 2004. Socially valid measures might include sociometric status, friendship status, and various types of archival data e.g., ofce disciplinary referrals, school suspensions, arrest rates. Other measures are not themselves inherently socially valid, but they are indicators or correlates of ones standing on socially valid measures. The most common types of these measures are systematic direct observations of social behavior in naturalistic settings such as classrooms, playgrounds, home, and community settings. A major advantage of these measures is that FRANK M. GRESHAM ET AL. 34

they tend to be highly sensitive in detecting short-term treatment effects. One weakness in the SST literature is that these measures of social behavior are often not based on a sound theoretical or empirical framework or taxonomy. Advancements in this respect are the taxonomy developed by Caldarella and Merrell 1997 and the social skills domains found in the Social Skills Improvement System-Rating Scales SSIS-RS; Gresham  Elliott, 2008 from which theoretically and empirically sound direct observation measures can be created. Recent work using direct behavior ratings DBRs  a hybrid measure with characteristics of both direct observations and behavior rating scales  holds promise as a less expensive and time-consuming alternative to systematic direct observations Chafouleas, McDougal, Riley-Tilman, Panahon,  Hilt, 2005. Another alternative to direct observations is the development of change sensitive brief behavior rating scales BBRs. Change sensitivity is a quantiable characteristic of an item on a behavior rating scale, and several statistical metrics can be calculated to quantify, rank, and interpret items according to their change sensitivity. Gresham and colleagues developed a 12-item BBR using items from the teacher form of the Social Skills Rating System Gresham  Elliott, 1990 that was technically adequate in terms of internal consistency and criterion-related validity Gresham, Cook et al., 2010. Assessment of Social Skills Acquisition and Performance Decits Earlier in this chapter, a distinction was made between social skills acquisition and performance decits. This distinction was viewed as important because remedial instructional strategies for these two types of decits are vastly different Elliott  Gresham, 2008. The key in distinguishing between acquisition and performance decits is accurate assessment and classication strategies. Acquisition decits can be determined based on teacher andor parent ratings using the SSIS-RS Gresham  Elliott, 2008. Both the SSIS-RS teacher and parent forms have 46 social skills items distributed across 7 domains of communication, cooperation, assertion, responsibility, empathy, engagement, and self-control. Teacher and parent raters indicate the frequency with which a given social skill is exhibited using a 4-point scale of never, seldom, often, and almost always. These same items are also rated on an importance dimension using a 3-point scale of not important, important, and critical. Evidence-Based Social Skills Interventions 35

Social skills acquisition decits are operationally dened as a total social skills standard score less than 85 o16th percentile and any social skill receiving a frequency rating of 0 never with an importance rating of 1 important or 2 critical. Using these criteria, students receiving this pattern of ratings on more than 50 of items 24 items may be classied as having primarily acquisition decits. Social skills performance decits may be operationally dened as a total social skills standard score of less than 85 o16th percentile and any social skills receiving a frequency rating of 1 seldom and an importance rating of 1 important or 2 critical. Using these criteria, students receiving this pattern of ratings on more than 50 of items 24 or more items can be classied as having primarily performance decits. Using the SSIS-RS national standardization data, Gresham, Elliott, and Kettler 2010 calculated the base rates for social skills acquisition and performance decits using the above criteria. The base rates for social skills acquisition decits based on teacher and parent ratings for children ages 318 years were less than 1. As such, social skills acquisition decits appear to be a rare phenomenon in a normative sample of children and adolescents ages 318 years. The base rate, however, for children and youth with emotional and behavioral disorders, ADHD, and learning disabilities is likely much higher, although no research has focused on this issue. Gresham, Elliott et al. 2010 found that the base rates for social skills performance decits were much higher than base rates for acquisition decits. The base rate for performance decits was 5.4 using teacher ratings and 3.5 using parent ratings for children ages 318 years. Again, these base rates are most likely considerably higher in student populations with or at risk for emotional and behavioral disorders and learning difculties. SOCIAL SKILLS INSTRUCTION: SSIS-INTERVENTION GUIDE The SSIS-Intervention Guide SSIS-IG; Elliott  Gresham, 2008 is a manualized Tier 2 selected intervention that is delivered in a small-group setting of four to six students and is conducted by an experienced group leader such as a school psychologist, guidance counselor, or social worker. The program is designed for children and youth who have primarily social skill acquisition decits rather than performance decits. The SSIS-IG is FRANK M. GRESHAM ET AL. 36

implemented in two sessions per week for 45 minutes per session 90 minutes weekly over a period of up to 15 weeks 22.5 hours. The program centers around 20 instructional units that deal with key social skills across 7 domains: communication, cooperation, assertion, responsibility, empathy, engagement, and self-control. These domains are derived from the SSIS-RS Gresham  Elliott, 2008. Fig. 1 presents the 20 social skills distributed across the 7 social skill domains. Fig. 1. Behaviors Taught in Social Skills Improvement SystemIntervention Guide. Communication behaviors Taking turns in conversations Saying Please and Thank You Cooperation behaviors Paying attention to others Following directions Paying attention to your work Assertion behaviors Expressing feelings Asking for help Standing up for others Responsibility behaviors Respecting other peoples things Doing the right thing Doing your part in a group Empathy behaviors Making others feel better Doing nice things for others Engagement behaviors Asking others to do things with you Getting along with others Introducing yourself to others Self-control behaviors Making compromises Staying calm when criticized Staying calm when disagreeing Staying calm when pushed or hit Evidence-Based Social Skills Interventions 37

Fig. 2. Social Skills Improvement System-Intervention Guide Six-Step Instructional Sequence. Tell Phase 1. Provide learning objective for the featured social skill. 2. Introduce the skill via questions. 3. Dene a specic skill and stress key words. 4. Discuss why the skill is important. 5. Outline steps for doing the behavior. Show Phase 1. Model the behavior positive and negative examples. 2. Discretely model each of the major steps for enacting the skill. 3. With a student helper, direct a role-play of a typical situation. 4. Lead a discussion of alternative behaviors to accomplish the social behavior objective. Do Phase 1. Ask students to dene the skill. 2. Ask students to state the steps required to accomplish the skill. 3. Ask students about the importance of using the skill. 4. Repeat critical steps for enacting the behavior. 5. Ask students to model the skill in role-plays. 6. Ask other students to provide feedback for using the skill in roleplays. Practice Phase 1. Review and apply the skill in workbook activities. 2. Have pairs of students practice the skill steps and provide each other feedback. 3. Encourage use of the skill in class sessions outside the SSIS-IG lessons. Monitor Progress Phase 1. Ask students to think about how well they are doing with the social skill. 2. Ask students to complete a self-monitoring chart. Generalize Phase 1. Give a homework assignment to use the skill in other settings with other students. 2. Have students demonstrate the skill with a parent or older sibling to communicate information about the social skill they are working on in the program. FRANK M. GRESHAM ET AL. 38

The 20 skill units use a similarly structured lesson format. Each skill unit is organized around six phases: Tell, Show, Do, Practice, Monitor, and Generalize. Each skill unit includes a menu of activities and discussion topics that group leaders can tailor to meet the groups needs. Fig. 2 describes the activities and procedures that are used in each of the six phases. The rst three phases occur within the small-group setting that situates the featured social skill in a problem situation or event common in students lives. The latter three phases occur outside the small-group setting but with support from the group leader. The methods used in the SSIS-IG are based on social learning theory, cognitive-behavioral theory, and applied behavior analysis. These principles are woven into a framework of social skills deciencies developed over a period of systematic research spanning over 27 years Elliott  Gresham, 1991; Gresham, 1981a, 1985; Gresham  Elliott, 1990. The SSIS-IG assumes that the putative causes of social skills deciencies are due primarily to ve variables: a lack of knowledge acquisition decits, b lack of practice uency decits, c lack of cues discrimination decits, d lack of reinforcement performance decits, and e presence of competing problem behaviors Matching Law. These causes, although not encompassing of all possible explanations for social skill deciencies, were specically chosen because their effects can be remediated through social learning and behavioral training strategies. CONCLUSION Children and youth with severe social, emotional, and behavioral excesses and decits are at risk for numerous short-term and long-term negative outcomes. The etiology of specic social-behavioral patterns for these individuals is complex. A single risk factor is not likely to be responsible for any given behavior pattern, nor is any single protective factor likely to be sufcient to prevent the development of challenging behavior patterns. This chapter described how the facilitation of prosocial behavior patterns coupled with the reduction of competing problem behaviors may produce positive outcomes and reduce negative outcomes for children and youth. Social skills were dened as a specic class of behaviors that allow an individual to successfully accomplish social tasks. Social tasks are tasks that require the successful use of a social skill, such as peer group entry, having a conversation, making friends, or playing a game with peers. Social Evidence-Based Social Skills Interventions 39

competence, on the other hand, was dened as an evaluation based on judgment by others that an individual has performed a social task adequately. These judgments are made by social agents parents, teachers, peers with whom an individual interacts in natural environments home, school, community. As such, social skills cannot be dened independently of these social judgments and the social contexts in which behavior occurs. The literature is quite clear that various social judges use different criteria to determine social competence. For examples, peers judge the behavior of a particular child to be socially competent if it is characterized by behaviors such as cooperation, supporting peers, leading peers, and afliating with peers Walker et al., 1992. In contrast, teachers judge the behavior of a child to be socially competent if it is characterized by behaviors such as complying with teacher directions, following classroom rules, working independently, and listening carefully to the teacher Elliott  Gresham, 2007; Gresham  Elliott, 2008; Walker et al., 1992. This chapter also described how social skills can function as academic enablers and how problem behaviors can function as academic disablers. Social skills moderate the acquisition of academic skills and are signicantly related to academic achievement Caprara et al., 2000; DiPerna  Elliott, 2002; Malecki  Elliott, 2002. These ndings suggest that universal, or Tier 1, social skills interventions should improve the academic performance of entire classrooms by making the classrooms less chaotic and thus more conductive to learning. Similarly, Tier 2, or selected, social skills interventions that target students who are at risk for social, emotional, and behavioral difculties should similarly increase prosocial behavior patterns and decrease the occurrence of competing problem behaviors. Lastly, this chapter identied the need for successful remediation of social skills decits and competing problem behaviors. Interventions that focus on SST have been studied extensively and produce moderate outcomes on social skill remediation. Given the success of SST interventions, the chapter also describes one intervention package available for use in social skills remediation, the SSIS Gresham  Elliott, 1990, 2008. ACKNOWLEDGMENT Support for this article was provided by grants R324A090098 and R324A08711 from the Institute of Educational Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. FRANK M. GRESHAM ET AL. 40

REFERENCES Ager, C.,  Cole, C. 1991. A review of cognitive-behavioral interventions for children and adolescents with behavioral disorders. Behavioral Disorders, 16, 276287. Ang, R.,  Hughes, J. 2002. Differential benets of skills training with antisocial youth based on group composition: A meta-analytic investigation. School Psychology Review, 31, 164185. Beelmann, A., Pngsten, U.,  Losel, F. 1994. Effects of training social competence in children: A meta-analysis of recent evaluation studies. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 23, 260271. Bierman, K. L.,  Powers, C. J. 2009. Social skills training to improve peer relations. In K. Rubin, W. Bukowski  B. Laursen Eds., Handbook of peer interactions, relationships, and groups pp. 603621. New York, NY: Guilford. Caldarella, P.,  Merrell, K. 1997. Common dimensions of social skills in children and adolescents: Taxonomy of positive social behaviors. School Psychology Review, 26, 265279. Caprara, G., Barbaranelli, C., Pastorelli, C., Bandura, A.,  Zimbardo, P. 2000. Prosocial foundations of childrens academic achievement. Psychological Science, 11, 302305. Chafouleas, S., McDougal, J., Riley-Tilman, C., Panahon, C.,  Hilt, A. 2005. What do daily behavior report cards DBRCs measure? An initial comparison of DBRCs with direct observation for off-task behavior. Psychology in the Schools, 42, 669676. Chenier, J., Fisher, A., Hunter, K., Patty, E., Libster, L., OLeary, K., y  Gresham, F. M. 2011, February. What works regarding social skills interventions using single subject designs? Symposium presented at the Annual Meeting of the National Association of School Psychologists, San Francisco, CA. Cohen, J. 1988. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences 2nd ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Coie, J., Dodge, K.,  Coppotelli, H. 1982. Dimensions and types of social status: A cross-age perspective. Developmental Psychology, 18, 557570. Coie, J.,  Jacobs, M. 1993. The role of social context in the prevention of conduct disorder. Development  Psychopathology, 5, 2627. Special Issue. Coleman, M., Wheeler, L.,  Webber, J. 1993. Research on interpersonal problem-solving training: A review. Remedial and Special Education, 14, 2536. Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. 1992. A developmental and clinical model for the prevention of conduct disorders: The Fast Track Program. Development  Psychopathology, 4, 505527. Cook, C. R., Gresham, F. M., Kern, L., Barreras, R. B., Thornton, S.,  Crews, S. D. 2008. Social skills training with secondary EBD students: A review and analysis of the metaanalytic literature. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 16, 131144. Cooper, J., Heron, T.,  Heward, W. 2007. Applied behavior analysis 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Crone, D., Hawken, L.,  Horner, R. 2010. Responding to problem behavior in schools: The Behavioral Education Program 2nd ed. New York, NY: Guilford Press. DiPerna, J. C.,  Elliott, S. N. 2000. Academic Competence Evaluation Scales. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation. DiPerna, J.,  Elliott, S. N. 2002. Promoting academic enablers to improve student achievement: An introduction to the miniseries. School Psychology Review, 31, 293297. Evidence-Based Social Skills Interventions 41

Dodge, K. 1986. A social information processing model of social competence in children. In M. Perlmutter Ed., Minnesota symposium on child psychology Vol. 18, pp. 77125. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Eddy, J., Reid, J.,  Curry, V. 2002. The etiology of youth antisocial behavior, delinquency, and violence in a public health approach to prevention. In M. Shinn, H. Walker  G. Stoner Eds., Interventions for academic and behavior problems II: Preventive and remedial approaches pp. 2751. Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists. Elliott, S. N.,  Gresham, F. M. 1991. Social skills intervention guide. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. Elliott, S. N.,  Gresham, F. M. 2007. Social Skills Improvement System: Classwide intervention program teachers guide. Minneapolis, MN: Pearson Assessments. Elliott, S. N.,  Gresham, F. M. 2008. Social Skills Improvement System: Intervention guide. Minneapolis, MN: Pearson Assessments. Godbold, E., Vance, M., Chenier, J., Rodriguez, J., Menesses, K., Libster, L., y  Gresham, F. M. 2010, February. Evidence-based social skills interventions: What really works. Symposium presented at the Annual Meeting of the National Association of School Psychologists, Chicago, IL. Gresham, F. M. 1981a. Assessment of childrens social skills. Journal of School Psychology, 19, 120134. Gresham, F. M. 1981b. Social skills training with handicapped children: A review. Review of Educational Research, 51, 139176. Gresham, F. M. 1983. Social validity in the assessment of childrens social skills: Establishing standards for social competency. Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 1, 297307. Gresham, F. M. 1985. Utility of cognitive-behavioral procedures for social skills training with children: A review. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 13, 411433. Gresham, F. M. 1986. Conceptual issues in the assessment of social competence in children. In P. Strain, M. Guralnick  H. Walker Eds., Childrens social behavior: Development, assessment, and modication pp. 143180. New York, NY: Academic Press. Gresham, F. M. 1989. Assessment of treatment integrity in school consultation and pre-referral intervention. School Psychology Review, 18, 3750. Gresham, F. M. 1997. Social competence and students with behavioral disorders: Where weve been, where we are, and where we should go. Education and Treatment of Children, 20, 233249. Gresham, F. M. 1998. Social skills training: Should we raze, remodel, or rebuild? Behavioral Disorders, 24, 1925. Gresham, F. M. 2002. Teaching social skills to high-risk children and youth: Preventive and remedial strategies. In M. Shinn, H. Walker  G. Stoner Eds., Interventions for academic and behavior problems: Preventive and remedial approaches 2nd ed., pp. 403432. Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists. Gresham, F. M. 2009. Evolution in the conceptualization of the treatment integrity concept: Current status and future directions. School Psychology Review, 38, 533540. Gresham, F. M. 2010. Evidence-based social skills interventions: Empirical foundations for instructional approaches. In M. Shinn  H. Walker Eds., Interventions for achievement and behavior problems in a three-tier model including RTI pp. 337362. Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists. FRANK M. GRESHAM ET AL. 42

Gresham, F. M., Cook, C. R., Collins, T., Dart, E., Rasetshwane, K., Truelson, E.,  Grant, S. 2010. Developing a change-sensitive brief behavior rating scale as a progress monitoring tool for social behavior: An example using the Social Skills Rating System-Teacher form. School Psychology Review, 39, 364379. Gresham, F. M., Cook, C. R., Crews, S. D.,  Kern, L. 2004. Social skills training for children and youth with emotional and behavioral disorders: Validity considerations and future directions. Behavioral Disorders, 30, 1933. Gresham, F. M.,  Elliott, S. N. 1990. Social skills rating system. Minneapolis, MN: Pearson Assessments. Gresham, F. M.,  Elliott, S. N. 2008. Social Skills Improvement System: Rating scales manual. Minneapolis, MN: Pearson Assessments. Gresham, F. M., Elliott, S. N.,  Kettler, R. J. 2010. Base rates of social skills acquisition performance decits, strengths, and problem behaviors: An analysis of the Social Skills Improvement System-Rating Scales. Psychological Assessment, 22, 809815. Gresham, F. M., Sugai, G.,  Horner, R. 2001. Interpreting outcomes of social skills training for students with high-incidence disabilities. Exceptional Children, 67, 331344. Gresham, F. M., Van, M.,  Cook, C. R. 2006. Social skills training for teaching replacement behaviors: Remediation of acquisition decits for at-risk children. Behavioral Disorders, 30, 3246. Gumpel, T. P. 2007. Are social competence difculties caused by performance or acquisition decits? The importance of self-regulatory mechanisms. Psychology in the Schools, 44, 351372. Herrnstein, R. J. 1961. Relative and absolute strength of response as a function of frequency of reinforcement. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 4, 267272. Herrnstein, R. J. 1970. On the law of effect. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 13, 243266. Hinshaw, S. 1992. Externalizing behavior problems and academic underachievement in childhood and adolescence: Causal relationships and underlying mechanisms. Psychological Bulletin, 111, 127155. Hollinger, J. 1987. Social skills for behaviorally disordered children as preparation for mainstreaming: Theory, practice, and new directions. Remedial and Special Education, 8, 1727. Horner, R.,  Billingsley, F. 1988. The effects of competing behavior on the generalization and maintenance of adaptive behavior in applied settings. In R. Horner, G. Dunlap  R. Koegel Eds., Generalization and maintenance: Lifestyle changes in applied settings pp. 197220. Baltimore, MD: Brookes. Kupersmidt, J., Coie, J.,  Dodge, K. 1990. The role of peer relationships in the development of disorder. In S. Asher  J. Coie Eds., Peer rejection in childhood pp. 274308. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Landrum, T.,  Lloyd, J. 1992. Generalization in social behavior research with children and youth who have emotional or behavioral disorders. Behavior Modication, 16, 593616. Losel, F.,  Beelmann, A. 2003. Effects of child skills training in preventing antisocial behavior: A systematic review of randomized evaluations. Annals AAPSS, 857, 84109. Maag, J. W. 2005. Social skills training for youth with emotional and behavioral disorders and learning disabilities: Problems, conclusions, and suggestions. Exceptionality, 13, 155172. Evidence-Based Social Skills Interventions 43

Maag, J. W. 2006. Social skills training for students with emotional and behavioral disorders: A review of reviews. Behavioral Disorders, 32, 517. Malecki, C. M. 1998. The inuence of elementary students social behaviors on academic achievement. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Wisconsin-Madison. Malecki, C. M.,  Elliott, S. N. 2002. Childrens social behaviors as predictors of academic achievement: A longitudinal analysis. School Psychology Quarterly, 17, 123. Martens, B. K. 1992. Contingency and choice: The implications of matching theory for classroom instruction. Journal of Behavioral Education, 2, 121137. Martens, B. K.,  Houk, J. L. 1989. The application of Herrnsteins Law of Effect to disruptive and on-task behavior of a retarded adolescent girl. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 51, 1727. Martens, B. K., Lochner, D. G.,  Kelly, S. Q. 1992. The effects of variable-interval reinforcement on academic engagement: A demonstration of matching theory. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 25, 143151. Mathur, S.,  Rutherford, R. 1991. Peer-mediated interventions promoting social skills for children and youth with behavioral disorders. Education and Treatment of Children, 14, 227242. McFall, R. M. 1982. A review and reformulation of the concept of social skills. Behavioral Assessment, 4, 133. McIntosh, R., Vaughn, S.,  Zaragoza, N. 1991. A review of social interventions for students with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 24, 451458. MTA Multimodal Treatment Study of Children with ADHD Cooperative Group. 1999. A 14-month randomized clinical trial of treatment strategies for attention-decit hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 10731086. Newcomb, A., Bukowski, W.,  Pattee, L. 1993. Childrens peer relations: A meta-analytic review of popular, rejected, neglected, controversial, and average sociometric status. Psychological Bulletin, 113, 306347. Nezu, A.,  Nezu, C. 2008. Treatment integrity. In D. McKay Ed., Handbook of research methods in abnormal and clinical psychology pp. 351366. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Noell, G. 2008. Research examining the relationships among consultation process, treatment integrity, and outcomes. In W. Erchul  S. Sheridan Eds., Handbook of school consultation: Empirical foundations for the eld pp. 315334. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Offord, D., Boyle, M.,  Racine, Y. 1989. Ontario Child Health Study: Correlates of disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 28, 856860. Olmeda, R.,  Kauffman, J. 2003. Sociocultural considerations in social skills research with African American students with emotional and behavioral disorders. Journal of Developmental and Physical Disabilities, 15, 101121. Parker, J.,  Asher, S. 1987. Peer relations and later personal adjustment: Are low-accepted children at risk? Psychological Bulletin, 102, 357389. Perepletchikova, F., Treat, T.,  Kazdin, A. 2007. Treatment integrity in psychotherapy research: Analysis of studies and examination of associated factors. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 75, 829841. Quinn, M., Kavale, K., Mathur, S., Rutherford, R.,  Forness, S. 1999. A meta-analysis of social skill interventions for students with emotional and behavioral disorders. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 7, 5464. Reid, J. 1993. Prevention of conduct disorder before and after school entry: Relating interventions to developmental ndings. Development  Psychopathology, 5, 311319. FRANK M. GRESHAM ET AL. 44

Rosenthal, R.,  Rosnow, R. L. 1991. Essentials of behavioral research: Methods and data analysis 2nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Schloss, P., Schloss, C., Wood, C.,  Kiehl, W. 1986. A critical review of social skills research with behaviorally disordered students. Behavior Disorders, 12, 114. Schneider, B. 1992. Didactic methods for enhancing childrens peer relations: A quantitative review. Clinical Psychology Review, 12, 363382. Schneider, B.,  Byrne, B. 1985. Childrens social skills training: A meta-analysis. In B. Schneider, K. Rubin  J. Ledingham Eds., Childrens peer relations: Issues in assessment and intervention pp. 175190. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag. Snyder, J.,  Stoolmiller, M. 2002. Reinforcement and coercion mechanisms in the development of antisocial behavior: The family. In J. Reid, G. Patterson  J. Snyder Eds., Antisocial behavior in children and adolescents: A developmental analysis and model for intervention pp. 65100. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Templeton, J. 1990. Social skills training for behavior-problem adolescents: A review. Journal of Partial Hospitalization, 6, 4960. Walker, H. M., Irvin, L., Noell, J.,  Singer, G. 1992. A construct score approach to the assessment of social competence: Rational, technological considerations, and anticipated outcomes. Behavior Modication, 16, 448474. Walker, H. M.,  McConnell, S. 1995. Walker-McConnell Scale of Social Competence and School Adjustment. Florence, KY: Thomson Learning. Walker, H. M., Ramsay, E.,  Gresham, F. M. 2004. Antisocial behavior at school: Evidencebased practices. Belmont, CA: WadsworthThomson Learning. Walker, H. M., Severson, H.,  Seeley, J. 2010. Universal, school-based screening for the early detection of behavioral problems controlling later destructive outcomes. In M. Shinn  H. Walker Eds., Interventions for achievement and behavior problems in a three-tier model including RTI pp. 677702. Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists. Wentzel, K. R. 2005. Peer relationships, motivation, and academic performance at school. In A. Elliot  C. Dweck Eds., Handbook of competence and motivation pp. 279296. New York, NY: Guilford. Wentzel, K. R. 2009. Peers and academic functioning at school. In K. H. Rubin, W. M. Bukowski  B. Laursen Eds., Handbook of peer interactions, relationships, and groups pp. 531547. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Wentzel, K. R.,  Looney, I. 2007. Socialization in school settings. In J. E. Grusec  P. D. Hastings Eds., Handbook of socialization: Theory and research pp. 382403. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Wentzel, K. R.,  Watkins, D. E. 2002. Peer relationships and collaborative learning as contexts for academic enablers. School Psychology Review, 31, 366377. Wolf, M. M. 1978. Social validity: The case for subjective measurement or how applied behavior analysis is nding its heart. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 11, 203214. Zaragoza, N., Vaughn, S.,  McIntosh, R. 1991. Social skills interventions for children with behavior problems: A review. Behavioral Disorders, 16, 260275. Evidence-Based Social Skills Interventions 45

COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTIONS TO PREVENT AGGRESSION OF STUDENTS WITH EMOTIONAL AND BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS Stephen W. Smith, Gregory G. Taylor, Tia Barnes and Ann P. Daunic ABSTRACT Students with emotional and behavioral disorders EBD who display aggression necessitate effective interventions for reducing highly disruptive behavior, while keeping learning environments safe and secure for all students and staff. In this chapter, we describe the merits of cognitive-behavioral interventions CBIs in school settings to reduce student aggression and other destructive and maladaptive behavior and to promote student success and lifelong learning. To that end, we rst explore three theoretical frameworks for aggression: the general aggression model, social learning theory, and social information processing, each of which examines the role of environment, cognition, and behavior as foundational to the occurrence of aggression. Synthesizing these theories Classroom Behavior, Contexts, and Interventions Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, Volume 25, 4770 Copyright r 2012 by Emerald Group Publishing Limited All rights of reproduction in any form reserved ISSN: 0735-004Xdoi:10.1108S0735-004X20120000025006 47

assists in the development and implementation of CBIs in classroom settings. We then describe the CBI approach to teaching students cognitive and behavioral strategies to reduce problematic behaviors and increase the use of more pro-social alternatives, and ultimately generalize learned skills to a variety of social situations. A brief history of CBIs is explored, followed by a discussion of several meta-analyses establishing CBIs effectiveness in decreasing aggression across a variety of venues and populations. We then focus on social problem solving as an example of a cognitive-behavioral approach and describe the Tools for Getting Along curriculum as an example of a school-based CBI. At the end of the chapter, we explain some limitations of CBIs in schools and delineate future research needs. There are normative expectations for children and adolescents in schools to engage in appropriate social interactions with a wide range of peers and adults on a daily basis. For most children and youth, their adult social success is the result of healthy and positive social-emotional development Downer  Pianta, 2006; Kusche , 2002; Riggs, Greenberg, Kusche ,  Pentz, 2006. For some students, however, negative experiences during the developmental years affect their cognitive, behavioral, and social-emotional development in deleterious ways. For these students, the failure to form satisfactory relationships with others by using social and emotional skills typical of successful peers places them at serious risk for school failure, peer rejection, substance abuse, and school dropout Quinn  Poirier, 2004. A variety of school adjustment problems are related to a lack of positive social skill development. Teachers at all levels of K-12 education contend with student misbehavior, including disrespect for authority, deliberate noncompliance, habitual truancy, impulsivity, and verbal and physical aggression Farmer et al., 2003. Moreover, aggressive student behavior can elicit negative responses by peers and adults and thus limit future opportunities for positive interactions, contribute to a persistent pattern of hostility and negative social status, become part of an escalating spiral of conict, and contribute in a signicant way to school failure Bierman, 2004. Researchers posit that aggression among adolescents is a highly stable behavior and serves as a signicant predictor for later aggression and a variety of other undesirable outcomes for both the aggressor and victim Dodge, Coie,  Lynam, 2006; Loeber, 1996; Olweus, 1979. Hay and Loeber 1997 believe that most chronically violent individuals undergo development characterized by escalation in the severity of STEPHEN W. SMITH ET AL. 48

aggressive acts over several years. According to Hope and Bierman 1998 and Barth, Dunlap, Dane, Lochman, and Wells 2004, classrooms may serve as environments for continuing aggression and deviant peer afliations when there are a high proportion of aggressive children present. As a result of chronic underachievement and aberrant behavior, teachers and other school personnel often refer aggressive students for special education services for emotional and behavioral disorders EBD Kauffman  Landrum, 2009. Students with EBD lack the skills necessary for positive social functioning Kauffman  Landrum, 2009; Kavale, Mathur,  Mostert, 2004. They may have difculty understanding complex social situations, maintaining drive and motivation, and recognizing andor managing their emotional reactions to stressful and anger-provoking situations Freedman, Rosenthal, Donohoe, Schlundt,  McFall, 1978; Lochman  Dodge, 1994. Epstein, Kauffman, and Cullinan 1985 found that aggression was the most persistent pattern of behavior of students with EBD, and Ruhl and Hughes 1985 argued that aggressive behaviors in classrooms for students who exhibit EBD are y present and noticeably frequent p. 102. Generally, students with EBD who exhibit aggressive and other externalizing behaviors are isolated from typical peers Kauffman  Landrum, 2009 and associate with peers who exhibit similar behaviors Xie, Cairns,  Cairns, 1999. Isolation and afliation with deviant peers perpetuate aggressive behavior and increase the likelihood of further peer rejection Bierman, 2004. Consequently, highly aggressive students who lack pro-social interactions with typical peers are unlikely to have sufcient opportunities to develop strategies that foster positive social interactions at home, in their community, and on the job Kerr  Nelson, 2010. Clearly, education professionals who interact daily with students with EBD need instructional strategies to help ameliorate destructive behavior patterns and reverse the trend toward peer rejection, isolation, and escalating problems. A growing literature base suggests that behavioral excesses and decits of students with EBD may be linked to the poor development of self-regulatory mechanisms required in the integration of cognition and emotions e.g., Blair  Diamond, 2008; Hongwanishkul, Happaney, Lee,  Zelazo, 2005; Zelazo  Mueller, 2002. Such decits are recognized to contribute signicantly to chronically aggressive and antisocial patterns of behavior that affect mental health Fontaine, Burks,  Dodge, 2002; Se guin, Boulerice, Harden, Tremblay,  Pihl, 1999. To enhance intrinsic motivation and long-term behavioral change, and to prevent or ameliorate CBIs to Prevent Aggression of Students with EBD 49

destructive behavior patterns, researchers are now studying the efcacy of school and classroom-based cognitive-behavioral interventions CBIs Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group CPPRG, 1999; Daunic et al., 2012; Lochman  Wells, 2004. CBIs combine the use of behavioral principles, behavior therapy, and cognitive mediation through self-talk Kendall  Braswell, 1985; Smith  Daunic, 2006 and incorporate modeling, feedback, reinforcement, and cognitive mediation e.g., thinkalouds to build new ways of coping. They are founded on the assumption that individuals can inuence the cognitive events that mediate their behavior. Because schools are a primary environment for students social and emotional development, school-based intervention is of utmost importance, particularly for students with or at developmental risk for EBD. According to Hoagwood and Johnson 2003, child welfare, juvenile justice, and substance abuse counseling services assist large numbers of children, but the majority of mental health services are provided in primary care and schools. Hoagwood and Johnson point out, however, that only a small percentage of students in schools who need mental health services receive them. In this chapter, we describe the merits of CBIs in school settings to reduce student aggression and other destructive behavior and promote student success and lifelong learning. To that end, we explore three theoretical frameworks for aggression: the general aggression model GAM, social learning theory SLT, and social information processing SIP, each of which substantiates CBIs. Next, we delineate the components of CBIs, trace briey their historical development, and examine supporting empirical evidence. We also describe social problem-solving and its implementation as an example of a school-based CBI. Finally, we explain some limitations of CBIs in schools and describe future research needs. AGGRESSION The poor development of self-regulatory mechanisms necessary for cognitive and emotional integration contributes to patterns of aggression among students with EBD Blair  Diamond, 2008. Researchers have developed multiple theories to understand better the component processes involved in aggression. These include the GAM, SLT, and SIP cf. Anderson  Bushman, 2002; Bandura, 1986; Crick  Dodge, 1994, each of which examines the role of environment, cognition, and behavior in the occurrence of aggression. STEPHEN W. SMITH ET AL. 50

The General Aggression Model Designed to integrate various theories of aggression, the GAM provides a comprehensive theoretical framework for the factors involved in human aggression Anderson  Bushman, 2002 and can be useful in developing and implementing intervention programming. The GAM consists of a number of key components including a knowledge structures; b person and situation inputs; c routes for cognition, affect, and arousal; and d outcomes. Knowledge Structures The GAM asserts that knowledge structures, or the way knowledge is internally organized, have a signicant impact on the mental encoding, cognitive processing, and overt behavior of aggressive individuals Anderson  Dill, 2000; Fiske  Taylor, 1991; Wegner  Bargh, 1998. Developed through experience, these structures contain units of related information that allow individuals to interpret and organize the world efciently. These knowledge structures profoundly inuence perceptions, interpretations, beliefs, affective states, and behavioral responses, and they occur in three relevant domains: a perceptual schemata that involve the identication of phenomena ranging from simple objects to complex social interactions, b person schemata that encompass beliefs about individuals or a group of people, and c behavioral scripts that comprise thoughts about how people behave under various conditions. When encoding cues, aggressive children tend to focus primarily on more aversive signals and interpret them using persistent aggressive knowledge structures Dodge  Tomlin, 1987; Slaby  Guerra, 1988. Person and Situation Inputs The GAM framework divides input variables into two primary factors: person and situational. Person inputs include everything a person contributes to a situation, such as traits, beliefs, attitudes, values, goals, scripts, and genetic predispositions. According to Moftt 1993 and Tubman and Windle 1995, aggressive students and those with EBD often exhibit these characteristics in the form of difcult temperament, behavioral impulsivity, and low levels of self-efcacy. These person factors become stable as they are exhibited regularly across multiple situations Mischel, 1999. Anderson and Bushman 2002 believe that when summed together, person factors contribute to knowledge structures, and when consistently applied, these factors comprise individuals personality and their preparedness to aggress. CBIs to Prevent Aggression of Students with EBD 51

Situation inputs can include aggressive cues, provocation, and frustration, often common occurrences in classrooms for students with EBD who may already be predisposed to attend to deliberate or hostile cues Dodge  Tomlin, 1987; Slaby  Guerra, 1988. Along with person factors, each of these situation inputs may contribute to aggression by inuencing cognition, affect, and arousal. Cognition, Affect, and Arousal Person and situation inputs each contribute to an individuals internal state, which the GAM characterizes as made up of cognition, affect, and arousal. Cognition is affected when input variables summon aggressive concepts in memory. Frequent access of these concepts may lead to chronic accessibility, prime aggression, and result in hostility-related scripts Crick  Dodge, 1994; Dodge  Coie, 1987. Affect is inuenced when conditions such as pain, uncomfortable temperatures, or exposure to violent media inuence mood and emotion that prime aggressive behavior Anderson, 1997; Anderson, Anderson,  Deuser, 1996; Berkowitz, 1993. In addition, expressive motor responses automatically coincide with various emotional states, most noticeably through facial expressions. Finally, psychological and physical arousal can also be inuenced by input factors, such as medications in a persons system, recent exercise, or air temperature. Anderson and Bushman 2002 posit that cognition, affect, and arousal are deeply interconnected and may elicit knowledge structures or scripts that lead to aggressive behavior. Outcomes In the GAM framework, the decision-making process guides the actions an individual may take. This process is informed by an immediate appraisal of the affective states, goals, and intentions of others in a situation, and then ltered through intrapersonal internal states Anderson  Bushman, 2002. The accuracy of the appraisal depends on personal and situational factors, as well as the persons present internal state. According to Dodge 2006, aggressive children tend to demonstrate a hostile bias when appraising the intentions of others. For example, once an immediate appraisal is made, an individual may act impulsively not necessarily aggressively or may reappraise the situation if the outcome is important to the individual and sufcient resources such as time and cognitive capacity are available. For example, if a middle school student running down the hallway is late for class when another student bumps into him and knocks a book out of his hands, he is frustrated internal state. He notices that the boy who bumped STEPHEN W. SMITH ET AL. 52

him is a popular male athlete and cognitively accesses his knowledge structures about jocks person schemata and how they behave behavior scripts. Rubbing his arm from the impact arousal, the student makes an immediate appraisal of the situation assigning hostile intent and responds by verbally aggressing and pushing back. Following an immediate appraisal, a reappraisal can involve a more systematic search for a satisfying outcome and include an examination of possible causes, relevant memories, and probable outcomes of possible actions. An individual may cycle through several cognitive searches and evaluations before deciding on a course of action. Reappraisal, however, may not necessarily lead to a nonaggressive response. In fact, individuals may recall unpleasant prior experiences that elicit changes in their internal state and result in aggression. For example, the middle school boy might reappraise and notice the athlete was looking in another direction and had an expression of empathy on his face. The boy, in this instance however, might also notice other students looking on and recall a prior incident when he was ridiculed, and decide to push back after all, inuenced by his current emotional state and a desire to preserve his social status. The GAM framework focuses on the present internal state of the individual, including the inuence of past experience on present and future behaviors. Repeated exposure to poor environmental inuences and inappropriate models, as are prevalent in classrooms for students with EBD Ruhl  Hughes, 1985, may lead to the development of knowledge structures that create and solidify automated aggressive response scripts. Continued reinforcement of these scripts and knowledge structures may ultimately result in the development of a more aggressive personality. Based on the GAM, however, there is hope that this same process could result in the development of a less aggressive personality. How an individual develops specic knowledge structures can be accounted for through SLT. Social Learning Theory SLT posits that an individuals psychological functioning consists of continuous reciprocal interaction between behavior and its controlling conditions Bandura, 1973, p. 43. The individual and the environment shape one another constantly through this interaction. Individual patterns of behavior can be learned through the direct experience of reinforcement contingencies andor punishment, as an individual behaves within a particular context. For example, when a student raises his hand in a CBIs to Prevent Aggression of Students with EBD 53

classroom and waits to be called on before speaking, the teacher may praise the hand-raising and the students waiting behavior, thus inuencing the future occurrence of hand-raising within the classroom context. According to Bandura 1973, however, most learning is associated with the observation of anothers behavior that teaches general rules, help from behavioral scripts for various social situations, and provide a basis for interpersonal imitations. Thus, the observer learns to repeat or reject a behavior based on vicarious reinforcement, or reinforcement received indirectly by observing another person being reinforced. Using the hand-raising example, observational learning would occur if other students in the class initiate appropriate hand-raising and wait patiently, because they witnessed the teacher praise the performance of the same behavior. The inuence of repeated exposure to poor environmental conditions and inappropriate models, however, may lead to the formation of knowledge structures containing more aggressive behavioral scripts. Banduras 1973, 1986 SLT contributes to an understanding of human aggression. Individuals are equipped with neurophysiologic systems that facilitate aggressive behavior, but the topography, frequency, intensity, and context of aggressive acts are largely inuenced by social experience. Through the theory of reciprocal determinism, Bandura 1986 posits that behavior is regulated and maintained by interactions between the environment, behavior, and individual. With regard to these three systems, Human aggression is a learned conduct that, like other forms of social behavior, is under stimulus, reinforcement, and cognitive control Bandura, 1973, p. 44. For example, observing a ght during recess environment may lead to thinking about ghting cognition, which, in turn, may lead to provoking a ght in class behavior. Alternatively, thinking about ghting cognition increases the chances of noticing others ghting environment, which in turn may lead to ghting behavior again. All three elements  behavior, cognition, and environment  take turns inuencing or being inuenced by each other. The theory of reciprocal determinism thus suggests that cognitive processes shaped by events in the external environment control behavior. The premise of employing cognitive processes to self-regulate behavior is foundational to the cognitive-behavioral approach to intervention. Social Information Processing Dodge, Pettit, McClaskey, and Brown 1986 explained the cognitive processes of encoding and interpreting environmental cues and subsequently STEPHEN W. SMITH ET AL. 54

enacting a behavioral response through their model of SIP. Acknowledging the inuences of biologically determined capabilities and the presence of stored memories from prior experience, Dodge and his colleagues provided a framework for the steps that lead to performance in social situations. The basic premise of the model is that skillful execution of each step in the process will lead to competent social performance in a given situation, while biased or faulty processing will lead to deviant social behaviors, such as aggression Dodge  Crick, 1990. Dodge 1986 explained that children mentally engage in four steps before enacting a social response: 1. encoding situational cues, 2. representing and interpreting those cues, 3. mentally searching for possible responses, and 4. selecting a response. The third and fourth steps suggest that children recall possible responses from memory and evaluate them before selecting one for enactment. In revising the SIP model, Crick and Dodge 1994 abandoned a strictly linear approach for one in which a persons cognitive processing is posited to occur along several paths concurrently. The path from a particular provocation to a behavioral response, however, still entails a sequence of steps: 1. encoding of external and internal cues, 2. interpretation and mental representation of those cues, 3. clarication or selection of a goal, 4. response access or construction, 5. response decision, and 6. behavioral enactment. Each of these steps consists of sub-processes that lead to the completion of the primary step. Thus, the revised model suggests that steps and subprocesses may occur simultaneously and interactively, creating feedback loops and a cyclical structure. The reformulated model describes a database of information each individual possesses that may inuence each step along the sequence. This information includes representations of past social events stored in long-term memory, social schemas developed for specic social situations to simplify cognitive processing, and acquired rules e.g., when provoked by a peer, an aggressive response will preserve social status that unite to form latent mental structures stored in memory as social knowledge. CBIs to Prevent Aggression of Students with EBD 55

Research on children prone to aggression reveals decits along each step in the SIP model. Aggressive children tend to encode fewer social cues before interpreting situations, and the cues selected for encoding tend to be the more hostile ones Dodge et al., 1986; Milich  Dodge, 1984. Once they encode the cues, aggressive children tend to assign hostile intentions to others as they interpret the situation Dodge et al., 1986, and they underperceive their own level of aggression Lochman, 1987. Persistent cognitive beliefs also inuence the SIP of aggressive youth Slaby  Guerra, 1988. For example, Lochman, Wayland, and White 1993 found that aggressive adolescent males place higher value on dominance and revenge and less value on the social goal of afliation embraced by their nonaggressive peers. Their search for a behavioral response results typically in fewer socially competent solutions, a greater orientation toward physical action, and a weaker orientation toward verbal assertion Dodge et al., 1986; Lochman  Lampron, 1986. Moreover, Perry, Perry, and Rasmussen 1986 note that aggressive children possess a higher expectation of positive outcomes for aggressive actions than nonaggressive children, thereby increasing the probability of selecting an aggressive response. Finally, even if the child selects a pro-social solution, he may lack the social skills necessary for proper enactment Dodge et al., 1986. Thus, aggressive children may display a cognitive andor behavioral deciency at any level of SIP. One promising approach to addressing these deciencies is teaching students to regulate their own behavior using techniques such as self-talk and cognitive mediation, commonly found within CBIs. Theories such as the GAM, SLT, and SIP help to identify variables and clarify components meaningful for developing techniques and interventions to reduce aggression and other problematic behaviors exhibited by students with EBD. Key components identied in the GAM, such as knowledge structures, cognition, affect, and outcomes, inuence the mental encoding and cognitive processes that affect how individuals perceive, interpret, and behave in social situations. By investigating the interplay among components that elicit aggressive behavior, the GAM facilitates an examination of conceptual variables that underpin the cognitive-behavioral approach to intervention. Similarly, SLT explores interactions between cognition, environment, and behavior during social experiences and suggests how cognitive processes that control behavior are inuenced by external events. The premise that social behavior can be controlled through SIP of interpersonal variables also provides a theoretical basis for cognitive-behavioral approaches to treatment. Thus, each of the three theoretical frameworks considers factors STEPHEN W. SMITH ET AL. 56

that inuence the cognitive decision-making process. The dening feature of SIP is its delineation of a series of interconnected processes and steps that lead to social competency. The information accessed and how it is processed during each step along the sequence inuences social behavior, including the behavior of aggressive individuals. By demarcating these processes, SIP provides a foundation for the development of interventions based on the CBI approach, especially those with a focus on social problem-solving. Synthesizing the insight these theories provide about aggressive behavior assists in the practical development and implementation of CBIs in classroom settings. COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTIONS The CBI approach combines behavioral and cognitive components to modify disorders such as anxiety, fears, phobias, aggression, and disorders of conduct Lesure-Lester, 2002; Smith  Daunic, 2006; Smith, Lochman,  Daunic, 2005. CBI strategies employed in school settings can modify behavior by using a variety of covert implicit and overt explicit reinforcement contingencies, while simultaneously altering students thought processes about situations that frequently provoke negative behavioral outbursts Daunic et al., 2012; Riggs et al., 2006; Smith  Daunic, 2006. Basically, CBI operates under three fundamental assumptions: 1 cognitive activity affects behavior, 2 cognitive activity may be monitored and altered, and 3 desired behavior change can occur through cognitive change Kendall  Hollon, 1970; Smith  Daunic, 2006. While the CBI approach does not target behavior change by teaching how to respond in specic situations, it does provide skill development for generalization to a variety of problem situations. In congruence with the fundamental assumptions, teaching strategies imbedded in CBIs include whole class instruction, guided discussions, demonstrationmodeling, self-study, rehearsal, student homework, performance-related activities such as role-play, how to notice and challenge automatic thoughts, and the use of self-talk Smith  Daunic, 2006. Inherent in CBI is the fundamental idea that behavior is mediated through self-talk Mahoney, 1974; Mayer  Van Acker, 2009; Meichenbaum, 1977. Thus, the use of language in altering cognitions is often a common component of the approach, and most CBI programs promote the active engagement of participants in the process of understanding and modifying their thought processes, feelings, and behaviors Kendall, 1985; CBIs to Prevent Aggression of Students with EBD 57

Mayer  Van Acker, 2009. For example, teachers might use modeling to demonstrate self-talk, and students would then be encouraged to work through simulated situations using overt self-talk while they receive coaching and feedback. The long-term goal is for students to use self-talk covertly and automatically over time, in vivo. In addition to the integral role of self-talk, Kaplan and Carter 1995 delineated ve characteristics that set CBIs apart from other behavior management programs: 1. the student, rather than the teacher, is the agent of change, 2. verbalization is the primary tool for change, 3. the student is taught steps for identifying and solving social problems, 4. instruction involves the use of modeling, and 5. gaining self-control is the goal. History of CBI Prevalent well into the 1960s within school settings, the use of behavioral approaches met some resistance because of limited generalizability and durability of learned behaviors see e.g., Meichenbaum, 1980. As a result, CBIs emerged as a promising modication, because of ecological utility not inherent in behavioral modication approaches Meyers, Cohen,  Schleser, 1989; Van Acker  Mayer, 2009. According to Mayer and Van Acker 2009, CBIs gained favor in the 1970s, evolving from research and theory in cognitive psychology and behaviorism and marked by the work of researchers such as Kelly 1955 and Dollard and Miller 1950, who presented internal phenomena as explanations for human behavior. Kellys constructive alternativism 1955, 2003 led to the development of three common CBIs: rational emotive therapy, cognitive therapy, and selfinstructional training Kendall  Hollon, 1970; Meichenbaum  Goodman, 1971. According to constructive alternativism, all human perceptions are open to question and reconsideration, because they inherently differ from objective reality. Personal constructions are based on the meaning attached to an event, which is anchored to associated antecedents and consequences. This philosophical position set the stage for several CBI approaches, because it showed the importance of human perception. The use of CBIs in schools developed over the last 40 years, and according to Van Acker and Mayer 2009, the development of school-based CBIs can be conceptualized as occurring in three historical periods: formative early 1970s to mid-1980s, maturation mid-1980s to late 1990s, and established STEPHEN W. SMITH ET AL. 58

late 1990s to present. During the formative period, several events inuenced the development of CBIs across academic, social, behavioral, and emotional domains. These included an increase in research that addressed the skills and tasks vital to academic and social-emotional success and an established national priority for school-based prevention programming. Researchers also started to focus their school-based research on several critical skill areas, including: 1. generating alternative solutions, 2. reecting on consequences, 3. developing social-causal cognition, 4. means-end thinking, and 5. being sensitive to interpersonal problems. During this time, CBIs were developed to address angeraggression, depression, and anxiety, providing a foundation for the next generation of interventions. The maturation period was marked by an increase in CBI implementation in schools; further development of underlying theory e.g., GAM and SIP; continuing renement of interventions for treating aggressionanger, anxiety, and depression; and more consistent evidence of CBI efcacy. According to Van Acker and Mayer 2009, researchers are currently in the established phase of school-based CBI development, during which CBIs are being more nely tuned to meet the needs of all program participants. Efcacy of CBIs Meta-analyses of CBI effectiveness in the treatment of problem behavior include that of Beck and Fernandez 1998. In their analysis, studies involving the treatment of anger with parents, children, and delinquents mostly in clinical settings e.g., prisons, residential treatment centers, and detention facilities showed that CBI produced an overall mean weighted effect size of 0.70. Thus, those receiving CBI for anger reduction were better off than 76 of untreated participants. Also focusing on anger for children and adolescents ages 618, Sukhodolsky, Kassinove, and Gorman 2004 found a mean effect size of 0.67 and noted that CBI effects were equivalent to those of counseling and psychotherapy. They also found social skills training and multimodal interventions to be more effective in improving social skills and reducing aggressive behavior, and problem-solving interventions to be more successful in reducing personal anger experiences. In the CBIs to Prevent Aggression of Students with EBD 59

Sukhodolsky et al. 2004 study, modeling, feedback, and homework techniques were all positively correlated with effect size. Meta-analyses conducted by McCart, Priester, Davies, and Azen 2006 and Bennett and Gibbons 2000 focused on the effectiveness of CBI in reducing antisocial behavior. McCart and colleagues compared the effectiveness of behavioral parent training and CBI in the treatment of antisocial children and youth, while Bennett and Gibbons focused on the effectiveness of CBI only as a treatment of antisocial behavior in children and youth. The weighted mean effect size for all interventions was 0.40 in the McCart et al. 2006 study. Although student age did not determine the effectiveness of behavioral parent training, there was a positive correlation between age and effect size for CBI, such that older students beneted more than younger students. In the Bennett and Gibbons study, the mean effect size was 0.48, and 0.66 at follow-up. The researchers concluded that CBI has a low to moderate effect in decreasing antisocial behavior. While these meta-analyses provide evidence of CBI effectiveness for school-aged children and youth who exhibit behavior problems, the comingling of participant categories e.g., antisocial behavior, delinquency, incarceration, having abusive parents and data from school, clinic, and restrictive settings may inhibit generalization to a school-based population of students who typically exhibit less disruptive and aggressive behavior than those referred for clinical treatment. Robinson, Smith, Miller, and Brownell 1999 addressed these limitations in a meta-analysis that explored the use of school-based CBIs in treating aggression and hyperactivityimpulsivity in nonclinical populations. They found an overall weighted mean effect size of 0.74 for 24 outcome studies, 0.79 for studies focused on hyperactivity-impulsivity, and 0.64 for studies focused on aggression, specically. Effects found at posttest were maintained over time. Social Problem Solving Although school-based CBIs designed to decrease student aggression share elements of the GAM and SLT frameworks, the SIP theoretical model seems most relevant to social problem solving. Specically, the SIP model provides insight on the cognitive processes underlying social interactions. In fact, some of the earliest programs designed to address SIP decits were social problem-solving interventions Wilson  Lipsey, 2006. DZurilla and Goldfried 1971, for example, dened social problem solving as an overt or covert process that creates various potentially effective alternatives for STEPHEN W. SMITH ET AL. 60

dealing with a problematic situation and enhances the likelihood of selecting the most effective response from these alternatives. Thus, social problemsolving is a logical, effortful, and conscious activity DZurilla, Nezu,  Maydeu-Olivares, 2004. The approach is based on the assumption that a the ability to solve social problems is positively related to social competence and inversely related to maladaptive behaviors, and b training in social problem-solving skills will increase social competence and help reduce and prevent further development of maladaptive behavior in individuals with problem-solving decits. According to the DZurilla and Nezu 1999 framework, the ve components addressed in social problem-solving training are: 1. problem orientation, 2. problem denition and formulation, 3. generation of alternative solutions, 4. decision-making, and 5. solution implementation and verication. Problem solving is a higher order cognitive process that is inuenced by an individuals internal state e.g., knowledge structures, behavioral scripts, social schemas, and person and perceptual schemata, as discussed in GAM, SLT, and SIP theories. As the rst step of social problem solving, problem orientation involves the attentional set and cognitive-emotional schemas that inuence how students think and feel about social problems and their own problem-solving behavior DZurilla  Nezu, 1999. The remaining four components are skills that can be conceptualized as steps integral to successful problem-solving. In the second step, students learn to identify and state their problem so that it is likely to provide the kind of information needed to maximize performance in later phases. To accomplish this, Dollard and Miller 1950 believed the most important step in simple reasoning is to stop and think, to avoid immediate appraisal of a social situation and attend to all available cues. Basically, stop and think allows for sufcient time to process external and internal cues to ensure an effective and measured decision-making process. As students learn to recognize a problematic situation and inhibit their tendency to respond automatically, the next problem-solving step is to dene all aspects of the problem in operational terms. This includes formulating or classifying elements of the situation appropriately to distinguish relevant from irrelevant information, identify primary goals, and specify sub-problems, issues, or conicts. Once the problem is dened and CBIs to Prevent Aggression of Students with EBD 61

formulated, the student learns to identify major goals and generate ways to meet these goals through developing a list of alternative solutions. DZurilla and Goldfried 1971 conceptualized the generation of alternatives using Osborns 1963 method of brainstorming, which has four basic rules: Criticism is ruled out, free-wheeling is welcomed, quantity is wanted, and combination and improvement are sought DZurilla  Goldfried, p. 114. DZurilla and Goldfried argued that more good ideas are produced under this brainstorming instruction than under instruction requesting that students produce only good ideas. They suggested that students start by generating general strategies for solving their dilemma, enter the decision-making stage, and select the best strategy, and then go back to the generation stage to produce as many alternatives as possible for carrying out selected strategies. Acknowledging that individuals might not be able to identify the best alternatives from those they have generated, DZurilla and Goldfried provided guidelines, such as weighing the usefulness of decisions in light of the students value system. Once a behavioral alternative is chosen i.e., decision-making, the behavior is enacted. The outcome of enactment is then assessed to determine if the behavior was successful in meeting the students goal and whether it should be used again in the future i.e., solution implementation and verication. Tools for Getting Along An example of a social problem-solving curriculum is Tools for Getting Along TFGA; Smith  Daunic, 2006. Aimed at teaching social problemsolving skills to prevent or decrease problem behavior in fourth and fth grade students, TFGA is delivered at the universal level. In this way, typical peers who display adequate problem-solving skills provide positive role models for targets students who are at-risk for emotional and behavioral difculties. Through direct instruction, teacher modeling, and instruction in self-talk, TFGA focuses on six social problem-solving steps to help students in personal decision-making. They include: 1. recognizing that a problem exists, 2. calming down and thinking, 3. dening a problem in terms of goals and barriers, 4. generating solutions through brainstorming, 5. considering possible outcomes and selecting a strategy, and 6. evaluating an outcome once a solution is enacted. STEPHEN W. SMITH ET AL. 62

Daunic, Smith, Brank, and Peneld 2006 conducted a quasi-experimental study of TFGA that included 7 schools in three districts: 2 schools 10 teachers in a 20-lesson condition, 3 schools 17 teachers in a 20-lesson plus boosters condition, and 2 schools 8 teachers in a control condition, with a total of 165 targeted students across the 3 conditions. All intervention teachers i.e., 20-lesson and 20-lesson plus boosters conditions participated in a one-day training prior to implementation during which they learned to use a scripted curriculum and cognitive modeling, role-plays, small group activities, and real-life strategy application. The additional 6 lessons in the 20-lesson plus boosters condition provided opportunities for repeated behavioral practice. All TFGA lessons were designed to last approximately 30 minutes and to be taught at a rate of two to three lessons per week for 710 weeks. Study ndings were that target students identied as at-risk for disruptive andor aggressive behavior evidenced an increase in problemsolving knowledge and improved teacher-reported reactive and proactive aggression. These ndings were maintained over several months. There were no signicant differences between students in the booster condition and those in the 20-lesson condition. Further, Daunic et al. 2012 examined the effectiveness of TFGA in reducing developmental risk for EBD in a randomized controlled eld trial with a larger sample of fourth and fth grade students. Students from 87 classrooms 44 treatment, 43 control in 14 schools were randomly assigned to treatment or control. Teachers and guidance counselors were trained to implement TFGA during a 10-hour, 2-day training program. Treatment teachers taught an average of one TFGA lesson per week, and a follow-up meeting was conducted approximately halfway through curriculum delivery to reorient teachers to TFGA goals. Study ndings showed positive effects of treatment on problem-solving knowledge and teacher-reported social skills, proactive aggression, and areas of executive function, such as inhibitory control, attentional shift, initiating strategies, organizing materials, planning, and performance monitoring, all of which contribute to self-regulatory cognitive tasks relative to effective problem solving in a variety of contexts. Students who received TFGA versus those who did not reported they approached social problems more positively following intervention, had an improved problem-solving style, and had a lower level of trait anger and anger out. In summary, CBIs blend cognitive and behavioral components to reduce problematic behaviors such as aggression and increase the use of more prosocial alternatives. The CBI approach aims to teach students problemsolving skills that can generalize to a variety of social situations. Originating in the 1970s, the CBI approach is now at the renement stage, such that CBIs to Prevent Aggression of Students with EBD 63

practitioners can meet the needs of all students. Numerous controlled eld trial studies and meta-analyses across a variety of venues and populations have shown CBIs effectiveness in decreasing student problem behaviors, including aggression. RESEARCH AND IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES Although there is a growing awareness of, and empirical evidence for, the efcacy of CBIs for school-aged children and youth who exhibit maladaptive behavior, Smith, Graber, and Daunic 2009 noted a number of remaining research and implementation issues. First, most CBIs are multi-component, and researchers often report outcome measures at the individual student, classroom, family, andor community level. Thus, comparisons across studies are sometimes problematic, and generalizability to diverse populations difcult to establish. Gresham 2005 noted that many associated outcome measures lack adequate reliability and validity and may not be based on rm theoretical constructs. There are also issues associated with bias i.e., social desirability when teachers are both primary implementers and informants on outcome measures. In a similar way, when researchers rely on student self-reports to assess treatment effectiveness, the measures may be more or less useful at different developmental stages, because students may be hampered by limited self-awareness, especially at younger ages. Finally, Smith, Daunic, and Taylor 2007 emphasized the need for attention to treatment delity to ensure accurate and consistent delivery of all CBI components to participants over time. Basically, treatment delity is maximized when an intervention is implemented as planned. Teachers may, however, need to adapt and vary from prescribed treatment protocols because of the ideographic nature of their classrooms. Thus, a reasonable intersect is needed where researchers of CBIs and those who implement them assure the accuracy and delity necessary to maximize intervention effectiveness. FUTURE OF RESEARCH TO SCHOOL-BASED PRACTICE The complexity of delivering CBIs is compounded by the intricacy of intervention settings such as schools and classrooms Smith et al., 2005. Parents, students, and education professionals will not be served well when STEPHEN W. SMITH ET AL. 64

implementing CBIs known only to be effective under clinical conditions and implemented by experienced researchers. Rather, the ultimate goal is to develop CBIs that are effective and can be sustained in the complex and unpredictable arena of classrooms and schools. To accomplish this, teachers and other education professionals must be appropriately educated in intervention use, have the requisite amount of conceptual and theoretical knowledge about CBIs, and be convinced that using CBIs will lead to positive and long-term outcomes Larson  Lochman, 2002; Polsgrove  Smith, 2004; Smith et al., 2005. The expectations and attitudes of teachers and other education professionals about using CBIs could substantially augment or diminish their effects. Thus, extensive pre-service and in-service training and incentives for implementers are required, with ongoing monitoring and support by behavioral support personnel. This is a tall order, in light of the numerous competing priorities in schools, such as highstakes testing and teacher accountability for academics. In summary, students with and at risk for EBD who display aggression necessitate the provision of effective interventions by education professionals for reducing highly disruptive behavior, while keeping learning environments safe and secure for all students and staff. Despite the fact that many special education teachers and behavioral support personnel may be unfamiliar with the CBI approach, teaching students with EBD to understand and modify their thought processes, feelings, and behaviors can provide the skills to regulate their own behavior and reduce dependence on teacher-operated behavior reduction procedures. CBIs offer a viable strategy for teachers to help students with EBD become less aggressive, more independent, and more successful in the classroom and many aspects of school, work, and family life. REFERENCES Anderson, C. A. 1997. Effects of violent movies and trait hostility on hostile feelings and aggressive thoughts. Aggressive Behavior, 233, 161178. Anderson, C. A., Anderson, K. B.,  Deuser, W. E. 1996. Examining an affective aggression framework: Weapon and temperature effects on aggressive thoughts, affect, and attitudes. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 366376. Anderson, C. A.,  Bushman, C. 2002. Human aggression. Annual Review: Psychology, 53, 2751. Anderson, C. A.,  Dill, K. E. 2000. Video games and aggressive thoughts, feelings, and behavior in the laboratory and life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 772790. CBIs to Prevent Aggression of Students with EBD 65

Bandura, A. 1973. Aggression: A social learning analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Bandura, A. 1986. Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Barth, J. M., Dunlap, S. T., Dane, H., Lochman, J. E.,  Wells, K. C. 2004. Classroom environment inuences on aggression, peer relations, and academic focus. Journal of School Psychology, 42, 115133. Beck, R.,  Fernandez, E. 1998. Cognitive-behavioral therapy in the treatment of anger: A meta-analysis. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 22, 6374. Bennett, D. S.,  Gibbons, T. A. 2000. Efcacy of child cognitive-behavioral interventions for antisocial behavior: A meta-analysis. Child and Family Behavior Therapy, 22, 115. Berkowitz, L. 1993. Aggression: Its causes, consequences and control. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Bierman, K. L. 2004. Peer rejection: Developmental processes and intervention strategies. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Blair, C.,  Diamond, A. 2008. Biological processes in prevention and intervention: The promotion of self-regulation as a means of preventing school failure. Development and Psychopathology, 20, 899911. Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. 1999. Initial impact of fast track prevention trial for conduct problems: II. Classroom effects. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 648657. Crick, N. R.,  Dodge, K. A. 1994. A review and reformation of social information-processing mechanisms in childrens social adjustment. Psychological Bulletin, 1151, 74101. Daunic, A. P., Smith, S. W., Brank, E. M.,  Peneld, R. D. 2006. Classroom-based cognitivebehavioral intervention to prevent aggression: Efcacy and social validity. Journal of School Psychology, 44, 123139. Daunic, A. P., Smith, S. W., Garvan, C. W., Barber, B. R., Becker, M. K., Peters, C. D., y Naranjo, A. H. 2012. Reducing developmental risk for emotionalbehavioral problems: A randomized controlled trial examining the Tools for Getting Along curriculum. Journal of School Psychology, 50, 149166. Dodge, K. A. 1986. Social information processing model of social competence in children. In M. Perlmutter Ed., The Minnesota symposium on child psychology pp. 77126. Hillside, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Dodge, K. A. 2006. Translational science in action: Hostile attributional style and the development of aggressive behavior problems. Development and Psychopathology, 18, 791814. Dodge, K. A.,  Coie, J. D. 1987. Social information processing factors in reactive and proactive aggression in childrens peer groups. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 11461158. Dodge, K. A., Coie, J. D.,  Lynam, D. 2006. Aggression and antisocial behavior in youth. In W. Damon, R. Lerner Series Eds.,  N. Eisenberg Vol. Ed., Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development 6th ed., pp. 719788. New York, NY: Wiley. Dodge, K. A.,  Crick, N. R. 1990. Social information processing bases of aggressive behavior in children. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 161, 822. Dodge, K. A., Pettit, G. S., McClaskey, C. L.,  Brown, M. M. 1986. Social competence in children. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 51, 185. Dodge, K. A.,  Tomlin, A. M. 1987. Utilization of self-schemas as a mechanism of interpretational bias in aggressive children. Social Cognition, 5, 280300. STEPHEN W. SMITH ET AL. 66

Dollard, J.,  Miller, N. E. 1950. Personality and psychotherapy: An analysis in terms of learning, thinking, and culture. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Downer, J. T.,  Pianta, R. C. 2006. Academic and cognitive functioning in rst grade: Associations with earlier home and child care predictors and with concurrent home and classroom experiences. School Psychology Review, 351, 1130. DZurilla, T. J.,  Goldfried, M. R. 1971. Problem solving and behavior modication. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 78, 107126. DZurilla, T. J.,  Nezu, A. M. 1999. Problem-solving therapy: A social competence approach to clinical intervention. New York, NY: Springer. DZurilla, T. J., Nezu, A. M.,  Maydeu-Olivares, A. 2004. Social problem solving: Theory and assessment. In E. C. Chang, T. J. DZurilla  L. J. Sanna Eds., Social problem solving: Theory, research, and training pp. 1127. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Epstein, M. H., Kauffman, J. M.,  Cullinan, D. 1985. Patterns of maladjustment among the behaviorally disordered: Boys aged 611, boys aged 1218, girls aged 611, and girls aged 1218. Behavioral Disorders, 10, 125135. Farmer, T. W., Estell, D. B., Leung, M. C., Trott, H., Bishop, J.,  Cairns, B. D. 2003. Individual characteristics, early adolescent peer afliations, and school dropout: An examination of aggressive and popular group types. Journal of School Psychology, 41, 217232. Fiske, S. T.,  Taylor, S. E. 1991. Social cognition 2nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Fontaine, R. G., Burks, V. S.,  Dodge, K. A. 2002. Response decision processes and externalizing behavior problems in adolescents. Development and Psychopathology, 14, 107122. Freedman, B. J., Rosenthal, L., Donohoe, C. P., Schlundt, D. G.,  McFall, R. M. 1978. A social-behavioral analysis of skill decits in delinquent and nondelinquent adolescent boys. Journal of Consulting  Clinical Psychology, 46, 14481462. Gresham, F. M. 2005. Methodological issues in evaluating cognitive-behavioral treatments for students with behavioral disorders. Behavioral Disorders, 30, 213225. Hay, D.,  Loeber, R. 1997. Key issues in the development of aggression and violence from childhood to early adulthood. Annual Review of Psychology, 48, 2635. Hoagwood, K.,  Johnson, J. 2003. School psychology: A public health framework: I. From evidence-based practices to evidence-based policies. Journal of School Psychology, 41, 319. Hongwanishkul, D., Happaney, K. R., Lee, W. S. C.,  Zelazo, P. D. 2005. Assessment of hot and cool executive function in young children: Age-related changes and individual differences. Developmental Neuropsychology, 28, 617644. Hope, T. L.,  Bierman, K. L. 1998. Patterns of home and school behavior problems in rural and urban settings. Journal of School Psychology, 36, 4558. Kaplan, J. S.,  Carter, J. 1995. Beyond behavior modication: A cognitive-behavioral approach to behavior management in the school 3rd ed. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. Kauffman, J. M.,  Landrum, T. J. 2009. Characteristics of emotional and behavioral disorders of children and youth 9th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Kavale, K. A., Mathur, S. R.,  Mostert, M. P. 2004. Social skills training and teaching social behavior to students with emotional and behavioral disorders. In R. B. Rutherford, M. M. Quinn  S. R. Mathur Eds., Handbook of research in emotional and behavioral disorders pp. 446461. New York, NY: Guilford Press. CBIs to Prevent Aggression of Students with EBD 67

Kelly, G. A. 1955. The psychology of personal constructs: Volume 1. New York, NY: W. W. Norton. Kelly, G. A. 2003. A brief introduction to personal construct theory. In F. Fansella Ed., International handbook of personal construct psychology pp. 120. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Kendall, P. C. 1985. Toward a cognitivebehavioral model of child psychopathology and a critique of related interventions. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 13, 357372. Kendall, P. C.,  Braswell, L. 1985. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for impulsive children. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Kendall, P. C.,  Hollon, S. D. 1970. Cognitive-behavioral interventions: Overview and current status. In P. C. Kendall  S. D. Hollon Eds., Cognitive-behavioral interventions: Theory, research, and procedures pp. 19. New York, NY: Academic Press. Kerr, M. M.,  Nelson, C. M. 2010. Strategies for addressing behavior problems in the classroom 6th ed. Boston, MA: Pearson. Kusche , C. A. 2002. Psychoanalysis as prevention: Using PATHS to enhance ego development, object relationships,  cortical integration in children. Journal of Applied Psychoanalytic Studies, 43, 283301. Larson, J.,  Lochman, J. E. 2002. Helping schoolchildren cope with anger: A cognitive behavior intervention. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Lesure-Lester, G. E. 2002. An application of cognitive-behavior principles in the reduction of aggression among abused African American adolescents. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 174, 394402. Lochman, J. E. 1987. Self and peer perceptions and attributional biases of aggressive and nonaggressive boys in dyadic interactions. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 55, 404410. Lochman, J. E.,  Dodge, K. A. 1994. Social-cognitive processes of severely violent, moderately aggressive, and nonaggressive boys. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 366374. Lochman, J. E.,  Lampron, L. B. 1986. Situational and social problem-solving skills and self-esteem of aggressive and nonaggressive boys. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 14, 605617. Lochman, J. E., Wayland, K. K.,  White, K. J. 1993. Social goals: Relationship to adolescent adjustment and to social problem-solving. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 21, 135151. Lochman, J. E.,  Wells, K. C. 2004. The Coping Power program for preadolescent aggressive boys and their parents: Outcome effects at the one-year follow-up. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 571578. Loeber, R. 1996. Developmental continuity, change, and pathways in male juvenile problem behaviors and delinquency. In J. D. Hawkins Ed., Delinquency and crime: Current theories pp. 127. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Mahoney, M. J. 1974. Cognitive and behavior modication. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger. Mayer, M. J.,  Van Acker, R. 2009. Historical roots, theoretical and applied developments, and critical issues in cognitive-behavioral modication. In M. J. Mayer, R. Van Acker, J. E. Lochman  F. M. Gresham Eds., Cognitive-behavioral interventions for emotional and behavioral disorders: School-based practice pp. 328. New York, NY: Guilford Press. STEPHEN W. SMITH ET AL. 68

McCart, M. R., Priester, P. E., Davies, W. H.,  Azen, R. 2006. Differential effectiveness of behavioral parent-training and cognitive-behavioral therapy for antisocial youth: A meta-analysis. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 34, 527543. Meichenbaum, D. H. 1977. Cognitive-behavior modication: An integrative approach. New York, NY: Plenum Press. Meichenbaum, D. H. 1980. Cognitive-behavioral modication with exceptional children: A promise yet unfullled. Exceptional Education Quarterly, 11, 8388. Meichenbaum, D. H.,  Goodman, J. 1971. Training impulsive children to talk to themselves: A means of developing self-control. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 77, 115126. Meyers, A. W., Cohen, R.,  Schleser, R. 1989. A cognitive-behavioral approach to education: Adopting a broad-based perspective. In J. N. Hughes  R. J. Hall Eds., Handbook of cognitive-behavioral approached in educational settings pp. 6284. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Milich, R.,  Dodge, K. A. 1984. Social information processing patterns in child psychiatric populations. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 12, 171189. Mischel, W. 1999. Personality coherence and dispositions in cognitive affective personality CAPS approach. In D. Cervone  Y. Shoda Eds., The coherence of personality: Social cognitive bases of consistency, variability, and organization pp. 3760. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Moftt, T. E. 1993. Adolescence-limited and life-course persistent antisocial behavior: A developmental taxonomy. Psychological Review, 100, 674701. Olweus, D. 1979. Stability of aggressive behavior patterns in males: A review. Psychological Bulletin, 86, 852875. Osborn, A. F. 1963. Applied imagination 2nd ed. New York, NY: Scribner. Perry, D. G., Perry, L. C.,  Rasmussen, P. 1986. Cognitive social learning mediators of aggression. Child Development, 57, 700711. Polsgrove, L.,  Smith, S. W. 2004. Informed practice in teaching self-control to children with emotional and behavioral disorders. In R. B. Rutherford, M. M. Quinn  S. R. Mathur Eds., Handbook of research in emotional and behavioral disorders pp. 399425. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Quinn, M. M.,  Poirier, J. M. 2004. Linking prevention research with policy: Examining costs and outcomes of the failure to prevent emotional and behavioral disorders. In R. B. Rutherford, M. M. Quinn  S. R. Mathur Eds., Handbook of research in emotional and behavioral disorders pp. 446461. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Riggs, N. R., Greenberg, M. T., Kusche , C. A.,  Pentz, M. A. 2006. The mediational role of neurocognition in the behavioral outcomes of a social-emotional prevention program in elementary school students: Effects of the PATHS curriculum. Prevention Science, 7, 91102. Robinson, T. R., Smith, S. W., Miller, M. D.,  Brownell, M. T. 1999. Cognitive behavior modication of hyperactivityimpulsivity and aggression: A meta-analysis of schoolbased studies. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 195203. Ruhl, K. L.,  Hughes, C. A. 1985. The nature and extent of aggression in special education settings serving behaviorally disordered students. Behavioral Disorders, 10, 95104. Se guin, J. R., Boulerice, B., Harden, P., Tremblay, R. E.,  Pihl, R. O. 1999. Executive functions and physical aggression after controlling for attention decit hyperactivity disorder, general memory, and IQ. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 40, 11971208. CBIs to Prevent Aggression of Students with EBD 69

Slaby, R. G.,  Guerra, N. G. 1988. Cognitive mediators of aggression in adolescent offenders: Assessment. Developmental Psychology, 24, 580588. Smith, S. W.,  Daunic, A. P. 2006. Managing difcult behaviors through problem-solving instruction: Strategies for the elementary classroom. Boston, MA: Pearson. Smith, S. W., Daunic, A. P.,  Taylor, G. 2007. Treatment delity in applied educational research: Expanding the adoption and application of measures to ensure evidence-based practice. Education and Treatment of Children, 30, 121134. Smith, S. W., Graber, J.,  Daunic, A. P. 2009. Cognitive-behavioral interventions for anger aggression: Review of research and research-to-practice issues. In M. Mayer, R. Van Acker, J. Lochman  F. Gresham Eds., Cognitive-behavioral interventions for emotional and behavioral disorders: School-based practice pp. 111142. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Smith, S. W., Lochman, J. E.,  Daunic, A. P. 2005. Managing aggression using cognitivebehavioral interventions: State of the practice and future directions. Behavioral Disorders, 30, 227240. Sukhodolsky, D. G., Kassinove, H.,  Gorman, B. S. 2004. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for anger in children and adolescents: A meta-analysis. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 9, 247269. Tubman, J. G.,  Windle, M. 1995. Continuity of difcult temperament in adolescence: Relations with depression, life events, family support, and substance use across a oneyear period. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 24, 133153. Van Acker, R.,  Mayer, M. J. 2009. Cognitive-behavioral interventions and the social context of the school: A stranger in a strange land. In M. J. Mayer, R. Van Acker, J. Lochman  F. Gresham Eds., Cognitive-behavioral interventions for emotional and behavioral disorders: School-based practice pp. 82108. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Wegner, D. M.,  Bargh, J. A. 1998. Control and automaticity in social life. In D. Gilbert, S. Fiske  G. Lindzey Eds., The handbook of social psychology pp. 446496. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Wilson, S. J.,  Lipsey, M. 2006. The effects of school-based social information processing interventions on aggressive behavior, part II: Selectedindicated pull-out programs. Campbell Systematic Reviews, 6, 137. Xie, H., Cairns, R. B.,  Cairns, B. D. 1999. Social networks and congurations in inner-city schools: Aggression, popularity, and implications for students with emotional or behavioral disorders. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 7, 147155. Zelazo, P. D.,  Mueller, U. 2002. Executive function in typical and atypical development. In U. Goswami Ed., Handbook of childhood cognitive development pp. 445469. Oxford, UK: Blackwell. STEPHEN W. SMITH ET AL. 70

ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER AND ACADEMICS Robert Reid ABSTRACT Attention decit hyperactivity disorder ADHD is the most commonly diagnosed psychological disorder of childhood. Prevalence of ADHD currently is estimated at 5 among school-age children making it a serious concern for educators. One aspect of ADHD, however, that has received comparatively little attention is the academic difculties that are commonly associated with ADHD. This chapter provides an overview of the extent and nature of academic problems of students with ADHD. First, a theoretical perspective on academic decits of students with ADHD drawn from Barkleys 2006 theoretical work is presented. Second, the academic status of students with ADHD is discussed. Third, drawing on longitudinal studies, the academic trajectory of students with ADHD is examined. Fourth, possible causal factors for academic problems and core decit areas of working memory and executive functions are discussed. Next, progress in academic interventions for ADHD is assessed and promising interventions are noted. Finally, some possible directions for future intervention research are provided. Classroom Behavior, Contexts, and Interventions Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, Volume 25, 7194 Copyright r 2012 by Emerald Group Publishing Limited All rights of reproduction in any form reserved ISSN: 0735-004Xdoi:10.1108S0735-004X20120000025007 71

Attention decit hyperactivity disorder ADHD is now the most commonly diagnosed psychological disorder of childhood Barkley, 2006. Worldwide prevalence of ADHD is estimated at 5 among school-age children Polanczyk, de Lima, Horta, Biederman,  Rohde, 2007. ADHD is a chronic disorder and while some symptoms may abate by adolescence, the core problems remain. This typically results in problems in functioning successfully in work, school, or social settings. As children with ADHD enter adulthood, they are more likely than their peers to experience incarceration, contract a sexually transmitted disease, or be involved in multiple car accidents Casey et al., 2008; Cox et al., 2006; Flory, Molina, Pelham, Gnagy,  Smith, 2006. ADHD also poses serious economic concerns. In the United States, the direct cost of ADHD e.g., medical costs, educational services is estimated to be between 42.5 and 52.5 billion dollars per year Pelham, Foster,  Robb, 2007. Indirect costs e.g., lost work time by family members are difcult to quantify but are likely even larger. Thus, effective treatment for students with ADHD should be a pressing societal concern. ADHD is a disorder that has received a tremendous amount of attention in our society Reid  Johnson, 2011. ADHD is regularly featured in the media and is the subject of thousands of academic papers in the United States alone. A great deal of the attention paid to ADHD focuses on problem behaviors associated with ADHD e.g., overactivity, noncompliance, aggression and treatment of these problem behaviors e.g., medication. One aspect of ADHD, however, that has received comparatively little attention is the academic difculties that are commonly associated with ADHD. This is unfortunate, because academic underachievement has serious consequences. Students who fail to progress academically may fail to graduate, are more likely to drop out of school, and are less likely to access postsecondary education US Department of Education DOE, 2005. As a result, over 2 million students may be at risk for economic and social disadvantage because they lack the prociency in science, technology, math, reading, and writing that is required for employment in well-paying jobs DOE, 2005. The purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview of the extent and nature of academic problems of students with ADHD. First, a theoretical perspective on academic decits of students with ADHD is presented. Second, the academic status of students with ADHD is discussed. Third, the academic trajectory of students with ADHD is examined. Fourth, possible causal factors for academic problems and core decit areas are discussed. Next, progress in academic interventions for ADHD is assessed. Finally, some possible directions for future research are provided. Note that a ROBERT REID 72

comprehensive treatment of these topics is beyond the scope of this paper. When possible, the reader will be referred to sources that provide additional information on the topics covered. THEORETICAL EXPLANATIONS There is no universally accepted theory of ADHD, and most explanatory theories have little utility for understanding academic problems or intervention development. At present, probably the most useful theoretical framework for understanding academic decits is Barkleys theory 2006. In this theory, ADHD is seen as the result of a decit in self-regulation. Difculty with behavioral inhibition is the primary problem. Children with ADHD are unable to inhibit their initial reaction to a situation. Their initial reaction comes so quickly and automatically that it overwhelms executive functions EFs that would normally help to guide behavior. Children with ADHD also fail to monitor situations, assess whether an action is appropriate to the situation, act planfully, or consider consequences of their actions. This results in impulsive behavior. In Barkleys theory ADHD is not the result of a lack of skills or knowledge. Instead, ADHD is a problem deploying skills or knowledge appropriately Barkley, 2006. Barkleys theory focuses on four processes that are critical to self-regulation of behavior: a nonverbal working memory WM, which includes selfawareness, sense of time, retrospective function hindsight, and prospective function foresight; b internalization of speech, which includes selfquestioning and problem solving; c self-regulation of affectmotivation arousal, which includes objectivity; and d reconstitution planning, which includes analysis of behavior, and planning. Nonverbal WM Nonverbal WM refers to our ability to keep information in mind that can be used to control our response to various stimuli. It is our ability to make use of our memories or skills appropriately in a given situation. For example, we are able to call up what we have learned from previous experience when we encounter a similar situation at a later time. Nonverbal WM incorporates past experiences and uses our memory of those experiences to help us regulate our actions. It gives us the ability to imitate complex sequences of behavior, or to learn a skill by observing it practiced by someone else. Attention Decit Hyperactivity Disorder and Academics 73

Nonverbal WM also includes the concepts of hindsight  the ability to look back at an experience and reect on it, and forethought  the ability to consider the future and what actions should be taken to accomplish a particular goal, or to consider the future consequences of actions. The ability to remember a sequence of events also provides a sense of time and allows us to control our behavior relative to time i.e., time management. Internalization of Speech Internalization of speech refers to the use of language to mediate behavior. This refers to situations in which an individual uses self-talk also referred to as self-speech or private speech to help handle situations or deal with problems. Self-talk helps individuals deal with problems by literally talking themselves through a situation. For the most part, self-talk is internal after about age 10, though in some instances it becomes externalized and individuals actually orally describe whatever is happening and then verbally reect on how to respond to the situation. There are a number of types of self-talk, such as self-questioning e.g., Whats the formula for solving this problem?, rule-governed behavior e.g., I know the teacher doesnt allow chewing gum, so I need to get rid of mine, and moral reasoning e.g., Id feel bad if someone treated me that way, so Im not going to treat my friend like that. Self-Regulation of EmotionMotivationArousal The ability to self-regulate emotions, motivation levels, and general arousal levels in response to the environment is critical. The ability to control an emotional response is an important facet of self-regulation. External events can generate emotional responses that may, in turn, create a physical response. Effective self-regulation entails the ability to rein in those emotions and avoid overreactions. Self-regulation of motivation allows students to maintain their efforts in order to attain a goal. The last component  self-regulation of arousal  is closely related to self-regulation of motivation in that students must also keep themselves alert, oriented, and focused on goal-directed actions. Arousal is directly related to students ability to persist at a task. Both motivation and arousal are related to drive, willpower, determination, and sticking to it, all of which tend to be difcult for individuals with ADHD. ROBERT REID 74

Reconstitution Reconstitution refers to students ability to analyze behaviors, either their own or others, and then synthesize those behaviors into new behaviors that would enable them to function effectively in different situations or perform complex tasks. Planning, strategic behavior, and exible problem solving are key elements of reconstitution. Reconstitution also requires that students have the ability to mentally visualize the possible consequences of a new combination of behaviors or to see themselves in a new situation. In sum, reconstitution involves the planful strategic ordering of behaviors to reach a specic goal. Unfortunately, children with ADHD will seldom, if ever, engage in this type of behavior independently. ACADEMIC STATUS Academic decits are commonplace among students with ADHD. Academic decits are evident early and tend to persist throughout students school experience Breslau et al., 2009; Gale ra, Melchior, Chastang, Bouvard,  Fombonne, 2009. The decits are often pronounced. Compared to controls, students with ADHD score signicantly lower on standardized tests in reading, math, and spelling Frazier, Youngstrom, Glutting,  Watkins, 2007. Effect sizes Cohens d were .73 for reading, .67 for math, and .55 for spelling. Thus on average, achievement for students with ADHD is around 2530 lower than that of controls. Problems commonly associated with academic difculties are also common among students with ADHD. For example, students with ADHD are signicantly more likely to be retained in a grade, drop out of school, and fail a high school prociency test Barkley, 2006; Frazier et al., 2007. Students with ADHD also are much more likely to receive special education services than their peers; between 40 and 50 of students with ADHD are identied under IDEA e.g., Barkley, 2006; Reid, Maag, Vasa,  Wright, 1994. They are primarily identied under the categories of learning disabilities LD 49, behavioral disorders BD 13.8, and other health impaired OHI 17.7; Schnoes, Reid, Wagner,  Marder, 2006. A smaller group of students with ADHD are served under the categories of intellectual disability Abikoff, 2002 and speech language impairment Schnoes et al., 2006. Students with ADHD also make up a considerable proportion of students with disabilities. A national survey Schnoes et al., 2006 found that among school-age students with Attention Decit Hyperactivity Disorder and Academics 75

disabilities, the percentages of special education students who were also identied as having ADHD were 65.8 for OHI, 57.9 for BD, and 20.6 for LD. Thus, in two categories of disability, the majority of students with disabilities also had ADHD. This has signicant ramications for educators because the presence of ADHD in conjunction with a disability tends to exacerbate educational problems. For example, students with LD and ADHD perform signicantly lower in reading than those with LD alone e.g., Wilcutt et al., 2007. The correlation between ADHD and achievement problems is extremely robust and has been reported both in the United States and in large-scale international studies e.g., Ek, Westerlund, Holmberg,  Fernell, 2011; Gale ra et al., 2009. Note, however, that the fact that students with ADHD are below controls on average does not mean that students with ADHD as a class are low achievers. In fact, the range of achievement scores among students with ADHD closely parallels that of their peers e.g., Reid et al., 1994. ACADEMIC TRAJECTORY Cross-sectional and correlational studies have documented academic decits among students with ADHD and that ADHD-related problems, most notably attention-related problems, are a risk factor for later academic achievement problems. However, they do not inform us on the academic trajectory of students with ADHD. That is: Do students with ADHD progress at the same rate as their peers? This is a difcult question to address both because of the difculty of collecting longitudinal data and because of problems avoiding potential confounds e.g., referral bias, clinical samples. Currently, there appears to be only one study in which researchers collected longitudinal data on achievement of students with ADHD who were identied by DSM criteria from community-based samples as opposed to clinically referred samples and used standardized tests for academic assessment as opposed to measures such as teacher ratings or grades. Bussing et al. 2010 reported data on a cohort of 111 students with ADHD and a matched comparison group. Standardized achievement test data were collected yearly from grade 3 to grade 10, which spans most school years. After controlling for gender, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status, the researchers found  as expected  that the achievement level of the students with ADHD was signicantly below that of the comparison group. However, when special education status was controlled, there were ROBERT REID 76

no longer signicant differences in achievement across the ADHD and comparison groups. Students with ADHD but without comorbid disabilities did not differ from the comparison group or the average of the district as a whole. This suggests that the presence of a disability is a driving factor in the achievement problems of students with ADHD. The researchers also examined the rate of increase in academic performance i.e., slope across 3rd to 10th grades. They found that the slopes for the ADHD group both with and without disabilities and comparison groups were not signicantly different. Thus, although the mean achievement level for students with ADHD was lower than comparisons, there was no difference in the rate of academic progress. Interestingly, the study also compared gifted students with ADHD and a gifted comparison group and found no differences between means and rate of progress. These results are somewhat encouraging in suggesting that students with ADHD are not falling farther behind academically over time. Bussings results are also consistent with the Frazier et al. 2007 meta-analysis that found no age effects for achievement, suggesting that both students with and without ADHD progressed at similar rates. CAUSAL FACTORS Many possible explanations for academic decits have been proposed. The strong association between LD and ADHD no doubt accounts for some of the decits because the incidence of LD is high among students with ADHD Cantwell  Baker, 1991. It is also possible that ADHD itself does not interfere with the ability to learn, but instead affects the availability for learning Silver, 1990, p. 396; that is, students with ADHD miss out on instruction due to frequent behavior and emotional problems. The high incidence of language impairments, which affects students ability to quickly and efciently process verbal information, could also negatively affect academic outcomes Schnoes et al., 2006. Another factor that could affect academic performance is overall intellectual ability. In a meta-analysis of 123 studies of intellectual ability of individuals with ADHD, Frazier, Demaree, and Youngstrom, 2004 found that the full-scale IQ scores of individual with ADHD were signicantly lower d  .61 than controls. This result would suggest that academic achievement also would be signicantly lower than controls. Note, however, that although average IQ score levels are signicantly lower, the range of IQ scores mirrors that of the individuals without ADHD. Attention Decit Hyperactivity Disorder and Academics 77

Achievement discrepancies appear to be related to inattentive features of ADHD. Several correlational studies have found that teachers ratings of attention problems are predictive of future academic problems, and that students diagnosed with the predominantly inattentive subtype of ADHD achieve lower reading, spelling, and mathematics scores over time than children with other ADHD subtypes and those without ADHD Breslau et al., 2009; Massetti et al., 2008; Rabiner  Coie, 2000. This is true even when IQ and the presence of comorbid behavior problems are controlled. Inattention may interfere with students ability to concentrate, maintain effort, and reect before acting, and thus adversely affect learning Breslau et al., 2009; Currie  Stabile, 2006. Causal links between ADHD and achievement difculties, however, must be viewed with a modicum of caution. Although the correlation is well established, causation is less clear. It is possible that the relationship between ADHD and academic difculties is due, at least in part, to the fact that school-related problems are required for a diagnosis of ADHD. Thus, students with serious academic difculties may be more likely to be referred and diagnosed as having ADHD Loe  Feldman, 2007. Causal ow is another concern. It is possible that academic difculties lead to attention problems. Breslau et al. 2009 suggested that students with ADHD y may cease to attend to academic work because they cannot learn the academic skills rather than failing to learn because they are inattentive p. 407. Core Decit Areas That Affect Academics Decits in WM and EFs are well documented among students with ADHD e.g., Martinussen, Hayden, Hogg-Johnson,  Tannock, 2005. This is signicant because both WM and EF are highly correlated with academic outcomes in both the general population and in students with ADHD Alloway, Gathercole,  Elliott, 2010; Alloway, Gathercole, Kirkwood,  Elliott, 2009; Biederman et al., 2000; Clark, Prior,  Kinsella, 2002; Meltzer, 2007. In this section, the effects of WM and EF decits on academics are discussed. Working Memory WM refers to y a limited capacity system allowing the temporary storage and manipulation of information necessary for such complex cognitive tasks as comprehension, learning, and reasoning Baddeley, 2000, p. 418. The ROBERT REID 78

information can be either verbal e.g., directions for a task or visuospatial e.g., the route from home to work. WM serves as a mental workspace where limited amounts of information can be temporarily stored for use e.g., to perform mental arithmetic; Alloway, 2006. New information in WM e.g., teachers directions for a task is maintained only for a short time and once lost cannot be retrieved. WM is not identical to short-term memory. The distinction is that WM involves processing or manipulating information as opposed to merely storing information. WM also allows students to allocate and direct attention e.g., shift between different aspects of a task such as the steps in long division and the product of multiplying two numbers; Engle, 2002. It also allows students to resist distractions Conway, Cowan,  Bunting, 2001. This is especially important with tasks that require prolonged attention. Problems with WM have signicant effects on classroom performance. Students with WM decits have difculty mentally maintaining large amounts of information Gathercole, Lamont,  Alloway, 2006. This affects academically important skills such as remembering verbal instructions, reading comprehension, mental computation, and written composition Gathercole et al., 2006; Lorch, Berthiaume, Milich,  van den Broek, 2007. For example, to understand a text passage students must maintain information in WM and establish links between the different ideas or content presented e.g., main ideas and supporting details all while decoding the actual text. If this exceeds WM capacity, information will be lost, and students may be unable to answer even simple questions about a text. Listening comprehension can also pose a problem Lorch et al., 2007. Students with WM problems typically have difculties remembering and following directions because crucial information needed to accomplish the task is often forgotten Gathercole et al., 2006. In these cases, failure to follow directions may appear to be the result of inattention i.e., failure to attend to the directions when in reality it was a WM problem. Even apparently simple tasks can pose serious demands of WM. For example, copying a passage off the board requires students to remember the order of words in the passage, the word to be copied, its spelling, their place in the word while writing it, and how to form the letters of the text Gathercole et al., 2006. Complex tasks that require a sequence of steps e.g., writing an essay can be particularly difcult for students with WM problems because of the demands both on storing and processing information. Tasks that require a student to rapidly shift focus between multiple aspects of the task can be extremely difcult. For example, writing an essay requires Attention Decit Hyperactivity Disorder and Academics 79

attending to mechanics of spelling and grammar, including necessary essay elements e.g., arguments, supporting reasons, and using appropriate vocabulary. Other tasks such as math problem solving place similar demands. Effective instruction must be sensitive to WM demands, because if WM capacity is exceeded little or no learning will occur. There can also be an effect on behavior. WM is correlated with attention Gathercole  Alloway, 2008; Kane et al., 2007, and when demands on WM increase, students with ADHD tend to exhibit increased levels of inattentive behavior Koer, Rapport, Bolden, Sarver,  Raiker, 2009; Rapport et al., 2009. Anxiety also can have an effect on WM Owens, Stevenson, Norgate,  Hadwin, 2008. High levels of anxiety and the task-irrelevant thoughts that accompany it can lead to diminished WM capacity. In essence, high anxiety acts to drain cognitive resources. This in turn reduces students ability to accomplish tasks in an efcient or effective manner. Executive Functions EFs are cognitive processes necessary for complex goal-directed behavior, all of which are necessary for academic success. EFs involve planning, organizing, maintaining effort, and self-monitoring activities Meltzer, 2007. EFs also include metacognitive knowledge regarding strategies and tasks e.g., knowledge of how a strategy can help or that different tasks require different strategies and self-regulatory processes such as selfmonitoring Meltzer, 2007. Students with ADHD have three types of EF problems that affect academic performance: a adopting a planful, strategic approach to academic tasks; b goal-setting; and c persistence or maintaining effort on a task. Lack of a systematic, planful, strategic approach to academic tasks results in erratic performance on tasks and work that appears disorganized or sloppy. Problems with monitoring behaviors and adopting a planful, strategic approach to tasks appear early and can persist into adulthood Roth et al., 2004. Students with ADHD seldom analyze a task to determine the actions needed to accomplish the task; instead they often impulsively begin a task even when they have been instructed to plan before starting e.g., Jacobson  Reid, 2010. They also have difculty effectively combining the actions needed to accomplish a task i.e., Barkleys reconstitution, thus constructing a plan or a strategy may be difcult Siklos  Kerns, 2004. If a plan is developed, students with ADHD may be unaware of any shortcomings or may simply fail to follow the plan they have developed Kliegel, Ropeter,  Mackinlay, 2006. Students with ROBERT REID 80

ADHD may struggle even when an optimal plan is obvious. For example, Kofman, Larson, and Mostofsky 2008 gave students with ADHD a copying task consisting of highand low-point items. Students could have scored the most points simply by copying only the high-point items, but few students with ADHD could independently derive even this simple plan. Problems with strategy use can result in students performing poorly on academic tasks. Students with ADHD are unlikely to spontaneously use strategies. For example, Hamlett, Pellegrini, and Conners 1987 gave students with ADHD a card-matching task. Students were asked to study the location of cards for a few moments and were then tested on their recall. During the time allotted for study, they did not utilize strategies e.g., chunking, verbal rehearsal to help them remember locations. Students with ADHD also tend to embrace strategies that are less effective but easier to use Douglas  Benezra, 1990; Hamlett et al., 1987; ONeill  Douglas, 1991. For example, when asked to remember and summarize a story, rather than using a more effortful but effective approach such as re-reading or taking notes, students with ADHD tended to choose an easier approach  skimming  as their strategy ONeill  Douglas, 1996. Problems with strategy use for students with ADHD become even more pronounced when tasks call for effortful and continued strategic processing ONeill  Douglas, 1996; Tant  Douglas, 1982. For example, when asked to memorize word lists, students with ADHD tended to choose single word repetition as opposed to more effortful but effective strategies such as grouping similar words into sets and repeating the sets. Even when provided with an effective strategy, students with ADHD may fail to employ it consistently Kofman et al., 2008. However, when students with ADHD are provided with support for EF problems e.g., prompted in strategy use, given examples of use, guided practice, provided with explanations of benets of a strategy, they can use strategies effectively, and performance differences between ADHD and control groups can be greatly ameliorated or eliminated Cornoldi, Barbieri, Gaiani,  Zocchi, 1999; Re, Caeran,  Cornoldi, 2008. Goal-Setting Students with ADHD may have difculty maintaining a goal in WM or simply be unaware of the goal associated with an academic task e.g., the purpose of reading is to comprehend the text; Barkley, 2006. This is a serious concern because goals help to guide behaviors, provide feedback on progress, and enhance motivation Schunk, 1990. Research suggests Attention Decit Hyperactivity Disorder and Academics 81

that explicit instruction in goal-setting can improve the academic performance of students with ADHD Konrad, Fowler, Walker, Test,  Wood, 2007. However, without specic and appropriate goals in place, students with ADHD may be unable to structure their behavior sufciently to accomplish academic tasks. The lack of goal knowledge may be reected in an aimless literally or seemingly careless approach to a task. Additionally, some students with ADHD may adopt maladaptive performance-avoidance goals in which the goal is to avoid appearing incompetent that can serve to inhibit performance Barron, Evans, Baranik, Serpell,  Buvinger, 2006. Persistence Maintaining effort, especially if a task is repetitive or boring, is often a struggle for students with ADHD Barkley, 2006. Compared to peers without ADHD, they are more likely to fail to persist at a task Milich  Okazaki, 1991. Even a minor difculty may cause a child with ADHD to quit. In part this may be due to difculty with self-regulation of emotion that results from frustration Walcott  Landau, 2004. When students with ADHD experience frustration, they are less likely to engage in mood repair i.e., attempt to overcome feelings of frustration; this in turn makes it more likely that they will fail to persist in a task if they began to feel frustrated Scime  Norvilitis, 2006. Frustration is due in part to a lack of performance monitoring Barkley, 2006. Students with ADHD are often unaware of how well or how poorly they are performing a task because they do not effectively monitor their performance. This can lead to frustration that can decrease persistence. Another problem related to the lack of monitoring is positive illusory bias: the tendency of students with ADHD to rate their performance much higher than is warranted Hoza et al., 2004. This in turn can result in an unrealistic appraisal of performance or a distorted perception of ability. Positive illusory bias may serve a self-protective function Waschbusch, Craig, Pelham,  King, 2007; however, it can be a serious problem in the classroom, because a student who does not understand or recognize that there is a problem is not likely to attempt to address the problem Hoza et al., 2004. Additionally, positive illusory bias may lead to other maladaptive self-protection behaviors such as self-handicapping where a student engages in self-sabotage e.g., playing games on the Internet until 2:00 AM the night before an exam to provide an excuse for poor performance Waschbusch et al., 2007. ROBERT REID 82

IMPROVING ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE Given the well-documented and serious academic decits commonly found in students with ADHD, one would expect that academic interventions for these students would be the focus of intense research. Surprisingly few studies have addressed academic outcomes or interventions and in many of the studies that have reported academic outcome data, academics were not the primary focus Raggi  Chronis, 2007. A recent review found only 41 studies of academic interventions for students with ADHD Trout, Lienemann, Reid,  Epstein, 2007, and in many of these studies the focus was on behavioral interventions and academic achievement was a sidelight. Another serious limitation is that little research has been theoretically grounded Barkley, 2007. As a result, we are not well informed as to how best to improve academic outcomes for students with ADHD Loe  Feldman, 2007. Though our knowledge base is not deep, academics are receiving increased attention and there are some encouraging developments. This section discusses practices that can improve academic performance for students with ADHD. Medication Medication can have an effect on academic performance in the classroom. A number of studies have shown that psychostimulants i.e., methylphenidate, amphetamine compounds can enhance attention, increase productivity, and improve accuracy on academic tasks as measured by curriculum-based measurements for review, see Connor, 2006. However, the long-term effects on academic achievement as measured by standardized tests have been either minimal or nonexistent e.g., MTA Cooperative Group, 1999, 2004. Medication also is not an intervention that a school can control i.e., whether or not a child receives medication. Moreover, it is not a long-term solution as most students receive medication for only a few years e.g., Bussing et al., 2005 and effects of medication tend to decrease signicantly over the course of 34 years Jensen et al., 2007. Accommodations Accommodations refer to alterations in the instructional environment. The purpose of accommodations is to structure the instructional environment Attention Decit Hyperactivity Disorder and Academics 83

in a manner that minimizes the difculties students with ADHD will encounter, and maximizes the chances that they will have an opportunity to benet from instruction. Accommodations have received considerable attention over the last 30 years, and there are a number of simple, practical accommodations that have demonstrated efcacy in improving the amount of work completed and the accuracy of work. Some common recommendations include enhancing the personal relevance of activities, increasing the novelty or level of stimulation of materials, allowing a choice of activities, controlling task difculty level, task length, eliminating distractions, seating arrangements, and instructional grouping for a more complete discussion of these and other accommodations, see Pffner, Barkley,  DuPaul, 2006; Reid  Johnson, 2011. Note however, that accommodations are not synonymous with actual instruction i.e., teaching new skills, concepts, or strategies. Instructional Interventions Instructional interventions refer to situations where students engage in activities designed to increase uency or situations in which students are taught new knowledge or skills. As of yet there are no instructional interventions that could be accurately described as validated for students with ADHD. This is due to the small body of intervention research and because of the lack of replication systematic or otherwise; Trout et al., 2007. There are, however, three instructional interventions that do have some degree of empirical support for use with students with ADHD. Computer-Assisted Instruction Computer-assisted instruction CAI has many features that are well matched to the needs of students with ADHD Pffner et al., 2006: a the pace is set by the learner; b the learner is continuously prompted to make academic responses; and c the learner is provided frequent and often immediate performance feedback. CAI also can highlight essential material e.g., through font choice and color and can use multiple sensory modalities e.g., visual and auditory. Game type formats frequently used in CAI may also be motivating for students with ADHD Mautone, DuPaul,  Jitendra, 2005. Despite the potential, little research has been conducted on CAI for students with ADHD. Much of the early research was poorly designed and did not address academic outcomes Xu, Reid,  Steckelberg, 2002. More recently, the results of well-controlled studies suggest that CAI can have ROBERT REID 84

marked effects on engaged time and reduce time spent off-task; CAI also has positive effects on academic outcomes in terms of increased productivity and accuracy of responses; however, these effects are not as pronounced as those for attention or engaged time Mautone et al., 2005; Ota  DuPaul, 2002; Rabiner, Murray, Skinner,  Malone, 2010. CAI has several practical advantages for teachers who must work with large classes Mautone et al., 2005. CAI can provide structured opportunities for students to practice a skill without requiring extensive teacher supervision. Additionally, software can be adjusted to match each students instructional level, and some programs allow for monitoring students progress and making appropriate instructional-level adjustments when appropriate. However, there are signicant limitations to CAI. Currently, CAI largely consists of drill and practice programs designed to increase uency on a task that has already been taught; its utility for teaching new skills to students with ADHD has not been demonstrated. Further, the range of CAI is limited in terms of coverage of the curriculum. For example, there are many programs for practicing math facts, but there are many fewer programs in other areas such as social studies or science. In sum, CAI can be a useful adjunct but is unlikely to be an instructional mainstay. Peer Tutoring Peer tutoring is an intervention that is effective for a wide range of students Stenhoff  Lignugaris-Kraft, 2007. It provides students with opportunities for extra instruction, practice, repetition, or clarication to help solidify knowledge andor develop uency. Peer tutoring is a good match for students with ADHD DuPaul  Stoner, 2003 because it combines a ongoing one-to-one peer attention, b frequent active responding with highly structured and individualized academic content that is presented at a students pace, c frequent prompting to attend to task, d immediate performance feedback, and e no wait time. For students with ADHD, peer tutoring can increase the rate of academic responding and attention to task, while decreasing noncompliance and inappropriate motor activity e.g., dgeting or leaving their seat; DuPaul, Ervin, Hook,  McGoey, 1998; DuPaul  Henningson, 1993. Peer tutoring may also benet the teacher by decreasing the need to monitor for problem behavior during peer tutoring time, which allows for time to be spent in oneto-one instruction or small group instruction with other students. Peer tutoring is appropriate for both general education and special education classrooms. This is an important consideration because most students with Attention Decit Hyperactivity Disorder and Academics 85

ADHD spend the majority of their school time in the general education classroom Schnoes et al., 2006. However, as was the case with CAI, peer tutoring is primarily useful for increasing uency, not in teaching new skills or knowledge. Strategy Instruction One straightforward approach to the lack of a planful strategic approach to academic tasks among students with ADHD is to simply teach students how to use strategies to better organize their behavior. There are several reasons why this approach holds promise. First, strategy instruction is theory based. It addresses one of the core problems  reconstitution  that is central to academic problems. Second, strategy instruction procedures directly address the core areas of WM and EF decits Reid  Lienemann, 2006a. For example, strategy instruction incorporates scaffolding and teaching the strategy to a high degree of mastery to support WM. It also includes support for EF decits through explicit planning, goal-setting, and metacognitive strategy information, and incorporates self-regulation procedures that have been shown to be effective with students with ADHD Reid, Trout,  Schartz, 2005. Finally, there is considerable overlap between ADHD and LD, and students with ADHD share many common characteristics with students with LD e.g., difculty focusing attention, problems with persistence. The fact that strategy instruction has been demonstrated to be effective with students with LD Swanson  Sachse-Lee, 2000 suggests that it might also be effective for students with ADHD. Strategy instruction for students with ADHD is a relatively recent development, but there is a growing body of research suggesting that strategy instruction can dramatically improve the academic performance of students with ADHD in the areas of written expression De La Paz, 2001; Jacobson  Reid, 2010; Lienemann  Reid, 2008; Mason, Kubina,  Taft, 2009; Reid  Lienemann, 2006b and reading comprehension Johnson, Reid,  Mason, 2012; Rogevich  Perin, 2008. The effects of these interventions have been quite robust. In a number of cases, students performance was actually normalized i.e., at or above the average for students in their grade in a relatively short time. This is encouraging because both theory and empirical evidence suggest that these are areas where students with ADHD have signicant difculties. However, all instruction was done in one-to-one settings by trained researchers, so there is still a need to determine whether strategy instruction delivered by general or special education teachers in a classroom or small group setting would be as effective. Maintenance is also a concern, especially for students with ADHD ROBERT REID 86

Reid  Lienemann, 2006a. Although all studies assessed maintenance, the longest period was only 4 weeks, thus long-term maintenance is a concern. FUTURE DIRECTIONS Environment There are two environmental factors that should be considered by future researchers. First, future research should be sensitive to where instruction for students with ADHD will occur. Research shows that even students with ADHD who are served under IDEA will spend the great majority of their school day  around 80  in the general education classroom Schnoes et al., 2006. Thus, the general education teacher will bear the brunt of the responsibility for instruction for students with ADHD. For this reason, researchers must be sensitive to the extent to which interventions are acceptable to the general education teacher in particular. An intervention that is only effective in one-to-one or small group settings likely has limited utility in the general education classroom. Both CAI and peer tutoring have been used successfully with whole classes in general education settings. In contrast, strategy instruction has not yet been tested with students with ADHD in the general education classroom with large group instruction. To date, all strategy instruction research with students with ADHD appears to have been conducted in one-to-one or small group settings and has been done outside the classroom. Instructional grouping e.g., individual work, small group, large group should also be studied further, as research suggests there can be signicant differences in academic productivity and on-task behavior across settings with students with ADHD Hart, Massetti, Fabiano, Pariseau,  Pelham, 2011. Attention to Core Decit Areas Intervention research should focus on instructional techniques that directly address the core decits in WM and EF such as scaffolded instruction, selfmonitoring, and goal-setting. Strategy instruction approaches typically incorporate these techniques Reid  Lienemann, 2006a, which makes the approach well suited for students with ADHD. Additionally, support for EF decits should be studied. The use of coachingtutoring programs, such as Challenging Horizons Evans, Serpell, Schultz,  Pastor, 2007, designed Attention Decit Hyperactivity Disorder and Academics 87

to improve academic survival skills e.g., social behavior in the classroom, note taking, organization, homework of students with ADHD should be explored further. Programs such as these could enhance the effects of instructional interventions. Expanded Focus Because so few interventions have been studied with students with ADHD, there are many potentially fruitful avenues for researchers. One promising instructional intervention for students with ADHD is the use of explicit instructiondirect instruction type approaches DuPaul  Weyandt, 2006. Explicit instruction has been used effectively with many students with learning difculties Slocum, 2004. This approach offers fast-moving instruction, frequent opportunities to respond, low error rates, and immediate feedback and error correction. These features suggest that this approach would be well suited for students with ADHD as they are sensitive to WM problems. Interventions to maintain or increase the academic engagement of students with ADHD during whole class activities should also be a high priority. Much instruction will take place in the general education classroom in whole class settings and the amount will increase as students progress through school. One potentially promising technique is the use of high response formats  such as response cards Gardiner, Heward,  Grossi, 1994. High response formats can increase the rate of academic responding and also increase time on-task and test grades Randolf, 2007. This could in turn improve the engaged time of students with ADHD. The content areas addressed by intervention research to date are extremely limited i.e., math computation, reading comprehension, written expression and should be expanded. However, researchers should focus on content areas that pose heavy demands on WM and EF, as these are the areas in which students will likely encounter the most difculty. The area of math problem solving is an obvious area that should be considered. It is the type of task that poses high cognitive demands and requires a planful strategic approach and thus would cause difculties for students with ADHD. Techniques such as Jitendras schema-based approach, which provides students with a strategy to solve problems along with self-regulation strategies e.g., Jitendra et al., 2009, could be useful with students with ADHD. Additionally, this approach has been used successfully in the general education classroom in large group settings. Future researchers should also expand the focus to ROBERT REID 88

encompass factors outside of the classroom. One aspect of ADHD that has received little attention is that there are students with ADHD who are successful academically. Looking at successful students with ADHD could allow researchers to indentify factors that are predictive of success. For example, parent involvement is a strong predictor of academic success but has not been studied with students with ADHD. In summary, the need for additional research in academic interventions for students with ADHD is obvious. While there appears to be increased attention to the academic needs of students with ADHD, the lack of validated approaches is frightening considering the potential loss of human capital. REFERENCES Abikoff, H. 2002. Matching patients to treatments. In P. Jensen  J. Cooper Eds., Attention decit hyperactivity disorder: State of the science, best practices. Kingston, NJ: Civic Research Institute. pp. 15-115-14. Alloway, T. P. 2006. How does working memory work in the classroom? Educational Research and Reviews, 1, 134139. Alloway, T. P., Gathercole, S. E.,  Elliott, J. 2010. Examining the link between working memory behaviour and academic attainment in children with ADHD. Developmental Medicine  Child Neurology, 52, 632636. doi:10.1111j.1469-8749.2009.03603.x Alloway, T. P., Gathercole, S. E., Kirkwood, H. J.,  Elliott, J. E. 2009. The cognitive and behavioral characteristics of children with low working memory. Child Development, 80, 606621. Baddeley, A. D. 2000. The episodic buffer: A new component of working memory? Trends in Cognitive Science, 4, 417423. Barkley, R. A. 2006. Attention-decit hyperactivity disorder: A handbook for diagnosis and treatment 3rd ed. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Barkley, R. A. 2007. School interventions for attention decit hyperactivity disorder: Where to from here? School Psychology Review, 36, 279286. Barron, K. E., Evans, S. W., Baranik, L. E., Serpell, Z. N.,  Buvinger, E. 2006. Achievement goals of students with ADHD. Learning Disability Quarterly, 29, 137158. Biederman, J., Monuteaux, M. C., Doyle, A. E., Seidman, L. J., Wilens, T. E., Ferrero,  Burgess. 2000. Strategy application disorder: The role of the frontal lobes in human multitasking. Psychological Research, 63, 279288. Breslau, J., Miller, E., Breslau, N., Bohnert, K., Lucia, V.,  Schweitzer, J. 2009. The impact of early behavior disturbances on academic achievement in high school. Pediatrics, 123, 14721476. Bussing, R., Porter, P., Zima, B., Mason, D., Garvan, C.,  Reid, R. 2010. Academic outcome trajectories of students with ADHD: Does special status education matter? Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders. Advance online publication. doi:10.1177 1063426610388180 Attention Decit Hyperactivity Disorder and Academics 89

Bussing, R., Zima, B., Mason, D., Hou, W., Garvan, C.,  Forness, S. 2005. Use and persistence of pharmacotherapy for elementary school students with attention-decit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 15, 7887. Cantwell, D.,  Baker, L. 1991. Association between attention decit-hyperactivity disorder and learning disorders. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 24, 8895. Casey, K. J., Hagaman, J. L., Trout, A. L., Reid, R., Chmelka, M. B., Thompson,  Daly. 2008. Children with ADHD in residential care. Journal of Child and Family Studies, 17, 909927. Clark, C., Prior, M.,  Kinsella, G. 2002. The relationship between executive function abilities, adaptive behaviour, and academic achievement in children with externalizing behaviour problems. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 43, 785796. Connor, D. F. 2006. Stimulants. In R. A. Barkley Ed., Attention-decit hyperactivity disorder: A handbook for diagnosis and treatment 3rd ed., pp. 608647. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Conway, A., Cowan, N.,  Bunting, M. 2001. The cocktail party revisited: The importance of working memory capacity. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 8, 331335. Cornoldi, C., Barbieri, A., Gaiani, C.,  Zocchi, S. 1999. Strategic memory decits in attention decit disorders with hyperactivity participants: The role of executive processes. Developmental Neuropsychology, 15, 5371. Cox, D., Merkel, R., Moore, M., Thorndike, F., Muller, C.,  Kovatchev, B. 2006. Relative benets of stimulant therapy with OROS methylphenidate versus mixed amphetamine salts extended release in improving the driving performance of adolescent drivers with attention-decithyperactivity disorder. Pediatrics, 118, 704710. Currie, J.,  Stabile, M. 2006. Child mental health and human capital accumulation: The case of ADHD. Journal of Health Economics, 25, 10941118. De La Paz, S. 2001. Teaching writing to students with attention decit disorders and specic language impairment. The Journal of Educational Research, 95, 3747. Douglas, V.,  Benezra, E. 1990. Supraspan verbal memory in attention decit disorder with hyperactivity normal and reading disabled boys. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 6, 617638. DuPaul, G. J., Ervin, R. A., Hook, C. L.,  McGoey, K. E. 1998. Peer tutoring for children with attention decit hyperactivity disorder: Effects on classroom behavior and academic performance. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 31, 579592. DuPaul, G. J.,  Henningson, P. A. 1993. Peer tutoring effects on the classroom performance of children with attention decit hyperactivity disorder. School Psychology Review, 22, 134143. DuPaul, G. J.,  Stoner, G. 2003. ADHD in the schools: Assessment and intervention strategies 2nd ed. New York, NY: Guilford Press. DuPaul, G. J.,  Weyandt, L. 2006. School-based interventions for children with attention decit hyperactivity disorder: Effects on academic, social, and behavioural functioning. International Journal of Disability, Development and Education, 53, 161176. Ek, U., Westerlund, J., Holmberg, K.,  Fernell, E. 2011. Academic problems of adolescents with ADHD and other behavioural learning problems  A population-based longitudinal study. Acta Paediatrica, 100, 402406. Engle, R. W. 2002. Working memory capacity as executive attention. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 11, 1923. ROBERT REID 90

Evans, S. W., Serpell, Z. N., Schultz, B. K.,  Pastor, D. A. 2007. Cumulative benets of secondary school based treatment of students with attention decit hyperactivity disorder. School Psychology Review, 36, 256273. Flory, K., Molina, B., Pelham, W., Gnagy, E.,  Smith, B. 2006. Childhood ADHD predicts risky sexual behavior in young adulthood. Journal of Clinical Child  Psychology, 35, 571577. Frazier, T., Demaree, H.,  Youngstrom, E. 2004. Meta-analysis of intellectual and neuropsychological test performance in attention-decithyperactivity disorder. Neuropsychology, 18, 543555. Frazier, T. W., Youngstrom, E. A., Glutting, J. J.,  Watkins, M. W. 2007. ADHD and achievement: Meta-analysis of the child, adolescent, and adult literatures and a concomitant study with college students. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 40, 4965. Gale ra, C., Melchior, M., Chastang, J., Bouvard, M.,  Fombonne, E. 2009. Childhood and adolescent hyperactivity-inattention symptoms and academic achievement 8 years later: The GAZEL youth study. Psychological Medicine, 39, 18951906. Gardiner, R., Heward, W.,  Grossi, T. 1994. Effects of response cards on student participation and academic achievement: A systematic replication with inner-city students during whole class science instruction. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 27, 6371. Gathercole, S. E.,  Alloway, T. P. 2008. Working memory and learning: A practical guide for teachers. London, UK: Sage. Gathercole, S. E., Lamont, E.,  Alloway, T. P. 2006. Working memory in the classroom. In S. Pickering Ed., Working memory and education pp. 219240. Oxford, UK: Elsevier Press. Hamlett, K. W., Pellegrini, D. S.,  Conners, C. K. 1987. An investigation of executive processes in the problem-solving of attention decit disorder-hyperactive children. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 12, 227240. Hart, K., Massetti, G., Fabiano, G., Pariseau, M.,  Pelham, W. 2011. Impact of group size on classroom on-task behavior and work productivity in children with ADHD. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disabilities, 19, 5564. Hoza, B., Gerdes, A., Hinshaw, S., Arnold, L. E., Pelham, W. E., Jr., Molina,  Wigal. 2004. Self-perceptions of competence in children with ADHD and comparison children. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 382391. Jacobson, L.,  Reid, R. 2010. Improving the persuasive essay writing of high school students with ADHD. Exceptional Children, 76, 157174. Jensen, P. S., Arnold, L. E., Swanson, J. M., Vitiello, B., Abikoff, H. B., Greenhill, L. L., y Hur, K. 2007. 3-year follow-up of the NIMH MTA study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46, 9891002. Jitendra, A., Star, J., Starosta, K., Leh, J., Sood, S., Caskie, G., y Mack, T. 2009. Improving seventh grade students learning of ratio and proportion: The role of schema-based instruction. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 34, 250264. Johnson, J., Reid, R.,  Mason, L. 2012. Improving the reading recall of high school students with ADHD. Remedial and Special Education, 33, 258268. Kane, M. J., Brown, L. H., McVay, J. C., Silvia, P. J., Myin-Germeys, I.,  Kwapil, T. R. 2007. For whom the mind wanders, and when: An experience-sampling study of working memory and executive control in daily life. Psychological Science, 18, 614621. Attention Decit Hyperactivity Disorder and Academics 91 .

Kliegel, M., Ropeter, A.,  Mackinlay, R. 2006. Complex prospective memory in children with ADHD. Child Neuropsychology, 12, 407419. Koer, M., Rapport, M., Bolden, J., Sarver, D.,  Raiker, J. 2009. ADHD and working memory: The impact of central executive decits and exceeding storagerehearsal capacity on observed inattentive behavior. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 38, 149161. Kofman, O., Larson, J. G.,  Mostofsky, S. H. 2008. A novel task for examining strategic planning: Evidence for impairment in children with ADHD. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 30, 261271. Konrad, M., Fowler, C. H., Walker, A. R., Test, D. W.,  Wood, W. M. 2007. Effects of selfdetermination interventions on the academic skills of students with learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities Quarterly, 30, 89113. Lienemann, T. O.,  Reid, R. 2008. Using self-regulated strategy development to improve expository writing with students with attention decit hyperactivity disorder. Exceptional Children, 74, 471486. Loe, I.,  Feldman, H. 2007. Academic and educational outcomes of children with ADHD. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 32, 643654. Lorch, E. P., Berthiaume, K. S., Milich, R.,  van den Broek, P. 2007. Story comprehension impairments in children with attention-decithyperactivity disorder. In K. Cain  J. Oakhill Eds., Childrens comprehension problems in oral and written language: A cognitive perspective pp. 128156. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Martinussen, R., Hayden, J., Hogg-Johnson, S.,  Tannock, R. 2005. A meta-analysis of working memory impairments in children with attention-decithyperactivity disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child  Adolescent Psychiatry, 44, 377384. Mason, L. H., Kubina, R.,  Taft, R. 2009. Developing quick writing skills of middle school students with disabilities. Journal of Special Education. Advanced online publication. doi:10.11770022466909350780 Massetti, G. M., Lahey, B. B., Pelham, W. E., Loney, J., Ehrhardt, A., Lee,  Kipp. 2008. Academic achievement over 8 years among children who met modied criteria for attention-decithyperactivity disorder at 46 years of age. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 36, 399410. doi:10.1007s10802-007-9186-4 Mautone, J., DuPaul, G.,  Jitendra, A. 2005. The effects of computer-assisted instruction on the mathematics performance and classroom behavior of children with ADHD. Journal of Attention Disorders, 9, 301312. Meltzer, L. 2007. Executive function difculties and learning disabilities: Understandings and misunderstandings. In L. Meltzer Ed., Executive function in education: From theory to practice pp. 77105. New York, NY: Guilford. Milich, R.,  Okazaki, M. 1991. An examination of learned helplessness among attention-decit hyperactivity disordered boys. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 19, 607623. MTA Cooperative Group. 1999. A 14-month randomized clinical trial of treatment strategies for attention-decithyperactivity disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 10731086. MTA Cooperative Group. 2004. National Institute of Mental Health Multimodal Treatment Study of ADHD follow-up: 24-month outcomes of treatment strategies for attentiondecithyperactivity disorder. Pediatrics, 113, 754761. ROBERT REID 92

ONeill, M. E.,  Douglas, V. I. 1991. Study strategies and story recall in attention-decit disorder and reading disability. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 19, 671692. ONeill, M. E.,  Douglas, V. I. 1996. Rehearsal strategies and recall performance in boys with and without attention decit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 21, 7388. Ota, K. R.,  DuPaul, G. J. 2002. Task performance and mathematics performance in children with attention-decit hyperactivity disorder: Effects of supplemental computer instruction. School Psychology Quarterly, 17, 242257. Owens, M., Stevenson, J., Norgate, R.,  Hadwin, J. 2008. Processing efciency theory in children: Working memory as a mediator between trait anxiety and academic performance. Anxiety, Stress,  Coping, 21, 417430. Pelham, W., Foster, E.,  Robb, J. 2007. The economic impact of attention-decit hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents. Ambulatory Pediatrics, 71, 121131. Pffner, L. J., Barkley, R. A.,  DuPaul, G. J. 2006. Treatment of ADHD in school settings. In R. A. Barkley Ed., Attention decit hyperactivity disorder: A handbook for diagnosis and treatment 3rd ed., pp. 547589. New York, NY: Guilford. Polanczyk, G., de Lima, M., Horta, B., Biederman, J.,  Rohde, L. 2007. The worldwide prevalence of ADHD: A systematic review and metaregression analysis. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 942948. Rabiner, D.,  Coie, J. D. 2000. Early attention problems and childrens reading achievement: A longitudinal investigation. The Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. Journal of the American Academy of Child  Adolescent Psychiatry, 39, 859867. doi:10.109700004583-200007000-00014 Rabiner, D., Murray, D., Skinner, A.,  Malone, P. 2010. A randomized trial of two promising computer-based interventions for students with attention difculties. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 38, 131142. Raggi, V.,  Chronis, A. 2007. Interventions to address the academic impairment of children and adolescents with ADHD. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 9, 85111. Randolf, J. 2007. Meta-analysis of the research on response cards: Effects on test achievement, quiz achievement, participation, and off-task behavior. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 9, 113128. Rapport, M. D., Bolden, J., Koer, M. J., Sarver, D. E., Raiker, J. S.,  Alderson, R. M. 2009. Hyperactivity in boys with attention decithyperactivity disorder ADHD: A ubiquitous core symptom or manifestation of working memory decits? Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 37, 521534. Re, A., Caeran, M.,  Cornoldi, C. 2008. Improving expressive writing skills of children rated for ADHD symptoms. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 41, 535544. Reid, R.,  Johnson, J. 2011. Teachers guide to ADHD. New York, NY: Guilford. Reid, R.,  Lienemann, T. O. 2006a. Strategy instruction for students with learning disabilities. New York, NY: Guilford. Reid, R.,  Lienemann, T. O. 2006b. Self-regulated strategy development for written expression with students with attention decit hyperactivity disorder. Exceptional Children, 73, 5368. Reid, R., Maag, J. W., Vasa, S. F.,  Wright, G. 1994. Who are the children with ADHD: A school-based survey. Journal of Special Education, 28, 117137. Reid, R., Trout, A. L.,  Schartz, M. 2005. Self-regulation interventions for children with attention-decithyperactivity disorder. Exceptional Children, 71, 361377. Attention Decit Hyperactivity Disorder and Academics 93

Rogevich, M. E.,  Perin, D. 2008. Effects on science summarization of a reading comprehension intervention for adolescents with behavior and attention disorders. Exceptional Children, 742, 135154. Roth, R., Wishart, H., Flashman, L., Riordan, H., Huey, L.,  Saykin, A. 2004. Contribution of organizational strategy to verbal learning and memory in adults with attention-decit hyperactivity disorder. Neuropsychology, 18, 7884. Schnoes, C., Reid, R., Wagner, M.,  Marder, C. 2006. ADHD among students receiving special education services: A national survey. Exceptional Children, 724, 483496. Schunk, D. 1990. Goal setting and self-efcacy during self-regulated learning. Educational Psychologist, 25, 7186. Scime, M.,  Norvilitis, J. M. 2006. Task performance and response to frustration in children with attention decit hyperactivity disorder. Psychology in the Schools, 43, 377386. Siklos, S.,  Kerns, K. A. 2004. Assessing multitasking in children with ADHD using a modied Six Elements Test. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 19, 34361. Silver, L. B. 1990. Attention-decit-hyperactivity disorder: Is it a learning disability or a related disorder? Journal of Learning Disabilities, 23, 394397. Slocum, T. A. 2004. Direct instruction: The big ideas. In D. J. Moran  R. W. Mallott Eds., Evidence-based educational methods pp. 8194. San Diego, CA: US Press. Stenhoff, D.,  Lignugaris-Kraft, B. 2007. A review of the effects of peer tutoring on students with mild disabilities in secondary settings. Exceptional Children, 74, 830. Swanson, H. L.,  Sachse-Lee, C. 2000. A meta-analysis of single-subject-design intervention research for students with LD. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 33, 114136. Tant, J. L.,  Douglas, V. I. 1982. Problem solving in hyperactive, normal, and reading disabled boys. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 10, 283306. Trout, A., Lienemann, T., Reid, R.,  Epstein, M. 2007. A review of non-medication interventions to improve academic performance of children and youth with ADHD. Remedial and Special Education, 28, 207226. US Department of Education. 2005. National Assessment of Educational Progress NAEP. Washington, DC: US Department of Education. Walcott, C. M.,  Landau, S. 2004. The relation between disinhibition and emotion regulation in boys with attention decit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 33, 772782. Waschbusch, D. A., Craig, R., Pelham, W. E., Jr.,  King, S. 2007. Self-handicapping prior to academic-oriented tasks in children with attention decithyperactivity disorder ADHD: Medication effects and comparisons with controls. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 35, 275286. Wilcutt, E., Betjemann, R., Pennington, B., Olson, R., DeFries, J.,  Wadsworth, S. 2007. Longitudinal study of reading disability and attention-decithyperactivity disorder: Implications for education. Mind, Brain,  Education, 1, 181192. Xu, C., Reid, R.,  Steckelberg, A. 2002. Technology applications for children with ADHD: Assessing the empirical support. Education  Treatment of Children, 25, 224248. ROBERT REID 94

TEACHER EXPECTATIONS FOR STUDENT PERFORMANCE: LESSONS LEARNED AND IMPLICATIONS FOR RESEARCH AND PRACTICE Kathleen Lynne Lane, Erik W. Carter, Eric Common and Adam Jordan ABSTRACT In this chapter, we begin by exploring the lessons learned from studies of teachers expectations for student behavior, being with early inquiry conducted following the Education for All Handicapped Children Act P.L. 94-142 of 1975. Next, we explore the expanding knowledge base following reauthorization of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act IDEA, 1997, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act IDEIA, 2004, and No Child Left Behind Act NCLB, 2001 as the eld increasingly emphasized inclusive programming and supporting access to the general education curriculum, called for academic excellence for all students, and focused on systems-level perspectives for teaching behavioral expectations. We summarize lessons learned from Classroom Behavior, Contexts, and Interventions Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, Volume 25, 95129 Copyright r 2012 by Emerald Group Publishing Limited All rights of reproduction in any form reserved ISSN: 0735-004Xdoi:10.1108S0735-004X20120000025008 95

these bodies of knowledge, focusing attention on key ndings and existing limitations of the studies conducted to date. We conclude with implications for educational research and practice, with attention to how lessons learned regarding teacher expectations for student performance can a facilitate inclusive programming for students with disabilities, b support school transitions, c inform primary prevention efforts and targeted supports, and d inform teacher preparation programs. In Volume 25 of Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, editors Cook, Tankersley, and Landrum have called for a focus on current issues and trends related to student behavior and classroom management. We echo the importance of this focus, as success or failure in these areas has direct implications for teachers and students alike. In terms of implications for teachers, very few people enter the teaching profession with a goal of working with students with social and behavioral challenges Walker, Ramsey,  Gresham, 2004. Instead, most people enter this profession with a goal of teaching. Their efforts are focused on providing meaningful, engaging, and perhaps even inspiring instructional experiences for their students Lane, Menzies, Bruhn,  Crnobori, 2011. Yet, many teachers quickly realize their ability to prevent the development of learning and behavioral problems as well as respond effectively when such problems do occur impacts their ability to instruct. Even the most well-crafted lesson plan is difcult to deliver if a teacher does not have clear expectations for student performance and the classroom management skills necessary to a support students in meeting these expectations and b maximize engagement in instruction. Teachers condence with classroom management also impacts teacher retention and burnout. Teachers who are or feel less than capable of managing challenging behaviors in the classroom may be more apt to exit the eld relative to teachers who view themselves as capable of responding to such challenges Brouwers  Tomic, 2000. Furthermore, teachers with low levels of condence with respect to behavior management are more likely to use strategies and tactics less positive in nature and are more apt to refer students to other school personnel for assistance Martin, Linfoot,  Stephenson, 1999. The majority of rst-year teachers report needing practical training in managing student behavior before starting their teaching experiences Harris, 1991. For many teachers, time does not shift this perception. KATHLEEN LYNNE LANE ET AL. 96

Even after completing their rst year of teaching, 61 of teachers report a desire for additional knowledge of and skills in classroom management Harris, 1991. To support the development and retention of high-quality teachers, it is important for teachers to secure the knowledge and condence needed to a establish behavioral expectations for students to facilitate the instructional process; b prevent problem behaviors from occurring by supporting students to meet these behavioral expectations using proactive strategies; and c respond efciently, effectively, and respectfully when such behavior problems do occur. This repertoire of skills will enable all teachers to better meet the academic, behavioral, and social needs of an increasingly diverse student body, some of whom come to school with a range of behavior patterns that pose challenges to teachers, administrators, and peers Lane et al., 2011. For students, successfully negotiating teacher and peer interactions is a formidable task. This is particularly true for students with emotional or behavioral disorders EBD, including students with externalizing e.g., noncompliance, aggression, and coercion or internalizing e.g., anxiety, depression, and social withdrawal behavior patterns Kauffman

Brigham, 2009. Certainly many students come to school with the skills and experiences needed to adapt well to the school setting. For example, some students easily navigate interactions with different teachers, come prepared to listen to and follow instructions, seek assistance appropriately when needed, are self-determined in their work, and adeptly resolve emerging problems with peers and teachers Carter, Lane, Pierson,  Stang, 2008; Walker, Irvin, Noell,  Singer, 1992; Wehmeyer  Field, 2007. In essence, such students are able to meet teachers expectations by engaging in a manner that support harmony in the classroom and facilitate the instructional processes. Such facilitative behaviors support teachers goals of meeting rigorous state standards, enabling teachers to spend more time on instruction and less time responding to undesirable behaviors Tomlinson  McTighe, 2005. Other students, including those with EBD, come to school less prepared to meet teachers expectations. Some of these students are simply unaware of existing expectations. Others tend to engage in whatever behavior patterns are necessary to access or avoid reinforcement e.g., attention from teachers or peers, preferred tasks, or sensory experiences; Umbreit, Ferro, Liaupsin,  Lane, 2007. It is essential teachers also possess the knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary to assist students with less than optimal behavior patterns. This maximizes instructional time and learning for all Teacher Expectations for Student Performance 97

students, including those who require additional supports beyond primary prevention Tier 1 in the form of secondary Tier 2 and tertiary Tier 3 supports Lane, Kalberg,  Menzies, 2009. The main goal of teachers is to provide opportunities for all students to experience academic success, including those with disabilities, as delineated in the No Child Left Behind Act NCLB, 2001 and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act IDEIA, 2004. Indeed, this later legislation emphasizes the need for school-wide incentives for positive behavior supports. PURPOSE: A STARTING POINT We contend the starting point for supporting teachers and students alike in achieving academic success is better understanding the expectations teachers hold for student behavior Lane, Pierson, Stang,  Carter, 2010. Better understanding the behaviors teachers view to be critical for school success is important for several reasons. First, this information can inform school-wide intervention efforts by allowing all students to understand key behavioral expectations likely to be reinforced by teachers. Second, information on teacher expectations can be used to support transitions across the K-12 continuum by helping students in a more deliberate manner to understand differences in teachers expectations as they move from preschool to elementary school, elementary school to middle school, and middle to high school Theriot  Dupper, 2010; Witherspoon  Ennett, 2011. Third, information on teacher expectations can also facilitate inclusive programming by teaching students with disabilities to understand and navigate any variations in expectations held by general and special education teachers Hersh  Walker, 1983; Walker  Rankin, 1983. Finally, such information could also be used in teacher preparation programs to ensure pre-service teachers are cognizant of their own expectations for student performance and how their perceptions may diverge from other teachers perceptions and from parent perceptions Lane, Stanton-Chapman, Roorbach,  Phillips, 2007. In this chapter, we begin by exploring the lessons learned from studies of teachers expectations for student behavior, starting with early inquiry conducted following the Education for All Handicapped Children Act P.L. 94-142 1975. Walker and Rankin 1983 stated one major consequence of P.L. 94-142 was to heighten the importance of teaching management skills to general educators, who might not have been fully prepared to support the mainstreaming process. The authors raised important question KATHLEEN LYNNE LANE ET AL. 98

about how best to support students with disabilities to meet general education teachers expectations. Next, we explore the expanding knowledge base following reauthorization of IDEA 1997, IDEIA, 2004, and NCLB 2001 because the eld increasingly emphasized inclusive programming and supporting access to the general education curriculum, called for academic excellence for all students, and focused on systems-level perspectives for teaching behavioral expectations. We summarize lessons learned from these bodies of knowledge, focusing attention on key ndings and existing limitations of the studies conducted to date. We conclude with implications for educational research and practice, with attention to how the lessons learned regarding teacher expectations for student performance can a facilitate inclusive programming for students with disabilities, b support school transitions, c inform primary prevention efforts and targeted supports, and d inform teacher preparation programs. LESSONS LEARNED We conducted systematic electronic searches of psychology and education databases i.e., PsycINFO, Education Resources Information Center ERIC, and Education Full Text to acquire all studies regarding teacher expectations of student behavior for school-age students, including preschoolers. Search terms included all possible combinations and derivatives of the following sets of terms a preschool, grade, elementary, grammar, middle, intermediate, high, secondary, school, age, adolescent, and student; b expectation, perception, assumption, presumption, prediction, anticipation, conception, attitude, and skill; c general education, special education, exceptional learner, exceptional children, and transitional program; and d social, achievement, behavior, classroom, academic, teach, educator, instructor, and schoolteacher. We identied 330 articles via the electronic search. We read each articles title and abstract to determine if the full article should be examined. Two authors independently read 52 articles to determine if they met the following inclusion criteria: a explores teacher expectations of student behavior, performance, or outcomes; b focuses on school-age youth, across the pre-kindergarten through twelfth-grade continuum; c reports ndings of a quantitative, descriptive study; and d published in peerreviewed journals. Fifteen articles met these inclusion criteria. Next, we completed a master list of journals in which two or more identied articles were published. We conducted hand searches of those Teacher Expectations for Student Performance 99

journals beginning in 1997 to identify all articles published following the initial reauthorization of IDEA. We reviewed Exceptional Children, Education and Treatment of Children, Journal of Special Education, and Remedial and Special Education. All post-1997 articles identied in electronic searches were identied in hand searches. Two additional articles were also identied for inclusion through ancestral searches of reference lists provided in articles identied via electronic and hands searches. We identied 17 studies as appropriate for inclusion. Nine studies constituted early inquiry, exploring initial investigations conducted after the passage of P.L. 94-142 but before the IDEA 1997 Table 1. Another eight studies constituted the expanding knowledge base following the reauthorization of IDEA 1997 Table 2. Salient features of each article are summarized in these tables. Specic features include a authors, publication year, and journal outlet; b purpose of the study; c participant characteristics and sample information e.g., number of teachers, setting, and geographic locale; d research design type of study and basic information on analysis and measures used; and e summary of key ndings. In the following sections, we provide a descriptive synthesis of primary lessons from the studies conducted prior to and following the 1997 reauthorization of IDEA. We do not evaluate the core quality indicators of these studies Odom et al., 2005, but instead focus on the general themes of the intended purposes of studies, the sample populations, methodology employed, and information gleaned, with attention to the strengths and limitations of these bodies of knowledge. Early Inquiry: Research on Teacher Expectations from P.L. 94-142 to IDEA 1997 Winetsky 1978 published the rst study of behavior expectations, exploring differences in preschool teachers N  66 and parents N  172 of young children. Participants completed the Educational Activities Index, a 10-item picture inventory depicting choices between two value systems: one emphasizing self-direction and a second emphasizing conformity. Results suggested that teachers  regardless of social class and ethnicity  consistently placed high value on self-directive behavior for preschool children. Parents, however, were less similar in their values of behavioral expectations. Teachers priorities were more consistent with those of white andor middle-class parents, with non-White andor working-class parents placing greater value on conformity. KATHLEEN LYNNE LANE ET AL. 100

Table 1. Studies of Teacher Expectations of Student Behavior: Early Inquiry from P.L. 94-142 to IDEA 1997. Authors Year, Journal Purpose Participant Characteristics and Sample Research Design and Measures Findings Winetsky 1978 Child Development To examine differences in teacher and parent expectations of preschool children as a function of role, social class, and ethnicity. Participants: N  66 teachers, N  172 parents Setting: 6 public childrens centers, 7 public preschools, 8 private preschools, and an adult education class preschool Locale: San Francisco Design: Quantitative, descriptive, and comparative analyses Measure: Educational Activities Index and Personal Background Data Questionnaire Differences identied between behavioral expectations held by teachers and some parents. Teachers were homogenous in the value they placed on selfdirected behaviors and differed only from working class andor non-White parents. Conte and McCoy 1980 Exceptional Children To examine behavioral expectations of teachers and social workers in a day treatment program for student with EBD and classroom teachers supporting students with EBD in schools in the district. Participants: N  5 day treatment teachers, N  6 day treatment social workers, N  7 District teachers Setting: Day treatment and district classrooms Locale: Not specied Design: Quantitative, descriptive, and comparative analyses Measure: 83 behaviors impacting a students ability to function in special education classroom within the district, rated on a vepoint Likert-type scales Results indicate differences in behavioral expectations held by individuals in the day treatment program and district classrooms, with district classroom teachers consistently rating items higher in importance with respect to functioning well in the district classroom. Teachers and social workers in the day treatment program held similar expectations. Walker and Rankin 1983 School Psychology Review To develop and provide initial evidence of reliability and validity of two scales for use in ecological assessments Study 1 Participants: N  50 general, N  22 special education teachers Setting: Grades 16 Study 1 Design: Quantitative, descriptive, test-retest stability, and convergent validity analyses Study 1: Results indicated a high degree of similarity in ratings of adaptive and intolerable behaviors, with lowest rated items more focused on peers

Table 1. Continued  Authors Year, Journal Purpose Participant Characteristics and Sample Research Design and Measures Findings of potential mainstreaming settings examining teacher tolerance levels, expectations, and standards for students social behavior associated with exceptionalities. Locale: Eugene district Measures: SBS Inventory; SBS Checklist; CII social behavior. Individual teachers differed immensely in their tolerance levels and behavioral expectations. Initial evidence of reliability and validity established Study 2 Participants: N  43 general education teachers Setting: Grades 16 Locale: Eugene district Study 2 Design: Quantitative, descriptive and correlational analyses Measure: SBS Inventory; SBS Checklist; direct observations Study 2: Results suggested signicant relation between SBS Instrument scores and seven teacher code category scores Study 3 Participants: N  33 intern teachers, N  38 student teachers, N  53 college students Setting: Teacher preparation program Locale: University of Oregon Study 3 Design: Quantitative, comparative and predictive analyses Measures: SBS Inventory; SBS Checklist Study 3: Results indicated high degree of similarity between the three groups of preservice teachers Study 4 Participants: N  72 Study 1 N  124 Study 3 Study 4 Design: Quantitative, factor structure Measures: SBS Inventory Study 4: Three factors: 1 excellent work habits organized and efcient, 2 self-control responsive to the teacher,

Setting: See above Locale: See above behavior role model for peers, and 3 social skilled and positive with peers Kerr and Zigmond 1986 Education and Treatment of Children To explore and compare standards and expectations for classroom behavior according to general and special education high school teachers. Participants: N  220 general, N  24 special education teacher Setting: Three large urban high schools grades 9 12; two served lower middle-class, racially diverse; one served a lower class, mostly white neighborhood Locale: Not specied Design: Quantitative, descriptive and comparative analyses Measure: SBS Inventory of Teacher Social Behavior Standards and Expectations Results indicated high school general and special educator rated behaviors related to good academic performance, study habits, and classroom deportment as most critical for success. Students interpersonal skills and problems were de-emphasized. General educators held more rigorous expectations than special educators. Walker and Lamon 1987 Journal of Special Education To a determine how Australian and U.S. teacher groups converge and diverge on two of the AIMS assessment instruments the SBS Inventory and Correlates Checklist and b compare responses from Australian general and special education preservice and in-service teacher samples. Phase 1: Four Australian teacher groups Phase 2: Comparative analysis of Australian and U.S. teacher groups Participants: N  179 Australian elementary n  23 special education graduate students, n  57 graduating general education student teachers, n  22 special educators, and n  77 general educators; N  72 U.S. Design: Quantitative, descriptive, and comparative analyses Measure: AIMS: SBS Inventory and SBS Checklist Results indicated similarities and difference between Australian and U.S. teacher groups, with U.S. teachers rating more adaptive items as critical and more maladaptive items as unacceptable. U.S. teachers expectations exceed those of Australian teachers. Australian groups were consistent in behavioral expectations and standards. Differences between novice and practicing Australians were more pronounced than those in U.S. General and special educators

Table 1. Continued  Authors Year, Journal Purpose Participant Characteristics and Sample Research Design and Measures Findings elementary n  22 special, n  50 general Setting: Australia; U.S. Eugene, Oregon District Locale: Australia and the United States were consistent in adaptive items rated critical and maladaptive items rated unacceptable. Special educators had lower demands and greater tolerance. Gersten, Walker, and Darch 1988 Exceptional Children To examine the relation between teachers reports on their tolerance of students in their classrooms with learning and behavioral challenges and observed teaching performance. Participants: N  15 primary grade teachers, all involved with the Follow Through Project Setting: Low-income, rural community Locale: Texas Design: Quantitative, predictive analysis Measures: SBS tolerance maladaptive; SBS resistance; SBS expectations adaptive; perceived technical assistance needs; TEEF Gersten et al., 1979 Results indicated variability in TEEF scores. Correlations indicated teachers with the strongest teaching techniques report they will tolerate less maladaptive behavior and are more apt to resist placement of students with disabilities. The most successful teachers held the highest expectations for classroom behavior and achievement and were more willing to receive assistance. Kauffman, Lloyd, and McGee 1989 Journal of Special Education To extend the knowledge base regarding technical assistance needs by examining a behaviors identied as critical and unacceptable, b views of special and general Participants: N  34 elementary, N  22 secondary teachers, N  5 not specied Setting: Enrolled in an in-service course in behavior management Design: Quantitative, descriptive, and comparative analyses Measure: SBS Inventory; SBS Checklist; brief demographic questionnaire Results indicate teachers are less focused on students peer relationships and more concerned about order in the classroom. Elementary and secondary teachers reported more maladaptive behaviors as

educators, and c examining expectations along the dimensions of demandingness, self-efcacy, and responsibility. Locale: Southwestern Virginia, Northern North Carolina, and eastern West Virginia intolerable than adaptive items as critical. Most were not supportive of technical assistance to help students with disabilities learn critical behaviors, stating they could teach these skills without support. Most were not willing to deal with antisocial behavior even with assistance. General and special educators were similar in the number of items marked critical and unacceptable. Differences evident between groups regarding demandingness level of expectations, responsibility for students behavior, and self-efcacy condence to change behavior. Kauffman, Wong, Lloyd, Hung, and Pullen 1991 Remedial and Special Education To explore the relationship between teachers judgments of risk and specic behavior characteristics Participants: N  54 general education teachers Setting: Large urban school district; enrolled in an in-service course in teaching at-risk students Locale: Virginia Design: Quantitative, descriptive, and comparative analyses Measure: Modied version of the SBS Inventory; demographic questionnaire Results indicated teachers reporting more adaptive behaviors as critical for success and more maladaptive behaviors as unacceptable, were apt to judge the absence of adaptive behavior, and the existence of more maladaptive as placing a student at risk. Teachers differentiated between their ratings of behavioral expectations and those apt to heighten risk. Demandingness

Table 1. Continued  Authors Year, Journal Purpose Participant Characteristics and Sample Research Design and Measures Findings was associated with perceptions of risk. Teachers viewed themselves as more capable of managing high-risk behaviors related to academics and less for social-interpersonal behavior. Fuchs, Fuchs, and Phillips 1994 The Elementary School Journal To examine and describe teachers views of the importance of good academic work habits and behavior. Then, to explore the effects of these beliefs on a teachers responsiveness during instructional planning to individual students performance and b low-performing students achievement. Participants: N  121 general education elementary and middle school teachers, each with at least one student with a learning disability; n  24 highand n  18 low-standard teachers Setting: 32 schools serving grades 16 Locale: 85 teachers in the southeast region of the United States and 36 in upper midwest Design: Quantitative, descriptive, and comparative analyses Measure: Classroom Standard Scale Fuchs, Fuchs, Simmons,  Bishop, 1991, Classroom Planning Scale Fuchs et al., 1991, CRAB, MOST, MAST, RBPC Results suggested teachers who had high classroom standards a indicated they were more responsive to student performance during planning and b effected higher achievement as compared to teachers with lower standards. EBD, Emotional and Behavioral Disorders; SBS Inventory, Social Behavioral Survival SBS Inventory of Teacher Social Behavior Standards and Expectations; SBS Checklist, Social Behavioral Survival SBS Checklist of Correlates of Child Handicapping Conditions; CII, Classroom Integration Inventory; HS, High School; AIMA, Assessment for Integration into Mainstream Settings; TEEF, Teacher Effectiveness Evaluation Form; CRAB, Comprehensive Reading Assessment Battery Fuchs, Fuchs,  Hamlett, 1989; MOST, Math Operations Skills Test; MAST, Math Applications Skills Test Stecker, Fuchs,  Hamlett, 1991; RBPC, Revised Behavior Problem Checklist Quay  Peterson, 1983.

Table 2. Studies of Teacher Expectations of Student Behavior: Expanding the Knowledge Base, Following Reauthorization of IDEA. Authors Year, Journal Purpose Participants Research Design and Measures Findings Lane, Pierson, and Givner 2003 Education and Treatment of Children To identify student behaviors K-12 teachers view as important for success in their classrooms. Participants: N  366 teachers n  304 general educators, n  48 special educators, n  13 other Setting: 8 schools 4 ES, 2 MS, 2 HS Locale: Southern California Design: Quantitative, descriptive, comparative, and predictive analyses Measure: SSRS, demographic information Results indicated assertion was less important than cooperation and self-control. Five skills were critical across K-12, none were assertion. MS teachers scores were most alike. General educators rated assertion and cooperation as more critical than special educators. General and special educators held similar views of self-control. HS special educators rated self-control as less important than HS general educators. Lane, Givner, and Pierson 2004 Journal of Special Education To extend the work of teacher expectations at the elementary level Participants: N  126 teachers n  105 general educators, n  18 special educators, n  3 other Setting: 4 ESs from 2 school districts Locale: Southern California Design: Quantitative, descriptive, comparative, and predictive analyses Measure: SSRS, demographic information Results showed primary and intermediate teachers rated cooperation and self-control equally important, with assertion less important. Seven skills were critical. General and special education teachers placed similar value on selfcontrol and assertion. General educators viewed cooperation more critical compared to special educators. No differences between a novice vs. experienced and b primary, upper, vs. combined grades.

Table 2. Continued  Authors Year, Journal Purpose Participants Research Design and Measures Findings Lane, Pierson, and Givner 2004 Journal of Special Education To extend the work of teacher expectations at the secondary level. Participants: N  240 teachers n  89 MS, n  151 HS Setting: 2 MS and 2 HS Locale: Southern California Design: Quantitative, descriptive, comparative, and predictive analyses Measure: SSRS, demographic information Results indicated teachers held similar views of cooperation and selfcontrol. Most MS teachers rated six skills critical and HS teachers eight, with ve in common. Views of assertion diverged. MS teachers rated greater importance relative to HS teachers, and general educators rated greater importance relative to special educators. No assertion items were critical for any subgroups. HS general educators rated self-control important compared to HS special educators. General, MS, and uncredentialed educators placed a higher value on cooperation. BeebeFrankenberger, Lane, Bocian, Gresham, and MacMillan 2005 Preventing School Failure To examine differences between teacher and parent perceptions of adolescent students social skills. Participants: N  33 students, N  32 parents, N  26 ES teachers, N  27 MS teachers Setting: Participants in a longitudinal study beginning in the primary grades, Design: Quantitative, descriptive, and comparative analyses Measure: SSRS Results indicated four core behavioral expectations across ES and MS teachers. Teachers and parents with adolescents with behavior challenges diverged in expectations. Teachers rated cooperation as more important in class compared to selfcontrol and assertion. Parents emphasized self-control,

followed in to the middle grades Locale: Southern California responsibility, and assertion in the home more than cooperation. Lane, Wehby, and Cooley 2006 Exceptional Children To examine teachers expectations of student behavior in the areas of cooperation, assertion, and selfcontrol as a function of school level elementary, middle, or high, program type general or special education, and school type high or low risk. Participants: N  717 n  210 ES, n  259 MS, n  248 HS Setting: 7 ES, 8 MS, and 4 HS in a large, socioeconomically and culturally diverse district Locale: Middle Tennessee Design: Quantitative, descriptive and comparative analyses Measure: SSRS, demographic information Results indicated all teachers held ve critical skills in common. Teachers placed similar importance on cooperation. Special educators rated cooperation less important compared to general educators. ES and MS teachers placed similar emphasis on self-control, whereas HS general educators rated selfcontrol as less important than HS special educators. Compared to ES and MS teachers, HS teachers rated assertion less important. General and special educators held similar views of assertion. High-risk schools rated assertion and self-control more important than low-risk schools. Lane, StantonChapman, Roorbach, and Phillips 2007 Topics in Early Childhood Special Education To examine the degree to which teachers and parents expectations of preschool-age students behavior align, with attention to the importance of specic skills sets. Participants: N  35 preschool teachers, N  124 parents of preschoolers Setting: 3 private preschools 2 at-risk neighborhoods, 1 rural farming community Locale: Virginia Design: Quantitative, descriptive, and comparative analyses Measure: SSRS, demographic information Results indicated teachers and parents shared similar views of cooperation, yet different views regarding assertion and self-control with parents rating both more important. Most teachers and parents rated three skills as critical. Parents rated ve others as critical.

Table 2. Continued  Authors Year, Journal Purpose Participants Research Design and Measures Findings McMullen, Shippen, and Dangel 2007 Journal of Instructional Psychology To study inclusive MS teachers expectations regarding classroom organization behavior for students with learning disabilities. Participants: N  12 middle school inclusive science and social studies teachers Setting: 2 middle schools Locale: Central Georgia Design: Quantitative and descriptive Measure: Classroom Organization Behavior Survey COBS Results indicate expectations of classroom organizational behaviors may vary as a function of compliance and competence. Lane, Pierson, Stang and Carter 2010 Remedial and Special Education To replicate earlier study of teacher expectations and extend the knowledgebase regarding teacher expectations and school risk. Participants: N  1,303 n  596 ES, n  361 MS, n  346 HS Setting: 29 ES, 12 MS, and 8 HS in 6 ethnically and economically diverse districts Locale: Western state Design: Quantitative, descriptive, comparative, and longitudinal random coefcients analyses Measure: SSRS, demographic information Results indicated four items were critical across all levels. Teachers had similar views of cooperation. Special educators rated cooperation less important than general educators. ES teachers placed more emphasis on self-control than MS and HS teachers. General and special educators held similar views. School risk did not predict assertion, self-control, or cooperation. School level predicted assertion, with ES teachers rating greater importance than MS teachers. ES teachers rated self-control more important than MS and HS teachers. ES, Elementary School; MS, Middle School. HS, High School; SRSS, Social Skills Rating System Gresham  Elliott, 1990.

Subsequent studies focused less on exploring the extent to which teachers and parents aligned in their views, instead focusing on behavioral expectations for students with disabilities. For example, Conte and McCoy 1980 compared the behavioral expectations of teachers N  5 and social workers N  6 in a day treatment program for students with EBD to those of classroom teachers N  7 supporting these students in the district. Results indicated teachers and social workers in the day treatment facility held comparable views regarding the importance of specic behaviors believed to inuence a students success in the district-level classrooms for students with EBD. Yet, there were marked differences in behavioral expectations held by individuals in the day treatment program and district classrooms, with classroom teachers consistently rating items related to functioning well in the district classroom higher in importance. This has important implications for supporting students who are transferring from more to less restrictive settings. It is possible that students who are meeting expectations in the former setting may still lack the requite skills deemed critical for success in the receiving setting. Yet, like many early investigations, this study is limited by a small sample size that restricts generalizability of the ndings. Walker and Rankin 1983 extended this line of inquiry by conducting a series of landmark studies describing the development of two instruments: a the Social Behavioral Survival SBS Inventory of Teachers Social Behavior Standards and Expectations SBS Inventory and b the SBS Checklist of Correlates of Child Handicapping Conditions SBS Checklist, which became the main assessment tools of subsequent inquiry during this early period. The SBS Inventory is a 107-item scale containing three scales. Section I contains 56 items describing adaptive student behavior teacherchild behavior and peer-to-peer social skills and behaviors evaluated on a three-point Likert-type scale ranging from critical, desirable, to unimportant for successful adjustment in the classroom setting, both through facilitating classroom adjustment and achievement as well social competencies. Section II contains 51 items describing maladaptive student behaviors that impede classroom adjustment and negatively impact peer social relationships. These behaviors are also evaluated on a three-point Likert-type scale ranging from unacceptable, tolerated, to accepted. Section III assesses teachers technical assistance needs in supporting students who are either a decient in critically rated items in Section I or b exceeding normative ranges unacceptable on behavioral items in Section II. For items marked critical in Section I, the teacher indicates whether a student lacking this skill must master it prior to integration and whether technical assistance would be Teacher Expectations for Student Performance 111

needed in remediating or adjusting to the behavior following placement in the general education setting. For items marked unacceptable in Section II, the teacher indicates if the student needs to be within normal limits on the behavior before mainstreaming occurs and if technical assistance would be necessary to manage the behavior after the placement occurred. The SBS Checklist is a 24-item scale developed to assess teacher tolerance levels regarding conditions and characteristics associated with disability conditions that are neither social nor behavioral in nature e.g., incontinence, self-help skills, and slow academic progress. Teachers indicated which items would cause them to be resistant to mainstreaming. Both tools were developed for use prior to placing a student receiving special education services in a less restrictive or inclusive environment. The SBS Inventory and SBS Checklist are part of the Assessments for Integration into Mainstream Settings AIMS, a multi-methodmulti-purpose assessment system for use in the decision-making process associated with mainstreaming students with exceptionalities into the least restrictive environments Walker  Lamon, 1987. The AIMS system included ve tools: three teacher ratings of students behaviors and two direct observations codes. The intent of these tools is to a identify potential placement settings in the general education settings, b identify environmental demands and behavioral expectations evident in a given context necessary for entry into and satisfactory adjustment in this new settings, and c use this information to systematically prepare the student to adjust to the new setting by meeting teachers expectations and supporting teachers with specic technical assistance needs in supporting this transition. We focus on the SBS Inventory and SBS Checklist scales as these tools were foundational assessments in subsequent inquiry of teacher expectations. In these initial studies, Walker and Rankin 1983 determined elementary teachers behavior expectation or standards to be quite demanding, narrow in scope, and intense. Furthermore, expectations held by general and special education elementary teachers were highly comparable. The highest rated maladaptive behaviors were low frequency, yet high intensity, behaviors e.g., aggression. The highest rated adaptive behaviors focused on classroom control, general discipline, and compliance with teacher directives. Teachers rated peer-to-peer social skills much lower than behaviors that supported classroom or academic adjustment. However, this was not true in a subsequent study comparing Australian and U.S. elementary teachers behavioral expectations that reported Australian teachers as having more balanced views of the importance of peer-related adjustment Walker  Lamon, 1987. In this international study, U.S. teachers overall appeared to KATHLEEN LYNNE LANE ET AL. 112

be more demanding, rating more adaptive items as critical for success and more maladaptive items as unacceptable relative to their Australian counterparts. Kerr and Zigmond 1986 used a similar methodology to extend this line of inquiry to explore standards and expectations held by secondary general N  220 and special N  24 education teachers. Teachers at three high schools completed the SBS Inventory, with results yielding comparable standards and behavioral expectations to those of elementary teachers delineated by Walker and Rankin 1983. Specically, high school general and special education teachers rated behaviors related to good academic performance, study habits, and classroom deportment as most critical for success. As with elementary teachers in the Walker and Rankin 1983 study, high school students interpersonal skills and problems were de-emphasized by both general and special education teachers. Although general and special educators held similar views on the percentage of behaviors essential for success, general educators were more rigorous in their expectations compared to special educators as evidenced by the percentage of behaviors deemed intolerable. Findings of Walker and Rankin 1983 and Kerr and Zigmond 1986 were conrmed in a subsequent study of elementary N  34 and secondary N  22 teachers enrolled in an in-service course in behavior management in the southeast Kauffman, Lloyd,  McGee, 1989. Results provided additional evidence to suggest teachers focus less on students relationships with their peers and are more concerned about control and order in the classroom. Elementary and secondary teachers reported substantially more maladaptive behaviors intolerable than adaptive items as critical, with a consistent lack of tolerance for aggressive, antisocial behavior patterns. Similarly, uncontrollable aggression, lack of bowel or bladder control, and lack of self-help skills were among the most frequent reasons to resist having a student with a disability in their classrooms. As in previous studies, general and special education teachers were similar in the number of adaptive items marked critical for success and maladaptive items marked as unacceptable; yet, there were considerable individual differences. In a subsequent study, Kauffman, Wong, Lloyd, Hung, and Pullen 1991 examined the relation between teachers judgments of risk and specic behavior characteristics. Fifty-four general educators enrolled in a course focused on teaching at-risk students completed a modied version of the SBS Inventory. In addition to rating adaptive and maladaptive behaviors listed on the scale, teachers also marked which items they believed placed a student at risk if the behavior was demonstrated. The following composite Teacher Expectations for Student Performance 113

scores were computed: risk number of items marked as placing a student at risk, demandingness sum of Section I times rated as critical and Section II items rated as unacceptable, responsibility degree to which the teacher was willing to assume responsibilities for behaviors rated as critical or unacceptable, self-efcacy degree to which they could manage the problem without technical assistance, and job satisfaction sum of ve items from demographic measure. It is interesting to note teachers did not indicate a behavior placed a student at risk for negative outcomes simply because it was contrary to their own standards. Yet, many of the behaviors marked as critical or unacceptable were identied as placing a student at risk. Overall results suggest teachers may perceive risk as a constellation of behaviors reecting difculties in communication, motivation, independence, and responding to failure. Collectively, these challenges impede the instructional process. More specically, data suggest that as demandingness and teachers expectations for success increased, so did their perception that failure to meet expectations places students at risk Kauffman et al., 1991, p. 13. After the earlier works of Walker and Kauffman, studies of teacher expectations began to shift. These studies focused less on determining which adaptive behavioral expectations or standards were critical for success and maladaptive behaviors deemed unacceptable and more on relations between teacher expectations and observed teacher performance Gersten, Walker,  Darch, 1988 and instruction and performance Fuchs, Fuchs,  Phillips, 1994. For example, Gersten and colleagues, in a study of 15 primary grade teachers involved with the Follow Through Project, found teachers with the strongest repertoire of effective teaching techniques a held high expectations for classroom behavior and achievement, b tolerated few maladaptive behaviors, c were more resistant to placement of students with exceptionalities, and d were more open to receiving technical assistance. These ndings were consistent with the rst studies conducted by Walker and Rankin 1983. Fuchs and colleagues 1994, in a study of 121 elementary and middle school teachers, reported teachers with high classroom standards were more responsive to student performance during planning and yielded higher student achievement relative to teachers with lower standards. Lessons learned from these initial inquiries suggest teachers may be more alike than different in their expectations for students with exceptionalities. Yet, subtle differences in expectations are important to recognize as they carry implications for successfully supporting teachers and students when transitions are made into least restrictive settings. Furthermore, it is possible that high teacher expectations may have some unintended consequences that KATHLEEN LYNNE LANE ET AL. 114

do not bode well for students with disabilities. Indeed, they might limit teachers willingness to include students with disabilities into general education settings Gersten et al., 1988. Expanding the Knowledge Base: Research on Teacher Expectations Following IDEA 1997 Research regarding teacher expectations for student behavior fell quiet for several years until shortly after the reauthorization of IDEA 1997, which called for an increased emphasis on promoting access to the core curriculum, and the introduction of NCLB 2001, which called for academic excellence for all learners. Gresham, Dolstra, Lambros, McLaughlin, and Lane 2000 resumed inquiry of teacher expectations of student behavior, focusing on exploring teacher-expected model behavior proles. As part of this presentation at Teacher Educators for Children with Behavior Disorders TECBD, Gresham and colleagues analyzed data from a longitudinal study of upper elementary students grades 46 at risk for school failure. One instrument used in this project was the teacher version of Social Skills Rating System SSRS; Gresham  Elliott, 1990, which is composed of three scales: social skills, problem behavior, and academic competence. The SSRS has excellent psychometric properties at the elementary level total scale coefcient alpha reliability estimates of .94 for boys and .93 for girls. The social skills scale includes a list of 30 social skills, each rated using three-point Likert-type scales to assess the frequency 0  never, 1  sometimes, and 2  very often and importance 0  not important, 1  important, 2  critical for success of each item. The 30 items are equally distributed across three subscales: cooperation e.g., ignores peer distractions when doing classwork, assertion e.g., invites others to join in activities, and self-control e.g., responds appropriately to peer pressure. For this study, importance scores were examined for 424 third-grade students from ve school districts. Results indicated it was important for students to demonstrate competence in the areas of cooperation and selfcontrol to be successful in a teachers classroom. In contrast, assertion skills were not rated as critical for success score of 2 by the majority of teachers. Findings were consistent with early inquiry elementary settings e.g., Kauffman et al., 1989; Walker  Rankin, 1983. Results also indicated teacher expectations shifted between fourth and sixth grade, with sixthgrade teachers rating an increased number of skills as critical for school success. Teacher Expectations for Student Performance 115

This initial study by Gresham et al. 2000 sparked additional inquiry to determine if these patterns were consistent across the K-12 grade span, between general education and special education teachers, and between teachers and parents. Instead of focusing solely on mainstreaming issues, a broader view of the importance of understanding teachers expectations for student behavior was established. For example, in addition to using this information to assist the placement process by supporting teachers and preparing teachers to negotiate the demands of the new setting Hersh  Walker, 1983; Lane, Givner,  Pierson, 2004, special educators emphasized other values during this decade. Knowledge of teacher expectations was also recommended for use by general and special education teachers to a support key transitions across the grade levels e.g., preschool to elementary school, elementary to middle school, and middle to high school; Alspaugh, 1988, b assist all students in negotiating varied expectations of teachers in secondary schools as they transition between classes during the school day, c improve interventions developed by prereferral intervention teams by attending to issue of goal alignment, and d inform primary prevention efforts by providing school-wide instruction in skills rated by the majority of teachers as critical for success Lane et al., 2004, 2010. In essence, it is difcult for any student to meet teachers expectations if those expectations are unclear because the skill is not taught explicitly or reinforced consistently Colvin, 2002. By establishing expectations, providing didactic instruction, and offering contingent reinforcement for meeting stated expectations, it is possible for students to have more school success on multiple dimensions e.g., academic, behavioral, and social performance; Lane et al., 2009; Sugai  Horner, 2002. Moving forward, most inquiry conducted since 2000 involved using a modied version of the SSRS in which teachers rated only the importance of each items. Specically, most survey research conducted during this period involved teachers rating the relative importance of each skill for students to succeed in their classrooms using the same three-point Likert-type scale. Rather than rating individual students as in the Gresham et al. 2000, the focus was on more global rating of teachers expectations for school success with the exception of the Beebe-Frankenberger, Lane, Bocian, Gresham,  MacMillan, 2005, which involved teachers ratings of specic students. Two studies deviated from this approach Beebe-Frankenberger et al., 2005; McMullen, Shippen,  Dangel, 2007, with the latter focusing exclusively on inclusive middle school social studies and science teacher expectations regarding classroom organization behavior for students with learning disabilities. McMullen et al. 2007 used the 12-item Classroom KATHLEEN LYNNE LANE ET AL. 116

Organizational Behaviors Survey. Because information was not provided on the reliability or validity of this scale, this study is not discussed beyond the information provided in Table 2. In the following sections, we highlight ndings related to a comparisons between general and special education teachers across the grade span, b variations in expectations as a function of overall risk evident in the school, and c alignment between teacher and parent expectations for behavior. Comparisons between General and Special Education Teachers Across the Grade Span To extend the initial inquiry conducted by Gresham et al. 2000, Lane, Givner, and Pierson 2004 conducted a study of teacher expectations involving 126 K-6 teachers n  105 general educators, n  18 special educators, n  3 other from 4 elementary schools in southern California. Teacher ratings of cooperation, assertion, and self-control skills indicated teachers viewed cooperation and self-control skills as equally important for success in schools, with seven items rated as critical by the majority of teachers: 1 follows directions, 2 attends to instructions, 3 controls temper in conict situations with peers, 4 controls temper in conict situations with adults, 5 gets along with people who are different, 6 responds appropriately to when hit or pushed, and 7 uses free time in an acceptable way. These behaviors were highly similar to behaviors identied by Walker and Rankin 1983, Gresham et al. 2000, and those specied in Walker et al.s 1992 model behavior prole literature. These ndings suggest teachers emphasize skills that foster the instructional process by encouraging compliance and harmony, minimizing disruption, and emphasizing restraint. Assertion skills were not emphasized as important according to teacher ratings. In terms of group differences, general and special education teachers placed similar value on self-control and assertion skills. Yet, general education teachers viewed cooperation skills as more critical for success compared to special education teachers. There were no differences in expectations held by a novice and experienced teachers or b primary, upper, and combined grade level teachers, suggesting some degree of uniformity in expectations at the elementary level. To extend Kerr and Zigmonds research 1986 on teacher expectations conducted in at the high school level, Lane, Pierson, and Givner 2004 conducted a study of teacher expectations involving 240 secondary teachers n  89 middle, n  151 high school from two middle and two high schools in southern California. Information gleaned from this study conrmed Kerr and Zigmonds ndings, which suggested high school teachers prioritized Teacher Expectations for Student Performance 117

skills in the areas of compliance, rule governed behavior, and listening to teachers instructions. Nearly 20 years later, high school teachers did not emphasize the importance of assertion skills despite the increased attention to fostering self-determined behaviors for secondary-age students Carter, 2010; Carter, Lane, Crnobori, Bruhn,  Oakes, 2011. These same ndings were true of middle school teachers. However, middle school teachers placed greater importance on assertion skills relative to high school teachers, as did general education teachers compared to special education teachers. It is possible middle school teachers stressed assertion skills more than high school teachers to support the transition from elementary school, where students typically have one main teacher to work with during the school day. Students may need to develop assertion skills to ensure their needs are met in this new context. Similarly, general education teachers may view assertion skills as essential for negotiating teacher and peer relationships. Despite these differences, none of the assertion items were rated as critical by the majority of any subgroups. In terms of self-control skills, high school general educators rated self-control skills as signicantly more important compared to high school special education teachers. In terms of cooperation skills, general educators rated these skills as more important compared to special educators, as did teachers without credentials compared to credentialed teachers and middle school teachers compared to high school teachers. In looking at data from these same samples across the entire K-12 continuum, Lane et al. 2003 identied ve skills rated by elementary, middle, and high school teachers as critical for success: 1 follows directions, 2 attends to your instruction, 3 controls temper in conict situations with peers, 4 controls temper in conict situations with adults, and 5 responds appropriately to physical aggression from peers. Items 14 were also identied as common priorities by elementary, middle, and high school teachers in a follow-up study of 717 teachers in Tennessee Lane, Wehby,  Cooley, 2006 and a study of 1,303 teachers in California Lane et al., 2010, suggesting some degree of generalizability. Lane et al. 2003 found middle school teachers were most alike in their expectations for student behaviors as compared to elementary and high school teachers. However, this nding was not conrmed in either of the subsequent studies Lane et al., 2006, 2010. Variations in Expectations as a Function of the Overall Level of Risk Evident in the School Lane et al. 2006 conducted the rst study to determine if teachers expectations vary as a function of school risk. Participants included 717 KATHLEEN LYNNE LANE ET AL. 118

n  210 elementary, n  259 middle, n  248 high general and special education teachers from 7 elementary, 8 middle, and 4 high schools in a large, socioeconomically, and culturally diverse district in Tennessee. For this study, the percentage of students receiving free or reduced-priced lunches served as a proxy for socioeconomic status given poverty is associated with negative school and life outcomes Yates, Egeland,  Sroufe, 2003. Results yielded differences in teachers expectations between teachers working at highand low-risk schools. Specically, where there were no differences with respect to the importance of cooperation skills, teachers at high-risk schools viewed assertion and self-control skills as more important for success compared to teachers at low-risk schools. It may be that assertion skills are more necessary to meet their educational needs given the limited enrichment activities often available in higher-risk schools and higher transiency rates often experienced by students residing in higherpoverty contexts. Or, self-control skills may be placed at a premium at highrisk schools due to higher levels of antisocial behavior e.g., aggression and more limited resources in terms of personnel to assist and supervise students. Yet, this study is limited by the fact only one variable was used to dene risk status. Lane et al. 2010 addressed this limitation by conducting a subsequent study exploring the relation between teachers expectations and the level of risk evident in the school. Participants included 1303 n  596 elementary, n  361 middle, n  346 high general and special education teachers from six ethnically and economically diverse districts in California. The value placed on cooperation skills was similar to that reported by Lane et al. 2006: elementary, middle, and high school teachers placed similar importance on cooperation skills. Special education teachers rated cooperation skills as less important compared to general education teachers. However, ndings regarding the importance of assertion and self-control skills diverged from those reported by Lane et al. 2006; see Table 2. Schoollevel variables examined using longitudinal random coefcients analyses included school level elementary, middle, or high, enrollment, percentage of students receiving free and reduced-price lunch, and percentage of school mobility, with the latter two variables serving as a proxy for socioeconomic status Walker, Block-Pedego, Todis,  Severson, 1991. Contrary to the initial hypothesis, level of school risk did not predict the importance scores for cooperation, assertion, and self-control skills. Additional inquiry is needed to further elucidate the relation between teachers expectations of behavior and the overall level of risk in a school. Findings from Lane et al. 2010 suggest teachers are consistent in their expectations for behavior Teacher Expectations for Student Performance 119

independent of school risk, perhaps only inuenced by the age of the student. Yet, questions remained, such as whether teacher expectations vary across regional or cultural differences. Alignment between Teacher and Parent Expectations for Behavior Two studies examined the extent to which parent expectations aligned with teacher expectations: the rst focusing on adolescent students BeebeFrankenberger et al., 2005 and the second focusing on preschool-age students Lane, Stanton-Chapman, Roorbach,  Phillips, 2007. BeebeFrankenberger et al. 2005 involved a subset of students from a larger longitudinal study of students referred to the prereferral intervention team due to academic, behavioral, or combined concerns. The intent of this follow-up study was to explore familial and parent risk and resiliency factors pertaining to academic and social competence. Fifty-three teachers 26 elementary and 27 secondary completed SSRS rating scales as did the students parents. Teacher ratings included the original ratings by elementary teachers as well as the students middle school teachers. Parents completed the SRSS during this second time point. Of the 33 students rated, 9 had behavior problems elementary problem behavior standard score Z115 and 23 were part of a comparison group elementary problem behavior standard score o115 from the original study. Results indicated 60 of elementary and middle school teachers rated four behavioral expectations as critical for success in the classroom: 1 produces correct school work, 2 ignores peer distractions while working, 3 easily makes transitions, and 4 nishes class assignments on time. Teachers and parents of adolescents with behavior challenges diverged in their behavioral expectations. Teachers viewed cooperation skills as more important for success in the classroom compared to self-control and assertion skills, whereas parents emphasized self-control, responsibility, and assertion skills in the home more than cooperation skills. Beebe-Frankenberger et al. 2005 suggested students with behavior problems may be caught betwixt and between the teacher and parent expectations for behavior requiring qualitatively different skills at home than at school p. 15. Lane et al. 2007 conducted a study of 35 preschool teachers and 124 parents of preschoolers in Virginia. In this study, researchers gave teachers and parents respective versions of the Social Skills Rating System for preschool students and asked participants to rate the importance of each behavior for students success in the classroom teacher perspective or at school parent perspective. Results indicated teachers and parents placed similar importance regarding cooperation skills, yet held different views KATHLEEN LYNNE LANE ET AL. 120

regarding assertion and self-control with parents rating both skills sets as signicantly more important. The majority of teachers and parents rated three skills as critical for success: 1 follows your directions, 2 controls temper in conict situations with adults, and 3 controls temper in conict situations with peers. These expectations were consistent with prioritized expectations in elementary, middle, and high school context Lane et al., 2010. However, preschool teachers rated fewer skills as critical for success relative to K-12 teachers. Findings diverge from the Beebe-Frankenberger et al. 2005 study of adolescents, yet it is important to recall this sample included a small, referred population whereas Lane et al. 2010 involved a nonclinical sample. While only two studies have yet been conducted, this line of inquiry is important. Research suggesting young students who have negative relationships with their teachers exhibit higher levels of problem behaviors and fewer adaptive skills in preschool as well as in kindergarten and rst grade when they transition to elementary school Pianta  Stuhlman, 2004. Yet, additional research is needed in this area to establish the generalizability of these initial ndings. CONSIDERATIONS Before considering the educational implications of the knowledge base of teacher expectations, it is important to consider the existing limitations of these studies. For example, none of the studies conducted following IDEA 1997 involved direct observations. Clearly, relying strictly on teacher and self-report data has substantial drawbacks. For example, issues exist pertaining to social desirability factors suggesting people may be presenting themselves in a more favorable light and deviations between perceptions of reality and reality itself suggesting people may indicate they value a certain type of behavior, when in actuality they tend to reinforce other types of behavior; Cooper, Heron,  Heward, 2007. Other limitations to these studies include a the possibility teacher expectations may not be uniform across students more ideographic in nature, b the absence of academic markers in existing studies e.g., the absence of academic performance as an index of school risk; Lane et al., 2010, and c limited sample sizes in some studies restrict statistical power to detect potential differences and pose concerns regarding validity issues. Yet, despite these limitations, the studies conducted to date offer important implications for researchers and practitioners alike. Teacher Expectations for Student Performance 121

IMPLICATIONS FOR RESEARCH AND PRACTICE Over thirty years of studies of teacher expectations have several implications for the eld, several of which have already been alluded to in this chapter. Facilitating Inclusive Programming for Students with Exceptionalities Access to the general curriculum is now a legal mandate. IDEA 1997 and IDEIA 2004 emphasized the importance of students with disabilities being a educated in the least restrictive environment appropriate and b exposed to the core academic curriculum offered in the general education context to the maximum extent possible. The initial work conducted by Walker and colleagues suggested that both teacher expectations and teacher attitudes directly inuence the potential success of mainstreaming efforts Walker  Lamon, 1987, p. 57. An important aspect of promoting successful inclusive experiences is ensuring students enter the least restrictive setting with the skill sets necessary to negotiate teachers expectations and participate in educational activities in a manner that facilitates teachers instructional goals Walker et al., 1992. One early concern was the possibility that professionals working with students with disabilities in more restrictive settings might hold different behavioral expectations than teachers working in less restrictive settings. Studies suggest this was in fact the case e.g., Conte  McCoy, 1980. For example, Lane et al. 2004 reported general education teachers placed greater emphasis on the importance of cooperation skills compared to special education teachers. Although the reasons for these differences were not explored a suggested area of inquiry, such differences may be evident because general education teachers need to manage a larger number of students over the course of the school day. Also, it is possible special education teachers may be more accustomed to dealing with less cooperative behavior. In terms of implications for practitioners, students with disabilities need to be made aware of these potential differences and provided explicit instruction in the skill sets expected by general education teachers. This instruction would allow students with disabilities to acclimate to inclusive placements quickly and with greater ease due to their uency with the specic target behaviors e.g., responds appropriately to conicts with peers most likely to be reinforced by the receiving teacher Kerr  Zigmond, 1986. An alternative is for general and special education teachers to use this KATHLEEN LYNNE LANE ET AL. 122

information as a starting point for aligning expectations, with consideration to developmental considerations. Supporting Transitions Across the K-12 Continuum Another recommendation pertains to using information about variations in teacher expectations for students behavior to support transitions across the developmental continuum. For example, noted differences between expectations held by preschool, elementary, middle, and high school teachers could be taught explicitly to students before making these transitions. In the most recent study of teacher expectations, Lane et al. 2010 replicated earlier ndings regarding the lack of emphasis placed on assertion skills. As in previous studies, assertion skills were not rated as critical for success by the majority of teachers at any age level. Yet, elementary teachers rated assertion skills as signicantly more essential compared to middle school teachers. This information regarding assertion could be used to facilitate transitions from elementary to middle school. Namely, elementary teachers could pre-teach the differences in expectations before students graduate from elementary school. Middle school teachers could also teach expectations during orientation or other similar venue at onset of the school year to all incoming middle school students e.g., if you need help from a teacher during class, it would be to do X rather than do Y as you did when you were in elementary school. While this will not address the problem of performance decits when students knowingly violate established expectations, but it will reduce the likelihood of acquisition decits. Namely, teaching these expectations may minimize problems occurring because students do not know the expectations in a new context. We recommend practitioners support students who are making key transitions by familiarizing students with differences in academic and behavioral expectations. Informing Primary Prevention Efforts and Targeted Supports In addition to supporting school transitions, information on teacher expectations can also inform intervention efforts on a number of levels by addressing issue of goal alignment. For example, consider the current practice of establishing three-tiered models of prevention. Rather than constructing expectations for student behavior in key settings e.g., classrooms, hallways, and cafeterias via committee decision, a more data-based approach could be employed. Specically, recently efforts have focused on Teacher Expectations for Student Performance 123

surveying all faculty and staff in a building to identify the importance they place on central social skills. Item rates as critical for success by the majority of adults are used to establish school-wide expectations. Then, all students in the school receive formal instruction on these data-derived, universal expectations Lane et al., 2009. Teachers should assume an instructional approach to behavior, teaching behavioral expectations explicitly in the same manner academic skills are taught. Using this approach, students are taught behaviors likely to access reinforcement by all adults in the building, which increases the probability of the behaviors being acquired initially, maintained over time, and generalized across settings and individuals Cooper et al., 2007. The same process could be used for informing Tier 2 and Tier 3 supports in schools with three-tiered models of prevention as well as interventions designed by the prereferral intervention team Lane, Mahdavi,  Borthwick-Duffy, 2003. One consideration we would like to raise with the research community is the need to examine goal alignment more closely. In reviewing the full body of work in this area we are concerned by two issues. First, summative ndings suggest most teachers place limited importance on assertion skills, which share many of the same features as self-advocacy skills emphasized in the self-determination literature Wehmeyer  Field, 2007. Is there a disconnect here for students with disabilities? Meaning, are special education scholars inadvertently emphasizing skills not likely to be valued by teachers? We are not suggesting self-advocacy skills be minimized. But, we are suggesting individuals involved with professional development and teacher preparation programs consider issues of goal alignment and issues of reinforcement to ensure we are preparing teachers who are ready to support the development of behaviors likely to be reinforced in naturalistic settings. Second, social success and the ability to interact with schools carry implications not only for school success, but also for success beyond the school setting e.g., working with colleagues in employment settings. As such, we think it is important for the research and teacher professional development communities to determine how best to assist teachers in developing their skills and condence with respect to teaching peer-peer social competencies Walker  Rankin, 1983. Considerations for Teacher Preparation Programs In addition to attending to issues of alignment and reinforcement and the focus of peer-related social competencies, we also contend this body of work KATHLEEN LYNNE LANE ET AL. 124

offers other important implications for teacher preparation programs, particularly in regards to home-school partnerships. Findings suggest expectations for student behavior and performance varies along socioeconomic and cultural dimensions, by role e.g., parent and teacher, and grade level provide valuable information for teacher preparation programs see Lane et al., 2007; Winetsky, 1978. If value systems vary along socioeconomic and cultural dimensions, it is important for teacher preparation programs to equip teachers to be fully prepared to deal not only with childrens developmental stages of growth, but also divergent beliefs regarding behavior expectations. This is not to say parents and teachers must agree on all behavior expectations. Yet, teachers will need training to support students in recognizing and negotiating different value systems evidenced in different settings. With the goal of inclusive programming, it is also essential that teacher preparation programs develop inclusive teachers knowledge, skill sets, and condence in supporting students whose behavior patterns tend to impede the instructional process. We applaud the development of the SBS assessment methodology for use in selecting appropriate mainstream settings immediately following the introduction of P.L. 94-142. We think the goal of teacher preparation programs needs to be expanded to provide greater training in helping all pre-K-12 general educators support students with exceptionalities and address expectations for critical behaviors in the general education context. Given the press for academic excellence accentuated in NCLB, providing such training and supports may help to address the concern raised by Kauffman et al. 1991: Raising teachers expectations and demands could have the unintended effect of increasing the number of students perceived as at risk and, consequently, being referred to special education, if more students fail to meet higher expectations p. 14. SUMMARY In this chapter, we examined lessons learned regarding teachers expectations for student behavior, starting with early inquiry conducted following P.L. 94-142 Education for All Handicapped Children Act that rst established special education supports. Then, we explored the expanding knowledge base following reauthorization of IDEA 1997, IDEIA 2004, and NCLB 2001 as education moved toward an increased emphasis on inclusive programming and supporting access to the general curriculum IDEA, 1997, a call for academic excellence for all students NCLB, and a Teacher Expectations for Student Performance 125

focus on a systems-level perspective for teaching behavioral expectations IDEIA, 2004. We summarized lessons learned from these bodies of knowledge, with attention to key ndings and existing limitations of the work conducted to date. Finally, we addressed implications of this literature for practice related to a facilitating inclusive programming for students with exceptionalities, b supporting pre-K through K-12 transitions, c informing primary prevention efforts and targeted supports, and d informing teacher preparation programs. REFERENCES Alspaugh, J. W. 1988. Achievement loss associated with the transition to middle school and high school. Journal of Educational Research, 92, 2025. Beebe-Frankenberger, M., Lane, K. L., Bocian, K. L., Gresham, F. M.,  MacMillan, D. L. 2005. Students with or at risk for problem behavior: Betwixt and between teacher and parent expectations. Preventing School Failure, 49, 1017. Brouwers, A.,  Tomic, W. 2000. A longitudinal study of teacher burnout and perceived selfefcacy in classroom management. Teaching and Teacher Education, 16, 239253. Carter, E. W. 2010. Promoting self-determination among transition-age youth with emotionalbehavioral disorders: Promising practices. In D. Cheney Ed., Transition of students with emotional and behavioral disabilities: Current approaches for positive outcomes 2nd ed., pp. 5178. Champaign, IL: Research Press. Carter, E. W., Lane, K. L., Crnobori, M., Bruhn, A. L.,  Oakes, W. P. 2011. Selfdetermination interventions for students with and at risk for emotional and behavioral disorders: Mapping the knowledge base. Behavioral Disorders, 36, 100116. Carter, E. W., Lane, K. L., Pierson, M. R.,  Stang, K. K. 2008. Promoting selfdetermination for transition-age youth: Views of high school general and special educators. Exceptional Children, 75, 5570. Colvin, G. 2002. Designing classroom organization and structure. In K. L. Lane, F. M. Gresham  T. E. OShaughnessy Eds., Interventions for children with or at risk for emotional and behavioral disorders pp. 159174. Boston, MA: Allyn  Bacon. Conte, J. R.,  McCoy, L. 1980. Teacher and social worker agreement on behavioral expectations of special children. Exceptional Children, 46, 645646. Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E.,  Heward, W. L. 2007. Applied behavior analysis 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Merrill Prentice-Hall. Education for All Handicapped Children Act P.L. 94-142 1975. 20 U.S.C. y 1400 et seq. Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D.,  Hamlett, C. L. 1989. Monitoring reading growth using student recalls: Effects of two teacher feedback systems. Journal of Educational Research, 83, 103111. Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D.,  Phillips, N. 1994. The relation between teachers beliefs about the importance of good student works habits, teacher planning, and student achievement. The Elementary School Journal, 94, 331345. Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Simmons, D.,  Bishop, N. 1991. Integrating quantitative and qualitative methodologies to develop a model of teacher planning. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Education Research Association, Chicago, IL. KATHLEEN LYNNE LANE ET AL. 126

Gersten, R., Meyer, L.,  Zoref, L. 1979. Teacher effectiveness evaluation form. Eugene, OR: University of Oregon. Gersten, R., Walker, R.,  Darch, G. 1988. Relationship between teachers effectiveness and their tolerance for handicapped students. Exceptional Children, 54, 433440. Gresham, F. M., Dolstra, L., Lambros, K. M., McLaughlin, V.,  Lane, K. L. 2000, November. Teacher expected model behavior proles: Changes over time. Paper presented at the Teacher Educators for Children with Behavioral Disorders Conference. Scottsdale, AZ. Gresham, F. M.,  Elliott, S. N. 1990. Social skills rating system. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. Harris, L. 1991. The metropolitan life survey of the American teacher, 1991: The rst year: New teachers expectations and ideals. New York, NY: Metropolitan Life Insurance Company. Hersh, R.,  Walker, H. M. 1983. Great expectations: Making schools effective for all students. Policy Studies Review, 2, 147188. Individuals with Disabilities Education Act IDEA 1997. P.L. 105-17, 20 U.S.C. y 1400 et seq. Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act IDEIA 2004. P.L. 108-446, 20 U.S.C. y 1400 et seq. Kauffman, J. M.,  Brigham, F. J. 2009. Working with troubled children. Verona, WI: Full Court Press. Kauffman, J. M., Lloyd, J. W.,  McGee, K. A. 1989. Adaptive and maladaptive behavior: Teachers attitudes and their technical assistance needs. The Journal of Special Education, 23, 185200. Kauffman, J. M., Wong, K. L. H., Lloyd, J. W., Hung, L.,  Pullen, P. L. 1991. What puts pupils at risk? An analysis of classroom teachers judgments of pupils behavior? Remedial and Special Education, 12, 716. Kerr, M. M.,  Zigmond, N. 1986. What do high school teachers want? A study of expectations and standards. Education and Treatment of Children, 9, 239249. Lane, K. L., Givner, C. C.,  Pierson, M. R. 2004. Teacher expectations of student behavior: Social skills necessary for success in elementary school classrooms. Journal of Special Education, 38, 104110. Lane, K. L., Kalberg, J. R.,  Menzies, H. M. 2009. Developing schoolwide programs to prevent and manage problem behaviors: A step-by-step approach. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Lane, K. L., Mahdavi, J. N.,  Borthwick-Duffy, S. A. 2003. Teacher perceptions of the prereferral intervention process: A call for assistance with school-based interventions. Preventing School Failure, 47, 148155. Lane, K. L., Menzies, H., Bruhn, A.,  Crnobori, M. 2011. Managing challenging behaviors in schools: Research-based strategies that work. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Lane, K. L., Pierson, M.,  Givner, C. C. 2003. Teacher expectations of student behavior: Which skills do elementary and secondary teachers deem necessary for success in the classroom? Education and Treatment of Children, 26, 413430. Lane, K. L., Pierson, M.,  Givner, C. C. 2004. Secondary teachers views on social competence: Skills essential for success. Journal of Special Education, 38, 174186. Lane, K. L., Pierson, M., Stang, K.,  Carter, E. W. 2010. Teacher expectations of students classroom behavior: Do expectations vary as a function of school risk? Remedial and Special Education, 31, 163174. Teacher Expectations for Student Performance 127

Lane, K. L., Stanton-Chapman, T. L., Roorbach, K. A.,  Phillips, A. 2007. Teacher and parent expectations of preschoolers behavior: Social skills necessary for success. Topics in Early Childhood, 27, 8697. Lane, K. L., Wehby, J. H.,  Cooley, C. 2006. Teacher expectations of students classroom behavior across the grade span: Which social skills are necessary for success? Exceptional Children, 72, 153167. Martin, A. J., Linfoot, K.,  Stephenson, J. 1999. How teachers respond to concerns about misbehavior in their classroom. Psychology in the Schools, 36, 347358. McMullen, R. C., Shippen, M. E.,  Dangel, H. L. 2007. Middle school teachers expectations of organizational behaviors of students with learning disabilities. The Journal of Instructional Psychology, 34, 7580. No Child Left Behind Act NCLB 2001. Pub. L. No. 107-110, y 115, Stat. 1425 2002. Odom, S. L., Brantlinger, E., Gersten, R., Horner, R. H., Thompson, B.,  Harris, K. 2005. Research in special education: Scientic methods and evidence-based practices. Exceptional Children, 71, 137148. Pianta, R. C.,  Stuhlman, M. W. 2004. Teacher-child relationships and childrens success in the rst years of school. School Psychology Review, 33, 444458. Quay, H. C.,  Peterson, D. R. 1983. Revised behavior problem checklist. Coral Gables, FL: University of Florida. Stecker, P. M., Fuchs, L. S.,  Hamlett, C. L. 1991. Technical features of mathematics operations and applications progress monitoring measures. Unpublished manuscript, available from L. S. Fuchs. Sugai, G.,  Horner, R. H. 2002. Introduction to the special series on positive behavior support in schools. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 10, 130135. Theriot, M. T.,  Dupper, D. R. 2010. Student discipline problems and the transition from elementary to middle school. Education and Urban Society, 42, 205222. doi:10.1177 0013124509349583 Tomlinson, C. A.,  McTighe, J. 2005. Integrating differentiated instruction: Understanding by design. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Umbreit, J., Ferro, J., Liaupsin, C.,  Lane, K. 2007. Functional behavioral assessment and function-based intervention: An effective, practical approach. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Walker, H. M., Block-Pedego, A., Todis, B.,  Severson, H. 1991. School archival record search. Longmont, CO: Sopris West. Walker, H. M., Irvin, L., Noell, J.,  Singer, G. 1992. A construct score approach to the assessment of social competence: Rationale, technological considerations, and anticipated outcomes. Behavior Modication, 16, 448474. Walker, H. M.,  Lamon, W. E. 1987. Social behavior standards and expectations of Australian and U.S. teacher groups. The Journal of Special Education, 21, 5682. Walker, H. M., Ramsey, E.,  Gresham, F. M. 2004. Antisocial behavior in school: Evidencebased practices 2nd ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. Walker, H. M.,  Rankin, R. 1983. Assessing the behavioral expectations and demands of less restrictive settings. School Psychology Review, 12, 274284. Wehmeyer, M. L.,  Field, S. 2007. Instructional and assessment strategies to promote the self-determination of students with disabilities. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. Winetsky, C. S. 1978. Comparisons of the expectations of parents and teachers for the behavior of preschool children. Child Development, 49, 11461154. KATHLEEN LYNNE LANE ET AL. 128

Witherspoon, D.,  Ennett, S. 2011. Stability and change in rural youths educational outcomes through the middle and high school years. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 40, 10771090. doi:10.1007s10964-010-9614-6 Yates, T. M., Egeland, B.,  Sroufe, L. A. 2003. Rethinking resilience: A developmental process perspective. In S. S. Luthar Ed., Resilience and vulnerability: Adaptation in the context of childhood adversities pp. 243266. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Teacher Expectations for Student Performance 129

ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT FOR STUDENTS WITH LEARNING DISABILITIES AND BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS: THE PROMISE OF SOCIAL EMOTIONAL LEARNING Allison B. Dymnicki, Kimberly T. Kendziora and David M. Osher ABSTRACT Although a large body of research has focused on young children with learning disabilities LD and behavioral disorders BD in preschool and elementary school settings, there is considerably less information about this population during adolescence. Recent work suggests that youth with these disabilities experience challenges in areas such as social skills, increased depressive symptoms, and involvement in the juvenile justice system. In addition, for a small percentage of the population, negative outcomes experienced during early childhood appear to persist in adolescence and early adulthood suggesting the need for additional interventions. Two primary aims guide the current chapter. First, we review key domains of adolescent development social, emotional, and Classroom Behavior, Contexts, and Interventions Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, Volume 25, 131166 Copyright r 2012 by Emerald Group Publishing Limited All rights of reproduction in any form reserved ISSN: 0735-004Xdoi:10.1108S0735-004X20120000025009 131

behavioral and highlight ways in which development differs for students with LD and BD. Second, we introduce the eld of social and emotional learning SEL and the accumulating body of research that suggests that this approach could have numerous benets for this population. We describe the results of recent meta-analytic reviews of SEL programs to indicate the current state of the eld, highlight a few evidence-based universal and indicated SEL programs for secondary school settings, and describe important areas for future research. Studying adolescent development for students with learning disabilities LD and behavioral disorders BD is important for several reasons. First, work related to students with disabilities has highlighted students experiencing a range of decits in areas such as self-concept, emotion regulation, attributions for success, social processing skills, and socially acceptable behaviors see Bryan, Burstein,  Ergul, 2004; Kavale  Forness, 1996; Swanson  Malone, 1992, for reviews of this literature. Perhaps the most troubling body of literature, which has grown considerably over the past 15 years, pertains to increased rates of loneliness, depression, andor suicide for students with LD Gallegos, Langley,  Villegas, 2012; Kiuru, Leskinen, Nurmi,  Salmela-Aro, 2011; Maag  Reid, 2006. Second, research indicates the association of social-emotional development and academic success Zins, Weissberg, Wang,  Walberg, 2004 and the relative lack of academic success of students with high-incidence disabilities in secondary settings. Nelson, Benner, Lane, and Smith 2004 found that students with BD are likely to experience academic achievement decits in all core content areas and that these decits become broader in math as students enter middle and high school. Some work suggests that students with LD reach a plateau at the 4thto 5th-grade level of skill attainment in academic achievement when they are in 10th grade and make little gains thereafter Deshler, Schumaker,  Lenz, 1984; Warner, Schumaker, Alley,  Deshler, 1980. However, research has identied a number of social-emotional factors that can contribute to students positive academic achievement including promoting student focus and motivation, creating supportive studentteacher relationships, and developing effective schoolfamily partnerships to help students succeed Dweck, 1986; Guerra  Bradshaw, 2008; Hamre  Pianta, 2001; Mart, Dusenbury,  Weissberg  2011. Given this association, there is a need to investigate how aspects of positive adolescent social and emotional development could promote academic performance for this population. ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 132

Third, problems experienced during adolescence for students with LD and BD are associated with a range of negative outcomes in secondary school settings as well as early adulthood Bradley, Doolittle,  Bartolotta, 2008. The research suggests that some students, with even mild impairments, continue to struggle as they enter adulthood. For example, in the National Longitudinal Transition Study-2 NLTS2, 55 of the students with BD dropped out of high school, more than twice the rate of students in general education Sanford et al., 2011. These data are consistent with NLTS1, where only 48 of students with BD graduated Wagner, Cameto,  Newman, 2003. Differences for enrollment in 4-year universities are also concerning. Upon completion of high school, only 16 of the population with learning disabilities and 6 of the sample with emotional disturbance enrolled in postsecondary education versus 29 of the general population of learners Sanford et al., 2011. Lower employment rates for adolescents with different disabilities have also been found e.g., employment rates were 64 for students with LD and 42 for students with emotional disabilities versus 66 for the general population Alverson, Naranjo, Yamamoto,  Unruh, 2010. In addition, youth with disabilities are entering the correctional system at rates four to ve times higher than the general population Sanford et al., 2011. DEFINING ADOLESCENCE AS A PERIOD OF DEVELOPMENT Adolescence can be dened biologically as the physical transition marked by the onset of puberty and termination of physical growth; cognitively, as changes in the ability to think abstractly and multidimensionally; socially, as a period of preparation for adult roles Harter, 1998; Steinberg  Morris, 2001; and emotionally, as establishing a realistic and coherent sense of identity in the context of relating to others and learning to cope with stress and manage emotions Eisenberg, 2006. All of these different aspects of development prepare adolescents to experiment with new behaviors as they transition from childhood to adulthood American Psychological Association, 2002. This experimentation, and the feedback they receive from engaging in these behaviors, allows them to ne-tune their cognitive, social, and emotional development. For the purposes of this chapter, we dene adolescence as beginning at age 10 and ending at age 18 as is generally agreed upon in the literature US Census Bureau, 2011. We acknowledge the discussion in the eld to broaden the denition of adolescence and the movement to distinguish Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 133

between different periods of development such as early adolescence age 1013, middle adolescence age 1417, and early adulthood age 1821. The distinctions among ages allow us to focus primarily on the research that looks at adolescent development within the context of middle and high school settings  early and middle adolescence. In the next section, we briey describe how development differs for students with BD and LD within the three key domains of social, emotional, and behavioral development Jones, 2009.1 The choice to focus on these three domains speaks to our interest in social-emotional competencies that develop during adolescence and have been identied as a mediator of social adjustment as well as associated with greater well-being and school performance Durlak, Weissberg, Dymnicki, Taylor,  Schellinger, 2011; Eisenberg, 2006; Guerra  Bradshaw, 2008. Although we attempt to describe development for students with LD and BD in broad brush strokes, it is important to acknowledge the great variability that exists within this population. For example, comorbidity of these decits occurs for many students, and factors such as raceethnicity, gender, and poverty can impact development in different ways Dymnicki, Antonio,  Henry, 2011. One illustration involves much higher, unemployment and dropout rates for youth of color Gardecki, 2001. SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT Important aspects of development within the domain of social development include social competence and family relationships. Adolescence involves an increased orientation toward peers, which requires students to possess social competence in order to establish functioning peer relationships Wiener  Schneider, 2002. By far the largest body of research on social development speaks to decits for many students with LD and BD in social information processing, social cognition, and social behavior Gresham  MacMillan, 1997. For example, students with LD consistently perform worse than peers on accurately recognizing and identifying prosody, facial expressions, and body language Semrud-Clikeman  Hynd, 1990, as well as nonverbal perception and their ability to encode dilemmas and generate competent solutions Crick  Dodge, 1994; Dodge et al., 2003; Swanson  Malone, 1992. A key aspect to healthy social development involves the ability of adolescents to develop and maintain close friendships, which has been shown to relate to feelings of self-worth at age 30 Bagwell, Newcomb,  Bukowski, 1998. Research has consistently established that students with LD are less likely to be socially accepted and more likely to be socially ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 134

rejected than their peers Roberts  Zubrick, 1993; Wiener  Schneider, 2002. Friendships for students with LD involve less contact with friends, less intimacy and validation, and more conict Wiener  Schneider, 2002. In addition, students with LD are reported to be more aggressive or disruptive by their peers and less insensitive, less tactful, and more likely to engage in attention-seeking behaviors by their teachers Pearl, Donahue,  Bryan, 1986. Longitudinal research also indicates that early peer rejection predicts growth in aggression during adolescence Dodge et al., 2003. Students with BD who have close friendships with other students demonstrating behavioral problems in turn demonstrate increased behavioral problems themselves Berndt, Hawkins,  Jiao, 1999. Peer rejection, sharing antisocial interests, and grouping youth with BD together for intervention can lead students with BD to associate with each other more and can reinforce and accelerate problem behavior Dishion, McCord,  Poulin, 1999; Dishion  Van Ryzin, 2011. Although the majority of research on social development focuses on the peer group, the inuence of family relationships should not be overlooked. Increased parentchild conict in early adolescence is accompanied by a decline in reported closeness and in the amount of time parents and children spend together Larson  Richards, 1991. However, the protective role of family relationships continues to be important during adolescence. A strong sense of bonding and attachment with family is associated with better emotional development, enhanced school performance, and engagement in fewer high-risk activities such as drug use as compared with youth who did not report a strong sense of bonding and attachment with family Perry, 2000; Resnick et al., 1997. Research has also suggested a fairly clear relationship between LD and conictual family climates Feagans, Merriwether,  Haldane, 1991; Oliver, Cole,  Hollingsworth, 1991. Green 1990 suggested that a disjointed parental communication style coupled with unclear behavioral contingencies in the home is related to LD for some children, but cautioned against determining the direction of the relationship. Similarly, longitudinal studies of aggressive youth have shown that families with violent delinquent children report poorer discipline, less cohesion, and less parental involvement in their childs life than families of nonviolent children Gorman-Smith, Tolan, Zelli,  Huesmann, 1996. EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT Emotional development during adolescence primarily involves identity development when adolescents begin to view themselves in terms of their Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 135

own personal beliefs and standards and start to evaluate themselves along several distinct domains e.g., academics, social relations; Steinberg  Morris, 2001. Another widely researched construct, identity development, involves self-concept e.g., beliefs about ones attributes, goals, interests, and values and self-esteem e.g., evaluating how one feels about hisher selfconcept; Berger, 2001. In relation to self-concept, individuals tend to develop more abstract characterizations of themselves over time, describing themselves in ways that are occasionally discrepant during middle adolescence but then become more consistent in later adolescence Harter, 1998. In general, though, self-esteem is fairly stable during adolescence, with a slight increase over the period of development Harter, 1998. Although those trajectories are typical for most adolescents, the development of identity does not always follow the same path for students with LD or BD. Most studies investigating the issue of identity development for adolescents with disabilities have documented lower self-concept and lower perceived academic competence for students with LD when compared to students without LD e.g., Ayres, Cooley,  Dunn, 1990; Raviv  Stone, 1991. Moreover, the research about self-esteem for students with BD is less than equivocal, with some research suggesting that low self-esteem is the persistent cause of the violence among youth gangs Anderson, 1994 and a traditional cause of all violence Staub, 1989, and other research suggesting that students direct anger outward to avoid revising their positive feelings about self Baumeister, Smart,  Boden, 1996. In addition to difculties related to identify development, students with LD and BD demonstrate an increased risk for a range of emotional problems including negative attributions, anxiety, loneliness, and depressionsuicide. Research on successfailure attributions e.g., locus of control, causal attributions has found that students with LD exhibit more external versus internal attributions than students without LD Lewis  LawrencePatterson, 1989. For example, LD students frequently perceive academic outcomes as controlled by others rather than as products of their making. Perhaps related to this feeling of limited control are ndings about increased trait anxiety levels for students with LD Margalit  Zak, 1984. This anxiety manifests itself in different ways, including a higher prevalence of somatic complaints and higher levels of loneliness than reported by typically developing students Margalit, 1991. As mentioned previously, a considerable body of work has also documented increased rates of depressionsuicide for students with LD as compared to the general population, with rates of both increasing throughout adolescence Maag  Reid, 2006; Wiener  Schneider, 2002. One explanation for this increased ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 136

risk involves the meditational role of self-concept. Montague, Ender, Dietz, Dixon, and Cavendish 2008 found that the effect of learning difculties on depressive symptoms was mediated via feelings of inadequacy as a student. Although research has shown that students with BD also display high levels of emotional distress, including anxiety Frick et al., 2003, a subgroup of students with BD also exhibit a distinct temperamental style. Research on students with early symptoms of conduct disorder shows a preference for novel and dangerous situations, a lack of emotional responsiveness to negative emotional material, and a lack of sensitivity to cues of punishment, which are all consistent with a temperamental style described as low fearlessness Rothbart  Bates, 1998. This subgroup of students with BD also demonstrate low behavioral inhibition, low harm avoidance Frick, 2004, and impaired emotion regulation Frick  Morris, 2004. Decits in emotion regulation are often cited as a direct and indirect mechanism for developing conduct problems, because decits in emotion regulation can result in impulsive and unplanned aggressive behavior for which the child is remorseful, but still has difculty controlling in the future Pardini, Lochman,  Frick, 2003. Moreover, because emotion dysregulation can impair the development of social processing skills, it is also associated with increased peer rejection, which is related to increased aggression Crick  Dodge, 1994; Dodge et al., 2003. BEHAVIORAL DEVELOPMENT Most of the literature on adolescent behavioral development focuses on risk-taking behaviors e.g., increased tobacco, alcohol, drug use; risky sexual behavior; increased delinquency, crime, violence; Hawkins, Catalano,  Miller, 1992; Scales  Leffert, 2004. Several reasons suggest the need to be concerned about adolescents involvement in risky behaviors. First, the majority of individuals who engage in unhealthy behaviors as adults developed the habit during adolescence e.g., more than 80 of adult smokers begin smoking before the age of 18; Riordan, 2009. Not all adolescents who experiment with risky behaviors continue these behaviors into adulthood Moftt, 1993, yet the continuation of risky behaviors throughout the life course for some is signicant. In fact, Moftt 1993 has made great strides in differentiating qualitatively different pathways of development for youth who experiment in risky behavior during this time period and has termed youth who continue to engage in this type of Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 137

behavior later on as demonstrating life course persistent antisocial behavior p. 674. Second, adolescent risk-taking behaviors are concerning because of the negative social outcomes that accompany them e.g., teen childbearing is associated with school dropout; Hoffman, 2008 as well as the vulnerability of youth to interventions that have iatrogenic effects Dishion  Dodge, 2005; Dishion, Poulin,  Burraston, 2001. Finally, there has been compelling research that suggests multiple serious risky behaviors tend to cluster in the same group of adolescents, putting this small group at increased risk for negative outcomes both in adolescence e.g., drinking and driving, as well as later on in life Hamburg, 1997. In addition to research regarding risk-taking behaviors, a growing body of work over the past 25 years has looked at adaptive behaviors, assets, and protective factors that also develop during adolescence Hawkins et al., 1992; Scales  Leffert, 2004. Research on protective factors suggests that resilience i.e., having positive outcomes despite serious threats to healthy development can be facilitated not just by reducing the level of risk individuals take but also by promoting their competence and strengthening their assets Margalit, 1993. A number of external and internal factors associated with increased resilience have been identied, including having a stable, positive relationship with one caring adult; attending schools that provide students with a sense of cooperative shared responsibility and belonging, high expectations, and adequate support; being part of a warm and nurturing family environment; and having emotional intelligence that allows students to cope with and handle stress Cowen  Work, 1988; Garbarino  Haslam, 2005; Jessor, 1991. In her recent book describing social-emotional development for students with disabilities, Jones 2009 included separate chapters to describe the social, emotional, and self-concept development for students with different disabilities including students with BD, LD, and physical and other health impairments. In the following sections, we introduce social and emotional learning, a coordinated approach to meeting the developmental needs of students with these different disabilities. WHAT IS SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL LEARNING? Social and emotional learning SEL is a unifying concept for organizing and coordinating school-based programming that integrates competence promotion and positive youth development frameworks for the prevention of problem behaviors and fostering of protective factors. SEL involves the ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 138

processes through which children and adults develop ve core competencies Durlak et al., 2011; Elbertson, Brackett,  Weissberg, 2010. These core competencies include self-awareness e.g., the ability to know what one is feeling and accurately assess ones capabilities, interests, and values, selfmanagement e.g., the ability to regulate ones emotions to handle stress, control impulses, and set and monitor progress toward achieving goals, social awareness e.g., the ability to take the perspective of others and recognize and appreciate group similarities and differences, relationship skills e.g., the ability to establish and maintain healthy relationships, resist peer pressure, and manage interpersonal conict, and responsible decision making e.g., the ability to make decisions based on the considerations of others, ethical standards, and social norms. The aim of SEL programsprogramming is to foster positive youth development through the promotion of personal and social competencies. In schools, SEL programs promote a caring and engaging learning environment which in turn should lead to better adjustment and improved school performance and functioning Durlak et al., 2011, and be evident in improved outcomes later on in life. SEL includes both specic programs and skills curricula focused on improving students social-emotional skills, attitudes, and behaviors, classroom-wide approaches such as daily morning meetings designed to improve studentteacher relationships, and classand school-wide approaches that attempt to improve school environments e.g., changing the way students transition from one class to the next to reduce peer conict. This all takes place within the context of safe, participatory schools as well as family settings and community environments that support childrens development and allow them to have opportunities to practice and apply these competencies Kress  Elias, 2006. DISTINCTION BETWEEN SEL INTERVENTIONS AND OTHER INTERVENTIONS Given that other chapters in this volume describe similar interventions, it is important to note how SEL intersects with several of these interventions or school-wide programs. Universal behavioral systemspositive behavior supports PBS, developed rst within the special education tradition, traditionally focused on establishing clear and consistent behavioral practices. More recently, PBS practices have evolved to include Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 139

a whole school approach Lewis  Sugai, 1999. PBS does not include a curriculum, but rather is a decision-making framework to guide selection, integration, and implementation of the best evidence-based practices to improve academic and behavioral outcomes of all students. In comparing PBS and SEL, both interventions address the needs of all children; however, SEL has a slightly different focus because of its emphasis on emotions and the development of social and emotional competencies Osher, Bear, Sprague,  Doyle, 2010. The two approaches can work together in school settings by having PBS establish a common discipline and behavioral skills approach that is reinforced school-wide and having evidence-based SEL programs teach social-emotional skills explicitly and provide opportunities for practice, feedback, and application within content areas and throughout the school setting Osher et al., 2010. Another school-wide approach, Response to Intervention RtI, works to integrate assessment practices and intervention approaches within a threetiered prevention model to maximize student achievement and reduce behavioral problems Fuchs  Fuchs, 2011.2 Four key components of the RtI approach involve quality core instruction, universal screening to identify students at risk of academic failure, individualized interventions for those identied students, and continual monitoring of student progress. Although SEL approaches reect a belief in the importance of screening and assessment to identify students who are experiencing difculty, it also emphasizes the importance of promoting positive development for all students from the start and advocates universal SEL programs to be introduced into the school to teach students social and emotional competences. Thus, combining both approaches could involve implementing quality core SEL instruction for all students with additional tiered responses for students who need greater levels of support Osher, Dwyer,  Jimerson, 2006. DESCRIPTION OF THE META-ANALYSES EVALUATING SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL LEARNING PROGRAMS Recent meta-analyses of SEL programs have indicated that these programs have positive impacts on a number of domains including increasing students social and emotional skills, attitudes toward self and others, ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 140

positive social behaviors, and academic achievement as well as reducing students risky behaviors and emotional distress Durlak et al., 2011; Durlak, Weissberg,  Pachan, 2010; Payton et al., 2008. Three separate reviews have been conducted regarding SEL programs: a a review of K-12 universal programming delivered to all students N  213; Durlak et al., 2011; b a review of K-8 indicated programming delivered to students showing signs of social, emotional, or behavioral problems who had not yet been diagnosed with BD or LD N  103; Payton et al., 2008; and c a review of K-12 programs delivered after school N  68; Durlak et al., 2010. All three reviews suggested positive impacts of SEL programs for many students on a range of outcomes, although the effect sizes ES associated with the indicated programming ES ranged from .38 to .77; Payton et al., 2008 were larger than ES associated with the universal programming ES ranged from .22 to .57; Durlak et al., 2011 and programs in the afterschool review3 ES ranged from .08 to .17; Durlak et al., 2010. These meta-analyses provide information about the current state of the eld and also point out gaps in current research and practice. For example, there were considerably fewer programs that serve high school versus elementary school students in each review i.e., 13 versus 56 in the universal review; 22 versus 53 in the indicated review; and 9 versus 46 in the after-school sample. Three ndings that were fairly consistent across the three reviews are important to discuss. First, in all three reviews, programs that did not report problems with implementation versus those that did report problems with implementation were associated with more positive effects.4 Second, in two of three reviews universal and afterschool, programs that included a set of evidence-based practices referred to as sequenced, active, focused, and explicit SAFE programs produced stronger effects than programs without these practices.5 Third, in two of three reviews universal and indicated, school staff were as effective as, and in some cases more effective than, nonschool personnel e.g., university researchers at delivering programs. Although all three reviews included programs that served K-12 students, the report describing the indicated set of studies Payton et al., 2008 only reported on K-8 SEL programs. Given this chapters focus on classroom practices mediating behavioral and emotional concerns of adolescents, we describe the 52 indicated SEL programs for middle and high school students. The 52 studies included 32 studies that were included in the indicated review and 20 studies that met the inclusionexclusion criteria established for the indicated review6 but were not described in Payton et al. 2008 Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 141

because they included indicated programs that were conducted in secondary school settings. Appendix A presents the list of the 52 studies included in our analyses. Below, we present study, participant, and program characteristics of this set of studies, and then highlight a few studies that produced strong effects. We refer readers interested in learning more information about the universal and after-school reviews to these two articles: Durlak et al. 2010, 2011. IDENTIFICATION OF SEL PROGRAMS SERVING ADOLESCENTS PRESENTING EARLY SIGNS OF PROBLEMS As shown in Table 1, 40 studies were included, which evaluated 32 separate programs. Two studies evaluated the program outcomes of Adolescent Transitions Program ATP, two studies evaluated assertion training, two studies evaluated Counselors CARE C-CARE and Coping and Support Training CAST, two studies evaluated the Penn Prevention Project PPP, two studies evaluated Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy REBT, two studies evaluated Systemic Desensitization SD, two studies evaluated Penn Resiliency Program for Children and Adolescents PRP-CA, two studies evaluated Coping with Depression CWD, three studies evaluated Cognitive Behavior Therapy CBT, four studies evaluated Structured Learning Therapy SLT, and nine studies evaluated Social Skills Training SST. To broadly describe the focus of these programs, 10 programs provided instruction in positive skill development more holistically e.g., self-control, assertiveness, anger control, and social skills and were mostly for students with assorted or multiple problems, 11 programs provided more focused skills instruction to reduce emotional distress e.g., anxiety, depressive symptoms, and shyness, and 19 programs provided more focused skills instruction to reduce behavioral problems. Programs for students with increased anxietydepressive symptoms as well as programs for students with increased angeraggression both provided explicit instruction in selfawareness and self-monitoring. However, most programs for students with increased anxietydepressive symptoms also provided explicit instruction in relationship skills, while most programs for students with increased angeraggression also provided explicit instruction in conict resolution and problem-solving skills. It is important to acknowledge the wide variety of programs available for this population as well as the vastly positive impacts overall. Specically, over 90 of the ES presented in Table 1 are ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 142

Table 1. Identication of Indicated SEL Programs Included in the Current Study. SEL Program Age of Participants Outcome Measures Effect Sizes Sample Studies Evaluating Effectiveness of the SEL Moral reasoning development intervention High school students SEL skills ES  1.55 Arbuthnot and Gordon 1986 Conduct problems ES  1.09 Academic performance ES  .68 Cognitive Behavior Therapy CBT Middle school students Emotional distress ES  .31 Asarnow, Scott, and Mintz 2002 Positive social behavior ES  .77 Social Skills Training SST Middle school students Attitudes ES  .65 Bienert and Schneider 1995 Positive social behavior ES  .65 Conduct problems ES  .65 Emotional distress ES  .65 Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy REBT High school students Conduct problems ES  2.00 Block 1978 Academic performance ES  2.43 Cognitive Behavior Therapy CBT Elementary and middle school students Conduct problems ES  .20 Dadds Spence, Holland, Barrett, and Laurens 1997 Emotional distress ES  .93 Cognitive Relaxation Coping Skills CRCS training Middle school students Attitudes ES  1.21 Deffenbacher, Lynch, Oetting, and Kemper 1996 Conduct problems ES  1.27 Emotional distress ES  .52 Social Skills Training SST Middle school students Attitudes ES  .60 Deffenbacher et al. 1996 Conduct problems ES  1.17 Emotional distress ES  .67 Adolescent Transitions Program ATP Middle school students Conduct problems ES  .01 Dishion and Andrews 1995 Adolescent Transitions Program ATP with parent involvement Middle school students Conduct problems ES  .32 Dishion and Andrews 1995 Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 143

Table 1. Continued  SEL Program Age of Participants Outcome Measures Effect Sizes Sample Studies Evaluating Effectiveness of the SEL Interpersonal Relations Class IRCPersonal Growth Class High school students Attitudes ES  .31 Eggert, Thompson, Herting, Nicholas, and Dicker 1994 Academic performance ES  .33 Making Life Choices Program MLCP High school students Attitudes ES  .44 Ferrer-Wreder et al. 2002 Positive social behavior ES  .48 Social Skills Training SST tailored for urban, suburban, and rural populations Middle school students Conduct problems ES  .10 Filipczak, Archer, and Friedman 1980 Academic performance ES  .20 Social Skills Training SST tailored for urban, suburban, and rural populations Middle school students Conduct problems ES  .00 Filipczak, Archer, and Friedman 1980 Academic performance ES  .45 Social Skills Training SST tailored for urban, suburban, and rural populations Middle school students Conduct problems ES  .00 Filipczak, Archer, and Friedman 1980 Academic performance ES  .38 Social Skills Training SST tailored for urban, suburban, and rural populations Middle school students Conduct problems ES  .25 Filipczak, Archer, and Friedman 1980 Academic performance ES  .34 Strong Families and Making Choices Programs Elementary and middle school students Positive social behavior ES  .28 Fraser, Day, Galinsky, Hodges, and Smokowski 2004 Conduct problems ES  .15 Penn Resiliency Program for Children and Adolescents PRP-CA Middle school students Attitudes ES  1.36 Gallegos 1985 Positive social behavior ES  .59 Emotional distress ES  .26 Penn Resiliency Program for Children and Adolescents PRP-CA with family involvement Middle school students Attitudes ES  .62 Gallegos 1985 Positive social behavior ES  .03 Emotional distress ES  .72 ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 144

Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy REBT High school students Attitudes ES  .00 Gonzalez 1988 Conduct problems ES  .00 Emotional distress ES  .00 Social skills training SST life skills training Middle school students Attitudes ES  .14 Greene and Ollendick 1993 Conduct problems ES  .53 Emotional distress ES  .22 Academic performance ES  .15 Structured Learning Therapy SLT Middle school students Positive social behavior ES  .68 Greenleaf 1982 Positive Adolescents Choices Training PACT Middle school students Positive social behavior ES  .66 Hammond and Yung 1991 Conduct problems ES  1.96 Cognitive Behavior Modication CBM Elementary and middle school students Emotional distress ES  .91 Harris and Brown 1982 Violence Prevention Project High school students Conduct problems ES  .48 Hausman, Pierce, and Briggs 1996 Progressive Relaxation PR Middle and high grade students Emotional distress ES  .57 Hiebert, Kirby, and Jaknavorian 1989 Attributional intervention Middle school students Conduct problems ES  1.13 Hudley and Graham 1993 Assertion training Middle and high school students Positive social behavior ES  .72 Huey and Rank 1984 Conduct problems ES  .48 Penn Prevention Program PPP Middle school students Attitudes ES  .08 Jaycox, Reivich, Gillham, and Seligman 1994 Conduct problems ES  .30 Emotional distress ES  .27 Systematic desensitization SD Middle school students Emotional distress ES  1.42 Johnson, Tyler, Thompson, and Jones 1971 Coping with Depression CWD Middle school students Attitudes ES  1.18 Kahn, Kehle, Jenson, and Clark 1990 Emotional distress ES  2.05 Relaxation and self-awareness techniques Middle school students Attitudes ES  .74 Kahn, Kehle, Jenson, and Clark 1990 Emotional distress ES  .91 Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 145

Table 1. Continued  SEL Program Age of Participants Outcome Measures Effect Sizes Sample Studies Evaluating Effectiveness of the SEL Stress Inoculation Training SIT High school students Attitudes ES  .72 Kiselica, Baker, Thomas, and Reedy 1994 Emotional distress ES  .82 Academic performance ES  .36 Assertion training High school students Positive social behavior ES  1.23 Lee, Hallberg, and Hassard 1979 Conduct problems ES  .71 Coping with Depression CWD Middle school students Skills ES  .60 Lewinsohn and Clarke 1984 Emotional distress ES  .08 Heroheroine modality class designed to foster ethnic identity, self-concept, and adaptive coping behavior Middle and high school students Attitudes ES  .55 Malgady, Rogler, and Costantino 1990 Emotional distress ES  .39 Systematic desensitization SD Middle school students Emotional distress ES  .77 Muller and Madsen 1970 Academic performance ES  .77 Structured Learning Therapy SLT taught by schoolbased personnel High school students Positive social behavior ES  .68 Pentz 1980 Structured Learning Therapy SLT taught by peers High school students Positive social behavior ES  .68 Pentz 1980 Structured Learning Therapy SLT taught by nonschoolbased personnel High school students Positive social behavior ES  .65 Pentz 1980 LISA-T cognitive-behavioral approach Middle school students Attitudes ES  .44 Possel, Horn, Goren, and Hautzinger 2004 Emotional distress ES  .10 ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 146

Counselors CARE C-CARE and Coping and Support Training CAST High school students Attitudes ES  .37 Randell, Eggert, and Pike 2001 Positive social behavior ES  .18 Conduct problems ES  .51 Emotional distress ES  .64 Cognitive Behavior Therapy CBT High school students Attitudes ES  .22 Reynolds and Coats 1986 Emotional distress ES  1.92 Penn Prevention Program PPP Middle school students Conduct problems ES  .22 Roberts, Kane, Thomson, Bishop, and Hart 2003 Emotional distress ES  .33 Suicide prevention curriculum High school students Emotional distress ES  .11 Silbert and Berry 1991 Self-Control Therapy Middle school students Attitudes ES  1.43 Stark, Reynolds, and Kaslow 1987 Emotional distress ES  1.91 Behavioral Problem-Solving Therapy Middle school students Attitudes ES  .18 Stark, Reynolds, and Kaslow 1987 Emotional distress ES  1.30 Counselors CARE C-CARE and Coping and Support Training CAST High school students Attitudes ES  .22 Thompson, Eggert, Randell, and Pike 2001 Positive social behavior ES  .36 Emotional distress ES  .34 Social Skills Training SST Elementary and middle school students Skills ES  .25 Tiffen and Spence 1986 Positive social behavior ES  .30 Conduct problems ES  .27 Peer facilitator intervention Middle school students Attitudes ES  .34 Tobias and Myrick 1999 Conduct problems ES  .73 Academic performance ES  .50 Social Skills Training SST Middle school students Attitudes ES  .21 Verduyn, Lord, and Forrest 1990 Positive social behavior ES  .72 Anxiety management training Middle school students Attitudes ES  .01 Wilson and Rotter 1986 Emotional distress ES  1.15 Penn Optimism Program POP Elementary and middle school students Attitudes ES  .37 Yu and Seligman 2002 Emotional distress ES  .33 Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 147

positive. Out of the 129 ES in total, there were only 5 negative ES 3.9 and 6 zero ES 4.7. OVERVIEW OF SEL PROGRAMS SERVING ADOLESCENTS PRESENTING EARLY SIGNS OF PROBLEMS The majority of included studies 80.8 used a randomized control design. Perhaps not surprising given the usual small group format of these programs, the average sample size was small M  83.4, median  57.0, range of 13509 participants. More programs were implemented in middle schools 67.3 than in high schools 32.7. As seen in Table 2, about half 44.3 of the studies included children with multiple categories of problems or with assorted problems while the remaining studies were more specialized toward children with one category of problems e.g., internalizing, behavioral, or learning problems. About half 46.2 of the studies used a single-measure screening process to identify children for the program, while the remaining studies used a variety of techniques to identify students e.g., adult referrals, multiple screening processes. A quarter of the studies n  11 included multiple components which involved some form of parental involvement, whereas the remaining studies only included direct student instruction. Overall, programs were of relatively short duration, with an average length of 12 weeks range of 236 weeks. The majority of programs used small group approaches 92.3, with the remaining studies implementing class-wide interventions that all students received. Programs were most commonly delivered by nonschool personnel 48.1, followed by school personnel 26.9, and sometimes a combination of the two 9.6. More than half 61.5 of the studies monitored implementation and reported no problems. The majority of studies included SAFE practices 90.4. The descriptive characteristics of this sample of studies provide some information about the current state of research for indicated SEL programming for adolescents. Many of the characteristics of these studies are promising e.g., the majority of the programs used randomization to assign students to conditions, monitored implementation and did not report problems, and met SAFE criteria. Of some concern, however, is the limited number of studies that reported results for students with different disabilities separately i.e., reported effects separately for students with LD versus students with BD. Given the short-term nature of many of the programs ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 148

Table 2. Descriptive Characteristics of 52 School-Based Studies with Outcomes at Post in the Indicated Review. Study and Participant Features N

Presenting problems of child in study Internalizing problems 17 32.7 Behavioral problems 8 15.4 Learning problems 2 3.8 Problems with forming peer relationships 1 1.9 Problems from multiple categories 11 21.2 Children with assorted problems 12 23.1 How children were identied for program Adult referral 8 15.4 Peer nomination 3 5.8 School records 4 7.7 Single screening measure 24 46.2 Multiple screening measures 8 15.4 Multiple gating screening method 4 7.7 Intervention component Single component intervention 41 78.8 Multiple component intervention, including parent training 11 22.2 Duration Less than 3 months 40 78.4 36 months 7 13.7 6 months1 year 4 7.8 Intervention format Small group intervention 48 92.3 Class-wide intervention that all children receive 4 7.7 Program deliverer School personnel 14 26.9 Peer led 2 3.8 Nonschool personnel 25 48.1 Combination of both 5 9.6 Program implementation status No problems noted 32 61.5 Problems noted 5 9.6 Not monitored 15 28.8 Included SAFE practices Yes 47 90.4 No 2 3.8 Note: Ns do not always add up to 52 studies because of missing information. Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 149

and the body of evidence that suggests programming must be of sufcient length and intensity to effect long-term change Elbertson et al., 2010, we also recommend that researchers consider developing longer programs. PROCEDURES USED TO CALCULATE EFFECT SIZES The standardized mean difference or ES is usually calculated by subtracting the control group mean from the intervention group mean at post and dividing the remainder by the pooled standard deviation of the two groups Hedges  Olkin, 1985; Lipsey  Wilson, 2001. Typically, one ES per study was calculated for each outcome; therefore, multiple ES per outcome were averaged e.g., two outcomes of emotional distress would be averaged. Higher ES indicate a greater improvement for program students than for comparison students. Means are statistically signicant when their condence intervals reported in Table 3 do not include zero. The same procedures were followed to calculate ES for this study as in the other three reviews so we refer readers to those reviews for a more technical description. FINDINGS OF SEL SERVING ADOLESCENTS PRESENTING EARLY SIGNS OF PROBLEMS The SEL programs included in this review were designed to meet the needs of students presenting a range of social, emotional, and behavioral problems, and were associated with a range of benets including improved skill Table 3. Student Outcomes Obtained at Post in 52 Studies in the Indicated Review. Outcome Category Mean Effect Size Condence Interval Number of Studies SEL skills .74 .271.21 3a Attitudes .37 .21.53 23 Positive social behavior .46 .26.66 18 Conduct problems .47 .33.62 27 Emotional distress .58 .43.73 28 Academic performance .53 .31.76 11 aBecause of the small sample size, caution is suggested in interpreting these effects. Denotes mean effect is signicantly different from zero at the .05 level. ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 150

development, attitudes, positive social behavior, and academic performance as well as reduced conduct problems and emotional distress. As seen in Table 3, most ndings for the middle and high school indicated programs were within .05 of the ES reported for the K-8 indicated programs range from .37 for positive social behavior to .74 for social emotional skills. For example, the ES for conduct problems was the same for middle and high school indicated programs and for elementary and middle school indicated programs ES  .47. The two outcomes for which there was a larger difference between the two reviews were for emotional distress ES of .58 for middle and high school indicated programs and .50 for elementary and middle school indicated programs and academic performance ES of .53 for middle and high school indicated programs and .43 for elementary and middle school indicated programs. Of note, the ES for positive social behavior ES  .46 was more than twice the magnitude of the ES found for social skills in another review of behavioral interventions Quinn, Kavale, Mathur, Rutherford,  Forness, 1999; i.e., .46 versus .20. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROGRAMS ASSOCIATED WITH THE STRONGEST EFFECTS We turn now to highlight three of the highly effective programs in this set of studies that included detailed descriptions of the SEL interventions and illustrate a range of different SEL approaches. By highly effective, we mean the studies that produced large positive ES on the previously described six outcomes: SEL skills, attitudes, positive social behavior, academic performance, conduct problems, and emotional distress see Table 1. The rst program, CWD, designed for middle school students exhibiting depressive symptoms followed a cognitive-behavioral, psychoeducational treatment paradigm Lewinsohn  Clarke, 1984 with a few modications including the introduction of communication, negotiation, and problemsolving skills and a parent training component Kahn  Kehle, 1990. CWD included 12 one-hour sessions followed by one-month and six-month booster sessions delivered in small groups average of 5 students in each. Sessions involved instruction designed to improve students ability to correctly identify and label emotions, self-change skills including how to set goals and reinforce positive thoughts, as well as SST in communication and negotiationproblem-solving skills. Participation in the program was Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 151

associated with gains in students attitudes ES  1.18 and reductions in emotional distress ES  2.05 as compared to comparison students. The second program, Cognitive Relaxation Coping Skills CRCS, designed for middle school students experiencing high levels of anger incorporated cognitive relaxation coping skills instruction Deffenbacher et al., 1996. CRCS included nine 45-minute sessions delivered in small groups average of 1214 students in each during regular school hours. The rst few sessions focused on helping students identify different angerprovoking situations and learn relaxation and coping skills that can be used when handling these types of situations. Students were given ample opportunities to practice these skills as well as homework assignments to reinforce these skills outside of the curriculum. The nal few sessions focused on how emotions and cognitive thoughts inuence anger and how correctly labeling emotions and thoughts that arise in anger-provoking situations can help to identify the appropriate coping skills to use. Participation in the program was associated with gains in students self-esteem ES  1.21, reduction in anxiety ES  .52, and decrease of conduct problems ES  1.27 as compared to comparison students. The third program designed for high school students experiencing high levels of anxiety paralleled Meichenbaums 1985 Stress Inoculation Training SIT model and included an assertiveness training component Kiselica et al., 1994. This program included eight 50-minute sessions delivered in small groups average of six students in each by two professional counselors. During the rst ve sessions, the counselors introduced relaxation and coping strategies designed to help students recognize and manage their anxiety as well as cognitive restructuring techniques designed to help students correctly label their emotions and learn self-management skills. During the remaining three sessions, assertive skills designed to increase social awareness and improve peer relationships were introduced and practiced in role-play situations. Participation in the program was associated with reductions in students anxiety ES  .82 and stress-related symptoms ES  .72, as well as gains in grade point average ES  .36 relative to comparison students. Overall, effective SEL programs for students with LD and BD involved explicit skills instruction in correctly labeling and identifying emotions, selfmanagement skills designed for students to learn how to control their anger, relationship skills such as those covered in assertiveness training, and problem-solving skills to help students generate alternative solutions when faced with anxiety-inducing or anger-provoking situations. ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 152

DESCRIPTION OF PROVEN SEL UNIVERSAL PROGRAMS Although the indicated review of SEL programs includes approaches specic to students with LD or BD, there are a number of effective universal SEL programs relevant for all students in a school that we also wanted to highlight. Unfortunately, only a few universal SEL interventions have analyzed effects separately for students with LD or BD; however, the results of these analyses are promising. For example, the FAST Track programs and the Multisite Violence Prevention Project both found differentially positive effects for students manifesting aggressive behavior Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 2010; Multisite Violence Prevention Project, 2009. In the following text, we describe three universal SEL programs with a compelling body of research to support their effectiveness7 although less evidence is available at the high school level. First, Lions Quest programs are based on social development, social inuence, and social cognitive approaches that are designed to teach students cognitive-behavioral skills e.g., self-refusal, communication, goal-setting skills to build socialemotional competencies, and to increase knowledge and consequences of drug use and bullying Eisen, Zellman,  Murray, 2003. The middle school curriculum of Lions Quest Skills for Adolescence consists of 102 sessions and the high school curriculum of Lions Quest Skills for Action consists of 33 sessions on leadership and service learning in the curriculum manual, 166 social and emotional skills in the Skills Bank, and 15 sessions in the drug prevention supplement. While the programs are designed to be offered as year-long courses that are taught at least one day per week, studies have evaluated shorter versions that meet program goals Rain  Brehm Consulting Group, 2006. Both middle and high school versions can be implemented into existing subject areas or taught as an evidence-based, stand-alone nine-week course by trained classroom teachers. In addition, Lions Quest programs work to reinforce essential academic, social, and emotional skills throughout the school day, in the home setting, and in the community through guides and materials on how to improve school climate and how to engage families and community members in activities that reinforce lesson content. Service learning is included in both programs, which has been shown to reinforce academic, social, and emotional skills in all students and to be especially effective for students with a higher tendency toward dropping out of school Muscott, 2000. Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 153

The RULER Approach to Social and Emotional Learning RULER Brackett et al., 2009; Rivers  Brackett, 2011 involves a series of evidence-based SEL programs anchored in the achievement model of emotional literacy Brackett, Rivers, Reyes,  Salovey, 2012. This model posits that teaching children and adults how to Recognize, Understand, Label, Express, and Regulate emotions RULER leads to enhanced personal, social, and academic outcomes for students and all adults involved in their education Brackett, Rivers, Reyes,  Salovey, 2010. Both adults and children learn specic anchor tools that help to develop the RULER skills, create a positive school climate, and promote school success. For example, the Mood Meter teaches selfand social-awareness, by helping all stakeholders develop a sophisticated emotion vocabulary. Another key component of RULER is the Feeling Words Curriculum, which works to integrate seamlessly into standard classroom curricula in language arts, social studies, and other subjects. This curriculum provides opportunities for students to regularly and consistently write, read, speak, listen, and think about emotions in the context of learning. In this ve-step process, teachers rst introduce a feeling word e.g., discouraged, students then connect this emotion to content studied across the curriculum e.g., a poem, involve their family members in structured conversations about this emotion, express their understanding of the emotion using visual representations, and engage in a strategy-building session to brainstorm ways to reach a regulation goal e.g., reduce feelings of being discouraged. This curriculum is only one part of the overarching districtwide approach that involves a long-term implementation process, including training for school leaders, teachers and support staff, and families Brackett et al., 2009. A third program, the 4Rs Reading, Writing, Respect, and Resolution, originally developed for elementary schools by the Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility, has recently been adapted for middle school settings. The 4Rs has been evaluated within the context of a large randomized control trial Brown, Jones, LaRusso,  Aber, 2010; Jones, Brown,  Aber, 2011. The 4Rs links the teaching of social and emotional competencies and literacy development by using high-quality childrens literature as a foundation for teaching students anger management, assertiveness, cooperation, empathy, and problem-solving skills. Primary program components include a 21to 35-lesson literacy-based curriculum and 25 hours of teacher training followed by ongoing coaching. Each of the seven units focuses on a specic grade-appropriate book and begins with a group discussion of primary themes and content. Students then practice ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 154

three to ve SEL skills within the context of the larger book discussion. The lessons, which involve opportunities for skill development, effective conict resolution, and community building, are laid out for teachers in a standardized, grade-specic teaching guide. AREAS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH We outline six directions for future research in adolescent development for students with LD and BD as well as SEL programs and practices for adolescents. First, although there is a considerable amount of work about development for students with LD and BD during middle school, there is less research on this population in high school or postsecondary settings. Of particular need is research on factors promoting successful transition to postsecondary settings and the supports that help these students to persist and graduate from postsecondary settings. Second, we encourage researchers to explore the heterogeneity that exists among students with LD and students with BD from a resiliency framework Jessor, 1991; Margalit, 1993. For example, Cowen and Work 1988 found college students with LD had developed coping strategies to compensate for their processing decits. Because only a small percentage of students with LD attend college, it would be fruitful to study this subgroup to understand what competencies they possess that have helped them to succeed in this setting. Third, although we described ndings from meta-analytic reviews of SEL programs both for students with LD and BD and for all students in general education settings, there is a need for research on the effectiveness of other SEL approaches that did not t into the scope of these reviews. For example, there are some encouraging ndings about the use of advisory periods which work to promote positive studentteacher relationships and increase student bonding and connectedness Mac Iver, 1990. Another promising area to investigate involves incorporating experiential learning or service learning into the school day, which is particularly relevant for high school and college settings Celio, Durlak,  Dymnicki, 2011; Muscott, 2000 and could be effective in helping students with LD and BD to develop more positive relationships with others. Fourth, we encourage more studies to incorporate measures of mediators or other mechanisms to conrm or disprove the theoretical assumptions about how SEL programs are leading to observed changes for students with LD and BD. Given the ndings on the differences in adolescent development for this population e.g., lower self-concept, it seems particularly important to Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 155

identify malleable factors that SEL programs can attempt to target and improve. Fifth, the NLTS documents different outcomes for students based on race, ethnicity and gender as well as language and economic status. Future research should address these factors for this population. Finally, when evaluating the impact of indicated and universal SEL approaches for this special population, differential analyses should be conducted to understand the effects of the SEL program for students with LD and BD as well as those with co-occurring LD and BD. This is particularly true for universal SEL approaches that could have additional benets for these students but have not been extensively empirically tested in the literature. Research indicates many benets of incorporating SEL into secondary education settings through evidence-based programs and practice that could help students with LD and BD to develop the competencies that can support healthy adolescent development and adult functioning. NOTES 1. Frequently, we describe ndings for students with LD versus BD, as there is a much larger body of research on this population. However, researchers have demonstrated a large overlap of these populations between 24 and 75 of students experience both types of problems; Fristad, Topolosky, Weller,  Weller, 1992; McConaughy, Mattison,  Peterson, 1994. 2. Efforts are underway to understand the efcacy of the RtI model applied at the secondary level National Center on Response to Intervention, 2011, given most research evidence speaks to its effectiveness in elementary school settings. 3. While the study reports an ES of .91 for emotional distress, given the small number of outcomes included n  5, we do not report this as the upper range. 4. Programs were only coded as having no implementation problems if implementation was monitored and authors reported no problems or that the program was delivered as intended. 5. Sequenced refers to whether the program uses a connected and coordinated set of activities to achieve their objectives that build upon skill development; active refers to the program including active versus didactic forms of learning to help youth learn new skills; focused refers to a program having at least one component devoted to developing personal or social skills, and explicit refers to the program targeting specic SEL skills rather than targeting skill development in a more general way. 6. Studies eligible for inclusion in the indicated review had to be written in English, appear by December 2007, emphasize the development of one or more SEL competencies, target students between the ages of 5 and 13 i.e., grades K-8, include a control group, and report information sufcient for calculating effect sizes usually the mean outcome of a treatment group and that of a control group post-intervention and the standard deviation of each. ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 156

7. The middle school version of Lions Quest is identied as a SAMSHA model program and the middle and high school versions are recognized by the Character Education Partnership as school-based programs with scientically demonstrated student outcomes, and as Highly Effective service-learning programs by the National Youth Leadership Council. Emotional Literacy in the Classroom was described as a model SEL program Elbertson et al., 2010 and has found a range of positive effects such as 11 gains in academic grades and 19 gains in adaptability for middle school students Brackett et al., 2012. The elementary version of 4Rs was associated with improvements across several domains including hostile attributional bias, interpersonal negotiation strategies, attention skills, depression, attendance, and aggressive and socially competent behavior Brown et al., 2010; Jones et al., 2011. REFERENCES Alverson, C. Y., Naranjo, J. M., Yamamoto, S.,  Unruh, D. K. 2010. Methods for collecting post school outcomes data on young adults with disabilities: A literature synthesis. Career Development for Exceptional Individuals, 333, 155164. American Psychological Association. 2002. Developing adolescents: A reference for professionals. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Anderson, E. 1994. The code of the streets. Atlantic Monthly, 2735, 8194. Ayres, R., Cooley, E.,  Dunn, C. 1990. Self-concept, attribution, and persistence in learning disabled students. Journal of School Psychology, 28, 153163. Bagwell, C. L., Newcomb, A. F.,  Bukowski, W. M. 1998. Preadolescent friendship and peer rejection as predictors of adult adjustment. Child Development, 69, 140153. Baumeister, R. E., Smart, L.,  Boden, J. M. 1996. Relation of threatened egotism to violence and aggression: The dark side of high self-esteem. Psychological Review, 1031, 533. Berger, K. S. 2001. The developing person through the life span. New York, NY: Worth Publishers. Berndt, T. J., Hawkins, J. A.,  Jiao, Z. 1999. Inuences of friends and friendships on adjustment to junior high school. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 45, 1341. Brackett, M. A., Patti, J., Stern, R., Rivers, S. E., Elbertson, N., Chisholm, C.,  Salovey, P. 2009. A sustainable, skill-based model to building emotionally literate schools. In R. Thompson, M. Hughes  J. B. Terrell Eds., Handbook of developing emotional and social intelligence: Best practices, case studies, and tools pp. 329358. New York, NY: Wiley. Brackett, M. A., Rivers, S. E., Reyes, M. R.,  Salovey, P. 2010. Using emotional literacy to improve classroom social-emotional processes. Presented to WT GrantSpencer Grantees Meeting. Washington, DC. Brackett, M. A., Rivers, S. E., Reyes, M. R.,  Salovey, P. 2012. Enhancing academic performance and social and emotional competence with the RULER Feeling Words Curriculum. Learning and Individual Differences, 222, 218224. Bradley, R., Doolittle, J.,  Bartolotta, R. 2008. Building on the data and adding to the discussion: The experiences and outcomes of students with emotional disturbance. Journal of Behavioral Education, 17, 423. Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 157

Brown, J. L., Jones, S. M., LaRusso, M. D.,  Aber, J. L. 2010. Improving classroom quality: Teacher inuences and experimental impacts of the 4Rs Program. Journal of Educational Psychology, 1021, 153167. Bryan, T., Burstein, K.,  Ergul, C. 2004. The social-emotional side of learning disabilities: A science-based presentation of the state of the art. Learning Disability Quarterly, 271, 4653. Celio, C., Durlak, J. D.,  Dymnicki, A. B. 2011. A meta-analysis of the impact of servicelearning on students. Journal of Experiential Education, 342, 164181. Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. 2010. The effects of a multiyear universal socialemotional learning program: The role of student and school characteristics. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78, 156168. Cowen, E. L.,  Work, W. C. 1988. Resilient children, psychological wellness, and primary prevention. American Journal of Community Psychology, 64, 591607. Crick, N. R.,  Dodge, K. A. 1994. A review and reformulation of social informationprocessing mechanisms in childrens social adjustment. Psychological Bulletin, 1151, 74101. Deffenbacher, J. L., Lynch, R. S., Oetting, E. R.,  Kemper, C. C. 1996. Anger reduction in early adolescents. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 43, 149157. Deshler, D., Schumaker, J. B.,  Lenz, B. 1984. Academic and cognitive interventions for LD adolescents: Part I. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 17, 108117. Dishion, T. J.,  Dodge, K. A. 2005. Peer contagion in interventions for children and adolescents: Moving towards an understanding of the ecology and dynamics of change. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 33, 395400. Dishion, T. J., McCord, J.,  Poulin, F. 1999. When interventions harm: Peer groups and problem behavior. American Psychologist, 54, 755764. Dishion, T. J., Poulin, F.,  Burraston, B. 2001. Peer group dynamics associated with iatrogenic effect in group interventions with high-risk young adolescents. New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 91, 7992. Dishion, T. J.,  Van Ryzin, M. J. 2011. Peer contagion dynamics in problem behavior and violence: Implications for intervention and policy. ISSB Bulletin, 60, 611. Dodge, K. A., Lansford, J. E., Burks, V. S., Bates, J. E., Pettit, G. S., Fontaine, R.,  Price, J. M. 2003. Peer rejection and social information-processing factors in the development of aggressive behavior problems in children. Child Development, 742, 374393. Durlak, J. A., Weissberg, R. P., Dymnicki, A. B., Taylor, R. D.,  Schellinger, K. B. 2011. The impact of enhancing students social and emotional learning: A meta-analysis of school-based universal interventions. Child Development, 821, 405432. Durlak, J. A., Weissberg, R. P.,  Pachan, M. 2010. A meta-analysis of after-school programs that seek to promote personal and social skills in children and adolescents. American Journal of Community Psychology, 45, 294309. Dweck, C. S. 1986. Motivational processes affecting learning. American Psychologist, 4110, 10401048. Dymnicki, A., Antonio, T.,  Henry, D. 2011. Levels and growth of specic and general norms for nonviolence among middle school students. Journal of Adolescence, 345, 965976. Eisen, M., Zellman, G. L.,  Murray, D. M. 2003. Evaluating the LionsQuest Skills for Adolescence drug education program: Second-year behavior outcomes. Addictive Behaviors, 28, 883897. ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 158

Eisenberg, N. 2006. In W. Damon  R. M. Lerner Eds., Handbook of child psychology 6th ed., pp. 124. New York, NY: Wiley. Elbertson, N., Brackett, M. A.,  Weissberg, R. 2010. School-based social and emotional learning SEL programming: Current perspectives. In A. Hargreaves, M. Fullan, D. Hopkins  A. Lieberman Eds., The second international handbook of educational change pp. 10171032. New York, NY: Springer. Feagans, L. V., Merriwether, A. M.,  Haldane, D. 1991. Goodness of t in the home: Its relationship to school behavior and achievement in children with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 247, 413420. Frick, P. J. 2004. Developmental pathways to conduct disorder: Implications for serving youth who show severe aggressive and antisocial behavior. Psychology in the Schools, 418, 823834. Frick, P. J., Cornell, A. H., Bodin, S. D., Dane, H. A., Barry, C. T.,  Loney, B. R. 2003. Callous-unemotional traits and developmental pathways to severe conduct problems. Developmental Psychology, 39, 246260. Frick, P. J.,  Morris, A. S. 2004. Temperament and developmental pathways to conduct problems. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 33, 5468. Fristad, M. A., Topolosky, S., Weller, E. B.,  Weller, R. A. 1992. Depression and learning disabilities in children. Journal of Affective Disorders, 261, 5358. Fuchs, D.,  Fuchs, L. S. 2011. Introduction to response to intervention: What, why, and how valid is it? Reading Research Quarterly, 411, 9399. Gallegos, J., Langley, A.,  Villegas, D. 2012. Anxiety, depression, and coping skills among Mexican school children: A comparison of students with and without learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 351, 5461. Garbarino, J.,  Haslam, R. A. 2005. Lost boys: Why our sons turn violent and how we can save them. Paediatrics  Child Health, 108, 447450. Gardecki, R. M. 2001. Racial differences in youth employment. Monthly Labor Review, 1248, 5167. Gorman-Smith, D., Tolan, P. H., Zelli, A.,  Huesmann, L. 1996. The relation of family functioning to violence among inner-city minority youths. Journal of Family Psychology, 102, 115129. Green, R. J. 1990. Family communication and childrens learning disabilities: Evidence for Coless Theory of Interactivity. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 23, 145148. Gresham, F. M.,  MacMillan, D. L. 1997. Social competence and affective characteristics of students with mild disabilities. Review of Educational Research, 674, 377415. Guerra, N. G.,  Bradshaw, C. P. 2008. Linking the prevention of problem behaviors and positive youth development: Core competencies for positive youth development and risk prevention. New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 122, 117. Hamburg, D. A. 1997. Toward a strategy for healthy adolescent development. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 712. Hamre, B.,  Pianta, B. 2001. Early teacherchild relationships and the trajectory of childrens school outcomes through eighth grade. Child Development, 72, 625638. Harter, S. 1998. The development of self-representations. In W. Damon Series Ed.  N. Eisenberg Vol. Ed., Handbook of child psychology Vol. 3: Social, emotional, and personality development 5th ed. pp. 553617. New York, NY: Wiley. Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 159

Hawkins, J. D., Catalano, R. E.,  Miller, J. Y. 1992. Risk and protective factors for alcohol and other drug problems in adolescence and early adulthood: Implications for substance abuse prevention. Psychological Bulletin, 1121, 64105. Hedges, L. V.,  Olkin, I. 1985. Statistical methods for meta-analysis. New York, NY: Academic Press. Hoffman, S. 2008. Updated estimates of the consequences of teen childbearing for mothers. In S. Hoffman  R. Maynard Eds., Kids having kids: Economic costs and social consequences of teen pregnancy pp. 74118. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute Press. Jessor, R. 1991. Risk behavior in adolescence: A psychosocial framework for understanding and action. Journal of Adolescent Health, 12, 597605. Jones, C. J. 2009. Social and emotional development of exceptional students: Disabled and gifted 2nd ed. New York, NY: LAbeille Publishing. Jones, S. M., Brown, J. L.,  Aber, L. 2011. Two-year impacts of a universal school-based social-emotional and literacy intervention: An experiment in translational developmental research. Child Development, 822, 533554. Kahn, J. S.,  Kehle, T. J. 1990. Comparison of cognitive-behavioral, relaxation, and selfmodeling interventions for depression among middle school students. School Psychology Review, 192, 196212. Kavale, K. A.,  Forness, S. R. 1996. Social skill decits and LD: A meta-analysis. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 293, 226237. Kiselica, M. S., Baker, S. B., Thomas, R. N.,  Reedy, S. 1994. Effects of stress inoculation training on anxiety, stress, and academic performance among adolescents. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 413, 335342. Kiuru, N., Leskinen, E., Nurmi, J.,  Salmela-Aro, K. 2011. Depressive symptoms during adolescence: Do learning difculties matter? International Journal of Behavioral Development, 354, 298306. Kress, J. S.,  Elias, M. J. 2006. School based social and emotional learning programs. In K. A. Renninger  I. E. Sigel Eds., Handbook of child psychology Vol. 4. Child psychology in practice 6th ed., pp. 592618. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Larson, R.,  Richards, M. H. 1991. Daily companionship in late childhood and early adolescence: Changing developmental contexts. Child Development, 622, 284300. Lewinsohn, P. M.,  Clarke, G. 1984. Group treatment of depressed individuals. The Coping with Depression course. Advances in Behavior Research and Therapy, 6, 99114. Lewis, S. K.,  Lawrence-Patterson, E. L. 1989. Locus of control of children with learning disabilities and perceived locus of control by signicant others. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 22, 155157. Lewis, T. J.,  Sugai, G. 1999. Effective behavior support: A systems approach to proactive schoolwide management. Focus on Exceptional Children, 316, 124. Lipsey, M. W.,  Wilson, D. B. 2001. Practical meta-analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Maag, J. W.,  Reid, R. 2006. Depression among students with learning disabilities: Assessing the risk. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 391, 310. Mac Iver, D. J. 1990. Meeting the needs of young adolescents: Advisory groups, interdisciplinary teaching groups, and school transition programs. The Phi Delta Kappan, 716, 458464. Margalit, M. 1991. Understanding loneliness among students with learning disabilities. Behavior Change, 8, 167173. ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 160

Margalit, M. 1993. Resilience model among individuals with learning disabilities: Proximal and distal inuences. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 182, 1836. Margalit, M.,  Zak, I. 1984. Anxiety and self-concept of learning disabled children. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 17, 537539. Mart, A., Dusenbury, L.,  Weissberg, R. P. 2011. Social, emotional, and academic learning: Complementary goals for school-family partnerships. In S. Redding, M. Murphy  P. Sheley Eds., Handbook on family and community engagement pp. 3743. Lincoln, IL: Academic Development InstituteCenter on Innovation and Improvement. McConaughy, S. H., Mattison, R. E.,  Peterson, R. L. 1994. Behavioralemotional problems of children with serious emotional disturbances and learning disabilities. School Psychology Review, 231, 8198. Meichenbaum, D. 1985. Stress inoculation training. New York, NY: Pergamon Press. Moftt, T. E. 1993. Adolescence-limited and life-course-persistent antisocial behavior: A developmental taxonomy. Psychological Review, 100, 674701. Montague, M., Ender, C., Dietz, S., Dixon, J.,  Cavendish, W. M. 2008. A longitudinal study of depressive symptomology and self-concept in adolescents. Journal of Special Education, 422, 6778. Multisite Violence Prevention Project. 2008. The Multisite Violence Prevention Project: Impact of a universal school-based violence prevention program on social-cognitive outcomes. Prevention Science, 9, 231244. Muscott, H. S. 2000. A review and analysis of service-learning programs involving students with emotionalbehavioral disorders. Education  Treatment of Children, 233, 346368. National Center on Response to Intervention. 2011. RTI in middle schools: Frequently asked questions. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Ofce of Special Education Programs. Nelson, J. R., Benner, G. J., Lane, K.,  Smith, B. W. 2004. An investigation of the academic achievement of K-12 students with emotional and behavioral disorders in public school settings. Exceptional Children, 71, 5973. Oliver, J. M., Cole, N. H.,  Hollingsworth, H. 1991. Learning disabilities as functions of familial learning problems and developmental problems. Exceptional Children, 57, 427440. Osher, D., Bear, G. G., Sprague, J. R.,  Doyle, W. 2010. How can we improve school discipline? Educational Researcher, 391, 4858. Osher, D., Dwyer, K.,  Jimerson, S. 2006. Foundations of school violence and safety. In S. Jimerson  M. Furlong Eds., Handbook of school violence and school safety: From research to practice pp. 5171. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Pardini, D. A., Lochman, J. E.,  Frick, P. J. 2003. Callous unemotional traits and socialcognitive processes in adjudicated youths. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 42, 364371. Payton, J., Weissberg, R. P., Durlak, J. A., Dymnicki, A. B., Taylor, R. D., Schellinger, K. B.,  Pachan, M. 2008. The positive impact of social and emotional learning for kindergarten to eighth-grade students: Findings from three scientic reviews. Chicago, IL: Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning. Pearl, R., Donahue, M.,  Bryan, T. 1986. Social relationship of learning disabled children. In J. K. Torgessen  B. Y. L. Wong Eds., Psychological and educational perspectives on learning disabilities pp. 193224. New York, NY: Academic Press. Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 161

Perry, C. L. 2000. Preadolescent and adolescent inuences on health. In B. D. Smedley  S. L. Syme Eds., Promoting health: Intervention strategies from social and behavioral research pp. 217253. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. Quinn, M. M., Kavale, K. A., Mathur, S. R., Rutherford, R. B.,  Forness, S. R. 1999. A meta-analysis of social skill interventions for students with emotional or behavioral disorders. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 71, 5464. Rain  Brehm Consulting Group Inc. 2006. Lions-Quest Skills for Action: Teens, Alcohol, and other drugs TAOD: Module 2 Lions-Quest TAOD section. U.S. Department of Education, Ofce of Safe  Drug Free Schools. Raviv, D.,  Stone, C. A. 1991. Individual differences in the self-image of adolescents with learning disabilities: The roles of severity, time of diagnosis, and parental perceptions. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 24, 602611. Resnick, M. D., Bearman, P. S., Blum, R. W., Bauman, K. E., Harris, K. M., Jones, J., y Udry, J. R. 1997. Protecting adolescents from harm: Findings from the National Longitudinal Study on Adolescent Health. Journal of the American Medical Association, 278, 823832. Riordan, M. 2009. The path to smoking addition starts at very young ages. Washington, DC: Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. Rivers, S. E.,  Brackett, M. A. 2011. Achieving standards in the English language arts and more using The RULER Approach to Social and Emotional Learning. Reading and Writing Quarterly, 27, 75100. Roberts, C.,  Zubrick, S. 1993. Factors inuencing the social status of children with mild academic disabilities in regular classrooms. Exceptional Children, 59, 192202. Rothbart, M. K.,  Bates, J. E. 1998. Temperament. In W. Damon Series Ed.  N. Eisenberg Vol. Ed., Handbook of child psychology Vol. 3: Social, emotional, and personality development pp. 105176. New York, NY: Wiley. Sanford, C., Newman, L., Wagner, M., Cameto, R., Knokey, A. M.,  Shaver, D. 2011. The post-high school outcomes of young adults with disabilities up to 6 years after high school. Key ndings from the National Longitudinal Transition Study-2 NLTS2 NCSER 20113004. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International. Scales, P. C.,  Leffert, N. 2004. Developmental assets: A synthesis of the scientic research on adolescent development 2nd ed. Minneapolis, MN: Search Institute. Semrud-Clikeman, M.,  Hynd, G. W. 1990. Right hemispheric dysfunction in nonverbal learning disabilities: Social, academic, and adaptive functioning in adults and children. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 196209. Staub, E. 1989. The roots of evil: The origins of genocide and other group violence. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Steinberg, L.,  Morris, A. S. 2001. Adolescent development. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 83110. Swanson, H. L.,  Malone, S. 1992. Social skills and learning disabilities: A meta-analysis of the literature. School Psychology Review, 21, 427443. U.S. Census Bureau. 2011. Census 2010 QT-P1: Age groups and sex: 2010. Census 2010 Summary File 1. Retrieved from http:factnder2.census.govrestdnldController deliver?ts  346246622580. Accessed on February 1, 2012. Wagner, M., Cameto, R.  Newman, L. 2003. Youth with disabilities: A changing population. A report of ndings from the National Longitudinal Transition Study NLTS and ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 162

the National Longitudinal Transition Study-2 NLTS2. Retrieved from http: www.nlts2.orgreports200304-1nlts2report200304-1execsum.pdf. Accessed on March 30, 2012. Warner, M. M., Schumaker, J. B., Alley, G. R.,  Deshler, D. D. 1980. Learning disabled adolescents in the public schools: Are they different from other low-achievers? Exceptional Education Quarterly, 12, 2736. Wiener, J.,  Schneider, B. 2002. A multisource exploration of friendship patterns of children with and without learning disabilities. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 30, 127141. Zins, J. E., Weissberg, R. P., Wang, M. C.,  Walberg, H. J. Eds. 2004. Building academic success on social and emotional learning: What does the research say? New York, NY: Teachers College Press. Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 163

APPENDIX A: BIBLIOGRAPHY OF REVIEWED INDICATED STUDIES Arbuthnot, J.,  Gordon, D. A. 1986. Behavioral and cognitive effects of a moral reasoning development intervention for high-risk behavior-disordered adolescents. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54, 208216. Asarnow, J. R., Scott, C. V.,  Mintz, J. 2002. A combined cognitive-behavioral family education intervention for depression in children: A treatment development study. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 26, 221229. Bienert, H.,  Schneider, B. H. 1995. Decit specic social skills training with peer-nominated aggressive disruptive and sensitive-isolated preadolescents. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 24, 287299. Block, J. 1978. Effects of a rational-emotive mental health program on poorly achieving, disruptive high school students. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 251, 6165. Dadds, M. R., Spence, S. H., Holland, D. E., Barrett, P. M.,  Laurens, K. R. 1997. Prevention and early intervention for anxiety disorders: A controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 627635. Deffenbacher, J. L., Lynch, R. S., Oetting, E. R.,  Kemper, C. C. 1996. Anger reduction in early adolescents. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 43, 149157. Dishion, T. J.,  Andrews, D. W. 1995. Preventing escalation in problem behaviors with highrisk young adolescents: Immediate and 1-year outcomes. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 538548. Eggert, L. L., Thompson, E. A., Herting, J. R., Nicholas, L. J.,  Dicker, B. G. 1994. Preventing adolescent drug abuse and high school dropout through an intensive schoolbased social network development program. American Journal of Health Promotion, 83, 202215. Ferrer-Wreder, L., Lorente, C. C., Kurtines, W., Briones, E., Bussell, J., Berman, S., et al. 2002. Promoting identity development in marginalized youth. Journal of Adolescent Research, 17, 168187. Filipczak, J., Archer, M.,  Friedman, R. M. 1980. In-school social skills training use with disruptive adolescents. Behavior Modication, 4, 243263. Fraser, M. W., Day, S. H., Galinsky, M. J., Hodges, V. G.,  Smokowski, P. R. 2004. Conduct problems and peer rejection in childhood: A randomized trial of the Making Choices and Strong Families programs. Research on Social Work Practice, 14, 313324. Gallegos, R. A. 1985. A brief school based preventive intervention with vulnerable early adolescents. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Denver. Gonzalez, G. M. 1988. Comparing the efcacy of rational-emotive and process-oriented shortterm group approaches for potential Hispanic school dropouts. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, California School of Professional Psychology. Greene, R. W.,  Ollendick, T. H. 1993. Evaluation of a multidimensional program for sixthgraders in transition from elementary to middle school. Journal of Community Psychology, 21, 162176. Greenleaf, D. O. 1982. The use of structured learning therapy and transfer programming with disruptive adolescents in a school setting. Journal of School Psychology, 20, 122130. Hammond, W. R.,  Yung, B. R. 1991. Preventing violence in at-risk African-American youth. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, 2, 359373. ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 164

Harris, K. R.,  Brown, R. D. 1982. Cognitive behavior modication and informed teacher treatments for shy children. Journal of Experimental Education, 50, 137143. Hausman, A., Pierce, G.,  Briggs, L. 1996. Evaluation of comprehensive violence prevention education: Effects on student behavior. Journal of Adolescent Health, 192, 104110. Hiebert, B., Kirby, B.,  Jaknavorian, A. 1989. School-based relaxation: Attempting primary prevention. Canadian Journal of Counseling, 23, 273287. Hudley, C.,  Graham, S. 1993. An attributional intervention to reduce peer-directed aggression among African-American boys. Child Development, 64, 124138. Huey, W. C.,  Rank, R. C. 1984. Effects of counselor and peer-led group assertive training in Black adolescent aggression. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 311, 9598. Jaycox, L. H., Reivich, K. J., Gillham, J.,  Seligman, M. E. P. 1994. Prevention of depressive symptoms in school children. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 328, 801816. Johnson, T., Tyler, V., Thompson, R.,  Jones, E. 1971. Systematic desensitization and assertive training in the treatment of speech anxiety in middle-school students. Psychology in the Schools, 8, 263267. Kahn, J. S., Kehle, T. J., Jenson, W. R.,  Clark, E. 1990. Comparison of cognitivebehavioral, relaxation, and self-modeling interventions for depression among middleschool students. School Psychology Review, 19, 196211. Kiselica, M. S., Baker, S. B., Thomas, R. N.,  Reedy, S. 1994. Effects of stress inoculation training on anxiety, stress, and academic performance among adolescents. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 413, 335342. Lee, D. L., Hallberg, E. T.,  Hassard, H. 1979. Effects of assertion training on aggressive behavior of adolescents. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 26, 459461. Lewinsohn, P. M.,  Clarke, G. N. 1984. Group treatment of depressed individuals: The coping with depression course. Advances in Behaviour Research  Therapy, 62, 99114. Malgady, R. G., Rogler, L. H.,  Costantino, G. 1990. Heroheroine modeling for Puerto Rican adolescents: A preventive mental health intervention. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58, 469474. Muller, S. D.,  Madsen, C. H., Jr. 1970. Group desensitization for anxious children with reading problems. Psychology in the Schools, 7, 184189. Pentz, M. A. 1980. Assertion training and trainer effects on unassertive and aggressive adolescents. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 27, 7683. Possel, P., Horn, A. B., Goren, G.,  Hautzinger, M. 2004. School-based prevention of depressive symptoms in adolescents: a 6-month follow-up. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 43, 10031010. Randell, B. P., Eggert, L. L.,  Pike, K. C. 2001. Immediate post intervention effects of two brief youth suicide prevention interventions. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 31, 4161. Reynolds, W. M.,  Coats, K. I. 1986. A comparison of cognitive-behavioral therapy and relaxation training for the treatment of depression in adolescents. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54, 653660. Roberts, C., Kane, R., Thomson, H., Bishop, B.,  Hart, B. 2003. The prevention of depressive symptoms in rural school children: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 713, 622628. Silbert, K. L.,  Berry, G. L. 1991. Psychological effects of a suicide prevention unit on adolescents levels of stress, anxiety and hopelessness: Implications for counseling psychologists. Counselling Psychology Quarterly, 4, 4558. Adolescent Development and Social Emotional Learning 165

Stark, K. D., Reynolds, W. M.,  Kaslow, N. J. 1987. A comparison of the relative efcacy of self-control therapy and a behavioral problem-solving therapy for depression in children. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 15, 91113. Thompson, E. A., Eggert, L. L., Randell, B. P.,  Pike, K. C. 2001. Evaluation of indicated suicide risk prevention approaches for potential high school dropouts. American Journal of Public Health, 91, 742752. Tiffen, K.,  Spence, S. H. 1986. Responsiveness of isolated versus rejected children to social skills training. Association for Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 27, 343355. Tobias, A. K.,  Myrick, R. D. 1999. A peer facilitator-led intervention with middle school problem-behaviors students. Professional School Counseling, 3, 2733. Verduyn, C. M., Lord, W.,  Forrest, G. C. 1990. Social skills training in schools: An evaluation study. Journal of Adolescence, 13, 316. Wilson, N. H.  Rotter, J. C. 1986. Anxiety management training and study skills counseling for students on self-esteem and test anxiety and performance. The School Counselor, 34, 1831. Yu, D. L.,  Seligman, M. E. P. 2002. Preventing depressive symptoms in Chinese children. Prevention and Treatment, 5, 131. ALLISON B. DYMNICKI ET AL. 166

BEYOND GRADE RETENTION AND SOCIAL PROMOTION: TOWARD SUPPORTING STUDENTS WITH LEARNING AND BEHAVIORAL DISABILITIES Shane R. Jimerson, Aaron Haddock and Jacqueline A. Brown ABSTRACT During the past decade, amid the current context emphasizing educational standards and accountability, the practice of grade retention has increased. The call for an end to social promotion has generated a variety of recommendations and legislation regarding promotion policies. This context has served as a catalyst for numerous debates regarding the use of grade retention and social promotion. In an era emphasizing evidencebased interventions, research indicates that neither grade retention nor social promotion is a successful strategy for improving educational success. Meta-analyses of studies during the past 100 years reveal deleterious outcomes associated with grade retention. Moreover, research also reveals prevention and intervention strategies that are likely to promote the social or academic competence of students at-risk of poor Classroom Behavior, Contexts, and Interventions Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, Volume 25, 167190 Copyright r 2012 by Emerald Group Publishing Limited All rights of reproduction in any form reserved ISSN: 0735-004Xdoi:10.1108S0735-004X20120000025010 167

school performance. It is essential that educational professionals are familiar with the research when implementing interventions to promote student success. This chapter provides a brief synthesis of contemporary concerns and empirical studies examining student outcomes associated with grade retention, and also describes alternatives to grade retention. Particular consideration is given to implications for students with learning and behavioral disabilities, and the importance of focusing empirically supported strategies to promote student social and cognitive competence. Overall, educational professionals are encouraged to incorporate evidence-based programs and policies to facilitate the success of all students. In the United States, the practice of grade retention as an intervention for students is a controversial topic that has been examined since the early 1900s. Grade retention is the practice where a student who has been in a specic grade level for a full school year is required to remain at that level for a subsequent school year Jackson, 1975; Jimerson, 2001. The following chapter provides a brief synthesis of contemporary concerns and empirical studies examining student outcomes associated with grade retention and also describes alternatives to grade retention. Particular consideration is given to implications for students with learning and behavioral disabilities, and the importance of focusing empirically supported strategies to promote student social and cognitive competence. With the No Child Left Behind federal legislation passed in 2001, U.S. states increasingly use performance on tests to evaluate schools and make decisions about grade promotion, leading to a rise in the utilization of grade retention since the early 1990s Bali, Anagnostopoulos,  Roberts, 2005; Frederick  Hauser, 2008; Hauser, Frederick,  Andrews, 2007; Owings  Magliaro, 1998; Roderick  Nagaoka, 2005; Wu, West,  Hughes, 2008. Although grade retention is increasingly employed, recent research has indicated that the use of test-based retention policies may violate professional standards for fair and appropriate test use Peneld, 2010. Grade promotion is not always tied to standardized assessments in other countries, yet retention is used at varying rates in countries around the world Gue vremont, Roos,  Brownell, 2007; Uysal, 2010. Although individual differences exist among retained students, factors that are often associated with an increased risk of retention include living in poverty, frequent changes in school or chronic absenteeism, reading and behavior problems, SHANE R. JIMERSON ET AL. 168

difculties with peer relationships, and social immaturity Jimerson  Skokut, 2008; Tomchin  Impara, 1992. Although few studies focused on outcomes associated with grade retention have specically examined students with learning and behavioral disabilities, some studies reveal that students who were retained in early grades may subsequently receive special education services, in some instances being identied with a learning or behavioral disability later in their educational experience Hauser et al., 2007; Temple, Reynolds, Arteaga, 2010. Findings from the Chicago Longitudinal Study CLS, 2005 indicate that in the Chicago public schools, students with learning disabilities were much more likely to be addressed by the school practice of grade retention Temple et al., 2010, p. 720 than placement in special education. Due to lack of funding and resources, impoverished schools are frequently unable to provide special education services to all children in need. As a result, the CLS study reveals that some schools may reserve special education services for students with the most apparent learning problems and utilize grade retention as an alternative method of addressing the needs of students with learning disabilities, resulting in an underidentication of children qualifying for special education placement and the provision of inappropriate services for children with learning difculties Temple et al., 2010. Although the pervasiveness of such a practice is unclear, special education practitioners, professionals, and scholars recognize the risk it poses for students with learning disabilities. Because of potential shortand long-term effects that grade retention can have on student achievement and socio-emotional outcomes, it remains a controversial topic in research and practice. Those who advocate its use claim that it enables students making inadequate academic progress to catch up, supports students who are emotionally immature, and increases academic homogeneity within the classroom Ehmke, Drechsel,

Carstensen, 2010; Lorence, 2006. On the other hand, those opposed to grade retention emphasize the deleterious outcomes e.g., achievement, motivation to learn, self-concept revealed in multiple meta-analyses Holmes  Matthews, 1984; Jimerson, 2001. Researchers also indicate that although educators may choose to retain students because it is a fairly easy approach to implement, thorough assessment is not always conducted to determine whether students should repeat the entire grade curriculum or if they would be unable to perform specic academic and cognitive activities if promoted to the following grade level Hong  Yu, 2007. The following chapter reviews key articles and meta-analyses that inform this debate, offers a brief summary of existing critiques of grade retention research, Grade Retention 169

discusses alternatives to retention, including programs to promote social and academic development, and provides recommendations for future research and practice. RESEARCH EXAMINING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF GRADE RETENTION Too often, anecdotal evidence, clinical experience, and folklore overshadow the results of empirical research when discussing the merits and limitations of grade retention. It is essential to consider the results of empirical research examining its effectiveness. Research indicates that neither grade retention nor social promotion alone is an effective strategy for improving educational success. Moreover, as discussed in the following sections, research demonstrates that grade retention is not effective for addressing academic or socialemotional concerns, is associated with negative long-term consequences, and is perceived negatively by students. Research demonstrates that initial academic improvements may occur during the year the student is retained. However, numerous studies reveal that achievement gains decline within two to three years of retention Jacob  Lefgren, 2004; Roderick  Nagaoka, 2005. This means that over time, children who were retained either did not show higher achievement relative to their low-achieving promoted peers Beebe-Frankenberger, Bocian, MacMillan,  Gresham, 2004; Hong  Raudenbush, 2005; Jimerson, Carlson, Robert, Egeland,  Sroufe, 1997; Silberglitt, Appleton, Burns,  Jimerson, 2006 or performed worse than similar groups of children who were not retained Hong  Yu, 2007; McCoy  Reynolds, 1999; Reynolds, 1992. Research has found that for most students, grade retention has a negative impact on all areas of academic achievement e.g., reading, math, oral and written language and social and emotional adjustment e.g., peer relationships, self-esteem, problem behaviors, attendance; Jimerson et al., 1997; Jimerson  Ferguson, 2007; Nagin, Pagani, Tremblay,  Vitaro, 2003. There is evidence of negative effects of retention on long-term school achievement and adjustment. Research demonstrates that during adolescence, previously experiencing grade retention during elementary school is associated with health-compromising behaviors e.g., emotional distress, low self-esteem, poor peer relations, cigarette use, alcohol and drug abuse, early onset of sexual activity, suicidal intentions, violent behaviors. Furthermore, students who were retained are much more likely to drop SHANE R. JIMERSON ET AL. 170

out of school Gue vremont et al., 2007; Jimerson, 1999; Temple, Reynolds,  Ou, 2004. A recent systematic review of research exploring dropping out of high school indicates that grade retention is one of the single most powerful predictors of high school dropout, with retained students being 5 to 11 times more likely to dropout Jimerson, Anderson,  Whipple, 2002; Rumberger, 1987, 1995. Moreover, based on data in the CLS 2005, Ou and Reynolds 2010 found that grade retention is associated with lower rates of participation in postsecondary education, above and beyond the effects of family demographics and early school achievement. Finally, grade retention is perceived negatively by students. Sixth-grade students have rated grade retention as one of the most stressful life events Anderson, Jimerson,  Whipple, 2005. Four seminal reviews provide historical perspective during the past century 19001999. The following section provides a brief synthesis of the results from published meta-analyses of research examining outcomes associated with grade retention. Meta-analysis is based on the concept of effect size ES. Calculation of ESs allows researchers to systematically pool results across studies. Thus, results from multiple studies may be included to examine the relative benet of an educational intervention. Meta-analysis statistical procedures provide a measure of the difference between two groups that is expressed in quantitative units that are comparable across studies. Analyses resulting in a negative ES suggest that an intervention retention in this case has a negative or deleterious effect relative to the comparison groups of promoted students. In the following synthesis, quotations from the original authors of the studies are used to convey the original statements without interpretation. Jackson 1975 Systematic Review Jackson 1975 provided one of the rst systematic reviews of research examining the efcacy of grade retention. This review included 30 studies published between 1911 and 1973. The purpose of this review was to determine, whether students who are doing poor academic work or who manifest emotional or social maladjustment in school are generally likely to benet more from being retained in a grade than from being promoted to the next one p. 615. Jackson declared, One general conclusion about the effects of grade retention relative to grade promotion is clearly warranted by all the results taken as a whole: There is no reliable body of evidence to indicate that grade retention is more benecial than grade Grade Retention 171

promotion for students with serious academic or adjustment difculties. Thus, those educators who retain pupils in a grade do so without valid research evidence to indicate that such treatment will provide greater benets to students with academic or adjustment difculties than will promotion to the next grade p. 627. Holmes and Matthews 1984 Meta-Analysis Holmes and Matthews 1984 completed a meta-analysis exploring the effects of retention on elementary and junior high school students, including both achievement and socio-emotional outcomes. This 1984 meta-analysis included 44 studies published between 1929 and 1981 including 4,208 retained students and 6,924 regularly promoted students. Of these 44 studies, 18 included comparison samples matched on various combinations of intelligence IQ, achievement tests, socioeconomic status SES, gender, grades, and other dimensions. The Holmes and Matthews meta-analysis indicated statistically signicant differences favoring the promoted students in each area of comparison e.g., academic achievement, language arts, reading, mathematics, work study skills, social studies, personal adjustment, social adjustment, emotional adjustment, behavior, self-concept, attitude toward school, attendance. The results of the meta-analysis indicated that overall the retained students had lower academic achievement, poorer personal adjustment, lower self-concept, and held school in less favor than promoted students. Based on the results of the meta-analysis, Holmes and Matthews 1984 concluded, Those who continue to retain pupils at grade level do so despite cumulative evidence showing that the potential for negative effects consistently outweighs positive outcomes. Because this cumulative research evidence consistently points to negative effects of nonpromotion, the burden of proof legitimately falls on proponents of retention plans to show there is compelling logic indicating success of their plans when so many other plans have failed p. 232. Holmes 1989 Meta-Analysis During the same decade, Holmes 1989 included 19 additional studies and completed another meta-analysis using a total of 63 studies published between 1925 and 1989 comparing retained students to promoted students. Of the 63 studies in this review, 25 studies included participants matched on SHANE R. JIMERSON ET AL. 172

areas such as IQ, achievement, SES, gender, grade, and other variables. Holmes reported that 54 studies found overall negative effects associated with grade retention, including socio-emotional maladjustment and lower academic achievement. Furthermore, of the nine studies that yielded positive results, the benets of retention appeared to diminish over time. For example, in these studies students often demonstrated gains during the repeated year and sometimes the following year; however, subsequent comparisons across the years usually demonstrated no signicant differences and sometimes favored the comparison group. Based on the results of the meta-analysis of 63 studies, Holmes 1989 concluded, When only wellmatched studies were examined, a greater negative effect was found for retention than in the research literature as a whole. In studies where retained children and promoted controls matched on IQ and prior achievement, repeating a grade had an average negative effect of .30 standard deviations. The weight of empirical evidence argues against grade retention p. 28. Jimerson 2001 Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Following a systematic literature search, Jimerson 2001 included 20 articles published between 1990 and 1999, totaling over 1,100 retained students and over 1,500 regularly promoted students. The studies included samples from diverse geographic regions across the United States. One of the key criteria for selection in the meta-analysis was that the study must have included an identiable comparison group of promoted students. Comparison groups ranged from those with only one matched variable to those with students who were recommended for retention but were not retained and essentially matched on all variables considered i.e., IQ, academic achievement, socio-emotional adjustment, SES, gender. Eighteen of the 20 studies included two or more matching variables. Across the 20 studies included 45 matched on or controlled for IQ, 65 matched on or controlled for academic achievement, 30 matched on or controlled for socio-emotional adjustment, 75 matched on or controlled for SES, and 70 matched on or controlled for gender. Most studies included only students retained during kindergarten, rst, second, and third grades; however, a few included students retained in kindergarten through eighth grade. Most of the studies examined outcomes through seventh grade, whereas ve included outcomes during eighth grade and beyond. Of the 20 studies, the authors of 80 of studies reported negative conclusions Grade Retention 173

regarding the efcacy of grade retention intervention for academic achievement and socio-emotional adjustment. Results of the meta-analysis indicated that overall, retained students had lower academic outcomes and more maladjusted socio-emotional and behavioral outcomes relative to the comparison group of promoted students. Based on the results of 20 studies published between 1990 and 1999, Jimerson 2001 concluded, Studies examining the efcacy of early grade retention on academic achievement and socio-emotional adjustment that have been published during the past decade report results that are consistent with the converging evidence and conclusions of research from earlier in the century that fail to demonstrate that grade retention provides greater benets to students with academic or adjustment difculties than does promotion to the next grade p. 27. Allen and Colleagues 2009 Meta-Analysis A recent meta-analytic, multilevel analysis by Allen, Chen, Willson, and Hughes 2009 focused on identifying systematic sources of variability in ESs in studies investigating the effect of retention on academic achievement to assess how the quality of research design moderates these effects. The authors used multilevel modeling to scrutinize characteristics of 207 ESs across 22 studies published between 1990 and 2007 at two levels: the study between and individual within levels. Notably, the Allen and colleagues meta-analysis evaluated the design quality of the existing recent literature, much of which is reported herein. These authors hypothesized that the negative effects found in previous meta-analyses would be decreased i.e., show more positive effects in studies that do a better job of removing the impact of preretention differences on outcomes by controlling for differences through careful selection of the comparison group and through the use of rigorous statistical controls. The results of Allen and colleagues meta-analysis 2009 challenge the widely held negative evaluation of utilizing the school practice of grade retention as an appropriate intervention for low-achieving students. The authors reported that differences in the design quality of studies account for a statistically signicant amount of the variability in ESs and concluded that studies that do a better job of removing the effect of preretention differences on achievement yield a less negative picture of the effects of grade retention. Importantly, the authors caution that these results provide little support for proponents of grade retention p. 493 since a nding of SHANE R. JIMERSON ET AL. 174

no signicant difference for retention on achievement calls into question the educational benets of grade retention policies, particularly when the added nancial expense and emotional toil retention exacts on students are taken into account. The results of these meta-analyses have revealed negative effects associated with grade retention, including lower academic achievement, higher socio-emotional maladjustment, lower self-concept, more negative attitudes toward school, and increased problem behavior. Research further indicates that retained students display more aggressive behaviors as adolescents Jimerson  Ferguson, 2007 and score signicantly higher on the Behavior Problem Index Byrd, Weitzman,  Auinger, 1997. Students must navigate the interaction of a number of environmental conditions, task demands, and social interactions with peers and adults by employing a variety of age-appropriate learning and self-regulatory strategies to engage successfully in the learning process. In accordance with their age andor grade level, students are expected to participate in classroom experiences with certain appropriate social and behavioral competencies. For example, research has shown that teachers expect students to listen attentively, follow directions, cooperate with peers, complete school work, and control their emotions. However, students with learning and behavioral disabilities frequently have trouble with the skills necessary to manage these fundamental expectations of appropriate classroom engagement. Several studies indicate that rather than enhancing struggling students social and behavioral competencies, grade retention may actually lead to increases in both externalizing and internalizing behavior that hinder students ability to participate appropriately at school. For example, researchers have found that retained students tend to display increases in aggression, oppositional behavior, and externalizing behaviors, with results of studies examining the effects of grade retention on internalizing behavior also indicating negative effects Pagani, Tremblay, Vitaro, Boulerice,  McDuff, 2001; Pianta, Tietbohl,  Bennett, 1997. Rather than assuaging the anxiety, depression, and withdrawal that disrupts attention, cripples academic performance, and leads to peer avoidance and social rejection, it appears that retaining students likely only makes their problems more acute Jimerson et al., 1997; McCombs Thomas et al., 1992; Pianta et al., 1997. A recent preliminary study by Crothers, Schreiber, Schmitt, Bell, Blasik, and Comstock 2010 provided evidence that old-for-grade students, whether due to grade retention or delayed school entry, are signicantly more likely to engage in bullying and victim behavior. These authors Grade Retention 175

hypothesized that grade-retained or delayed-entry students may be more likely to engage in bullying and victim behaviors because they are in reality displaying behavioral and learning disabilities, but are not receiving early identication and appropriate intervention, which may suggest that grade retention is associated with underidentication of children who would otherwise qualify for early intervention services, making peer rejection more likely given the presence of an untreated learning or behavioral problem. Research conducted outside of the United States has also yielded similar results. Gue vremont et al., 2007 utilized a large sample of students in kindergarten through eighth grade as well as students retained in third grade within a given year in Manitoba, Canada. Results indicated that there were no short-term improvements in standardized test scores for the majority of third-grade students and that ninth-grade students who had been retained were signicantly more likely to withdraw from school. Research conducted in Germany e.g., Ehmke et al., 2010 has also found that there are no academic differences between matched groups that are retained and those promoted with respect to math and science achievement, suggesting that it would be more benecial to promote students and provide them with additional academic support. Furthermore, a recent large-scale longitudinal study based on a random stratied sample of 122 Flemish primary schools consistently found negative effects on childrens academic growth and psychosocial functioning Goos, Van Damme, Onghena,  Petry, 2010. Given the various research designs used in grade retention research, researchers have commented upon the inability to make conclusions about the causal effects of grade retention, because random assignment to different treatment conditions is typically needed to assess causality Allen et al., 2009; Lorence, 2006; Wu, West,  Hughes, 2010. This limitation will be further discussed below when examining the critiques of grade retention research. One of the studies that was able to examine the causal effects of grade retention on different school outcomes Uysal, 2010 found that grade retention has a worsening effect on student educational achievement, leading to increases in dropout rates and decreased grades in mathematics and German. On the other hand, researchers have been more successful at examining factors that moderate the effect of grade retention on student achievement. These include school setting, peer interactions, teacher effectiveness, grade level, limited English language prociency, home-school relationships, childrens externalizing problems, number of school changes per year, and socioeconomic status Gue vremont et al., 2007; Hong  Yu, 2007; Wu et al., 2008. SHANE R. JIMERSON ET AL. 176

CRITIQUES OF GRADE RETENTION RESEARCH The primary critique of both early and more recent research involves methodological concerns and a dearth of empirical evidence Alexander, Entwisle,  Dauber, 2003; Allen et al., 2009; Jackson, 1975; Lorence, 2006; Wu et al., 2010. These researchers indicate that many studies do not use a control group of non-retained students and that a potential decline in performance may instead be due to general changes that exist for any group. They also emphasize that the most effective way to assess the effects of such practices would be to rst match students on various factors e.g., age, SES, sex and then randomly assign them to different treatment conditions to take into account initial differences in academic achievement, but that such an experimental design does not align with parent and teacher beliefs and school-based practices. Another critique is the use of group comparison strategies such as sameage or same-grade comparisons Lorence, 2006, as the specic method of comparison used may bias results. Research using same-grade comparisons has initially supported grade retention with positive effects declining after a few years, and results using same-age comparisons often indicate that promoted students have higher scores than retained students. Lorence also suggests that many sample sizes used in grade retention research are too small to yield sufcient power and valid results, and that they are not always representative of the population e.g., students from different social, economic, and cultural backgrounds. However, there has been an increased emphasis to address these concerns, particularly with respect to methodological concerns Uysal, 2010; Wu et al., 2008. Alternatives to Retention: Empirically Supported Intervention Strategies Given that the extant empirical evidence calls into question the use of grade retention to promote student achievement and adjustment, it is essential to examine empirically supported prevention and intervention strategies that may be used in lieu of grade retention. The following strategies are aimed at promoting the social and academic competence of students with learning and behavioral disabilities instead of simply retaining them see brief summary in Table 1. It is important to respect developmental, cultural, linguistic, and gender differences among students when selecting and implementing interventions. As such, there is no single silver bullet intervention that can meet the needs of all students. Rather, it is vital to Grade Retention 177

consider the context and specic needs of the individual children receiving the prevention or intervention services. Once the needs of an individual student andor the entire student population are understood, it is important for educators to be familiar with specic evidence-based intervention strategies Kratochwill  Stoiber, 2000. Although a complete review of all preventative and remedial approaches is beyond the scope of this chapter see Algozzine, Ysseldyke,  Elliot, 2002 for a discussion of research-based strategies for effective instruction; see Shinn, Walker,  Stoner, 2002 for a more extensive discussion of interventions for academic and behavior Table 1. Examples of Evidence-Based Alternatives to Grade Retention and Social Promotion.  Parent involvement with their childrens schools and education. Examples include frequent contact with teachers, supervision of homework, and ongoing communication about school activities to promote learning.  Early reading programs. Developmentally appropriate, intensive, direct instruction strategies have been effective in promoting the reading skills of low-performing students.  Early developmental programs and preschool programs to enhance language and social skills. Implementing prevention and early intervention programs is more promising than waiting for learning difculties to accumulate. Effective preschool and kindergarten programs develop language and pre-reading skills using structured, well-organized, and comprehensive approaches.  Age-appropriate and culturally sensitive instructional strategies to accelerate progress in the classroom.  Systematic assessment strategies, including continuous progress monitoring and formative evaluation, to enable ongoing modication of instructional efforts. Effective programs frequently assess student progress and modify instructional strategies accordingly.  School-based mental health programs. These programs are often valuable in promoting the social and emotional adjustment of children. In addition, addressing behavior problems has been found to be effective in facilitating academic performance.  Behavior management and cognitive-behavior modication strategies to reduce classroom behavior problems.  Student support teams with appropriate professionals to assess and identify specic learning or behavior problems, interventions designed to address those problems, and evaluation designed to measure the efcacy of those interventions. Effective programs tend to accommodate instruction to individual needs and maximize direct instruction.  Extended year, extended day, and summer school programs that focus on facilitating the development of academic skills.  Tutoring and mentoring programs with peer, cross-age, or adult tutors focusing on promoting specic academic or social skills.  Comprehensive school-wide programs to promote the psychosocial and academic skills of all students. Collaboration and consistency between regular, remedial, and special education are essential. SHANE R. JIMERSON ET AL. 178

problems, the following section provides a brief review of evidence-based intervention strategies that may be implemented by educational professionals as alternatives to retention. Children are most often retained due to low academic achievement, behavioral difculties, or a combination of the two. Alternatives designed to prevent academic failure, remediate academic decits, address behavioral problems, and reduce retention rates include an array of possible school-wide interventions and instructional strategies Rafoth  Carey, 1995. Schoolwide interventions refer to administratively commissioned programs that are pervasive throughout the school, whereas instructional strategies are direct, teacher-led interventions implemented within the existing classroom structure. Depending on the timing, such interventions may serve a preventative function for at-risk students who have not yet been retained, or as interventions for students who have been recommended for retention. Interventions briey reviewed below include a preschool programs, b comprehensive school-wide programs, c summer school and after school programs, d looping and multiage classrooms, e school-based mental health programs, f parent involvement, g early reading programs, h effective instructional strategies and assessment, and i behavior cognitive behavior modication. Some of the alternatives described below may involve substantial changes to existing school structure. School psychologists and special education professionals are encouraged to advocate for these types of changes as appropriate; however, it may not always be possible to immediately implement systemic reform. Therefore, several intervention strategies that can be used at the individual and classroom levels are also described a table delineating key scholarship related to each of these strategies is available at the Beyond Grade Retention and Social Promotion website; http:www.education.ucsb.edujimersonNEW20 retentionindex.html. Preschool Intervention Programs A primary purpose of preschool intervention programs is generally to assist at-risk students before they experience academic challenges, through enhancing foundation skills necessary for subsequent academic success Casto  Mastropieri, 1986; Zigler  Styfco, 2000. Basic literacy skills, prosocial behaviors, and socio-emotional development are often emphasized in preschool programs. Preschool programs offer a range of individualized services in the areas of health, nutrition, and parent involvement designed to Grade Retention 179

foster healthy development of children. For instance, Head Start and the Chicago Child-Parent Center CPC are two examples of early childhood intervention programs that provide comprehensive educational and family support-services to children from economically disadvantaged families to increase school readiness. Schwartz, Garnkle, and Davis 2002 provide valuable information and guidance on setting up preschool classrooms including membership, relationships, and knowledgeskills to promote positive outcomes for children. A signicant body of research has shown that enhancing skills for academic success through preschool programs may prevent retention Barnett  Boocock, 1998; Karoly, Kilburn, Bigelow, Caulkins,  Cannon, 2001. Comprehensive Programs to Promote Social and Academic Development Proponents of comprehensive programs emphasize that schools are likely to be most successful when they integrate strategies to promote childrens academic, social, and emotional learning Zins, Weissberg, Wang,  Walberg, 2004. Comprehensive intervention programs generally emphasize a systems approach for redesigning schools to prevent academic and behavior problems through proactive instruction and school-wide behavior support Sugai, Horner,  Gresham, 2002. Programs have also been developed to strengthen childrens social and academic skills and promote problem-solving and conict resolution skills, such as Promoting Alternative Thinking Strategies Greenberg, Kusche, Cook,  Quamma, 1995. Implementation of comprehensive programs requires a signicant commitment by the school administration and faculty, including considerable training, personnel, and resources. However, if these programs are successful, they may lead to reductions in retention as well as behavior problems. Summer School and After School Programs Recognizing that many children may benet from additional instructional opportunities beyond the 56 hours a day and approximately 175 days a year, well designed summer school and after school programs may provide students with additional time and exposure to master academic material. Summer school programs focus on providing instruction during the summer months of a traditional academic year, while after school programs provide instruction andor supplementary support outside of the normal school day SHANE R. JIMERSON ET AL. 180

or schools may offer morning programs or Saturday school. There have been numerous studies examining the effects of summer school and after school programs see Cooper, Charlton, Valentine,  Muhlenbruck, 2000 for a review. When implementing summer school or after school programs as an intervention to improve student achievement, it is important that the programs contain key elements commonly found in effective programs as delineated in Cooper et al., 2000. Giving students additional instruction after school or in summer school, as opposed to retaining them for a year, may also reduce the subsequent risk of students dropping out due to being overage for grade. Looping and Multiage Classrooms Considering individual differences in learning and development, looping and multiage classrooms are two alternative classroom structures that allow more exibility to address the needs of students. Looping classrooms have students spend two or more years with the same teacher, allowing the teacher to provide instruction to meet the needs and embrace the strengths of each student. Multiage classrooms include students of different ages and abilities, thus allowing each student to move ahead at hisher own pace and learn from one another May, Kundert,  Brent, 1995. Both looping and multiage classrooms provide teachers an opportunity to better understand and adapt to individual learning needs of students Nicholas  Nicholas, 2002; Yang, 1997. Other countries that have signicantly lower retention rates in comparison to the United States e.g., Japan, Germany often use looping Reynolds, Barnhart,  Martin, 1999. School-Based Mental Health Programs Students with mental health problems e.g., Attention Decit Hyperactivity Disorder, depression, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder often fall behind their classmates academically. As noted previously, behavioral difculties and socio-emotional problems are often associated with recommendations for retention. Some schools have adopted school-based mental health programs in an effort to address the broad mental health needs of students in the most efcient manner possible. Preliminary evaluation results suggest that schoolbased mental health programs are promising interventions for promoting social and emotional competence Armbruster  Lichtman, 1999. Grade Retention 181

Parent Involvement Parent involvement i.e., a combination of a parents attitude toward education and school, as well as a parents willingness to assist in creating a home atmosphere that is conducive to doing homework is associated with greater success among students Christenson, 1995; Fan  Chen, 2001; Sheridan  Kratochwill, 1992; Swap, 1993. Parent involvement is often an essential component of broad-based interventions aimed at improving academic achievement Slavin  Madden, 2001, and the addition of a parent component may improve the outcomes of many interventions. It is important to consider cultural variations among parentsfamilies and the ways in which cultural factors may interact with the schools outreach. Policy changes that encourage parent involvement, increasing understanding among administrators, teachers, and staff, and inviting parents involvement in all aspects of their childrens education, are proactive strategies that may make parent involvement more feasible. Early Reading Programs Reading is an essential skill for subsequent knowledge acquisition, thus early reading interventions attempt to facilitate childrens reading skills before they fall behind and are subsequently recommended for retention. Structured early reading programs have been demonstrated to promote student success Slavin  Madden, 2001. Teaching phonemic awareness and decoding skills and providing opportunities to practice reading are valuable instructional strategies Talbott, Lloyd,  Tankersley, 1994. There is an assortment of early reading programs, including Writing to Read Martin  Friedberg, 1986, Reading Recovery Clay, 1987; Gredler, 1997, Success for All Slavin  Madden, 2001, and Exito Para Todos Spanish version of Success for All. It is important to consider the needs of diverse student populations and establish multiple forms of instructional support when implementing early reading programs. Effective Instructional Strategies and Assessment There are numerous teaching techniques that can be easily implemented within existing classroom structures to increase student performance; for instance, direct instruction, curriculum-based measurement, cooperative SHANE R. JIMERSON ET AL. 182

learning, and use of mnemonic strategies have been shown to improve academic performance see the following sources for more information: Barnett, Clarizio,  Payette, 1996; Dretzke  Levin, 1996; Forness, Kavale, Blum,  Lloyd, 1997; Fuchs  Fuchs, 1986; Mastropieri  Scruggs, 1998; Shapiro, 1996; White, 1988. Implementing effective, research-based teaching strategies in the classroom is an important facet of facilitating student success. When consulting with classroom teachers, school psychologists and special education practitioners are encouraged to highlight research ndings regarding effective strategies to promote learning that may, in turn, reduce the perceived need to retain students experiencing learning problems. Behavior and Cognitive Behavior Modication Strategies Behavior and cognitive behavior modication strategies are valuable to reduce disruptive behavior and increase positive classroom behaviors. Although behavior and cognitive behavior strategies are grouped together in this section, there are important distinctions between them. Often behavior modication strategies use token reinforcement systems and peer or adult monitors, or may involve the use of publicly posted positive group and individual behaviors Shapiro, 1996. Cognitive behavior modication aims to address both the behaviors and the underlying cognitions inuencing external behaviors. A combination of behavioral approaches such as modeling, feedback, and reinforcement with cognitive approaches, such as cognitive think alouds, may be effective to teach strategies such as anger control and self-coping. Both behavior and cognitive behavior strategies have consistently been found to reduce disruptive behaviors and increase on-task classroom behavior, therefore providing an opportunity for students with learning and behavioral disabilities to increase academic and social skills, thus boosting achievement Robinson, Smith, Miller,  Brownell, 1999. SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS Research reveals that grade retention is associated with various deleterious outcomes e.g., school dropout but not with academic growth; moreover, there is compelling empirical evidence supporting alternative interventions Grade Retention 183

to promote the social and cognitive competence of students. Although no single intervention will address the needs of every low-achieving student, evidence-based practices can be incorporated into general education to facilitate academic success. Recommended practices include parental involvement through regular contact with teachers and homework supervision, early reading and developmental programs to support low-achieving students and enhance language and social skills, school-based mental health programs to support children in their social and emotional adjustment, as well as tutoring and mentoring programs and other interventions that target specic academic skills Ehmke et al., 2010; Jimerson  Skokut, 2008. It has also been suggested that the transition from elementary school to middle school or from middle school to high school warrants special consideration, because higher rates of retention have been found in seventh and eighth grade Gue vremont et al., 2007. Consequently, such practices not only focus on remediation for struggling students, but also on preventing problems by supporting all students. These practices emphasize the importance of collaboration between all educational professionals, families, and students to facilitate student success. Limitations of the existing grade retention literature include methodological concerns, use of age or grade norms, and sample size. Further research is warranted, including additional studies that examine factors that moderate the effect of retention on student achievement, the role that attrition may play in explaining retention effects, the use of grade retention as a substitute for special education placement, and increased focus on the psychometric properties of achievement measures. Although it may be valuable to further expand upon grade retention research, it is also important to remember that neither social promotion nor grade retention will address the challenges that many students face. Consequently, it is more benecial for future research and practice to focus upon specic remedial intervention strategies that facilitate the socio-emotional and academic success of youth, decreasing the need for retention Jimerson, 2001. In summary, students with learning and behavioral disabilities appear more likely to be retained and the conuence of research examining academic and adjustment outcomes associated with grade retention indicates there are no benets to student retention over promotion. Conversely, some studies reveal negative effects of grade retention, including lower academic achievement, higher socio-emotional maladjustment, and increased risk for school withdrawal. Thus, we have recommended and briey described an array of empirically supported effective interventions as alternatives to grade retention for low-performing students and students with learning SHANE R. JIMERSON ET AL. 184

and behavioral disabilities. Implementing these strategies into educational practices will help foster academic and socio-emotional improvement for all students. REFERENCES Alexander, K. L., Entwisle, D. R.,  Dauber, S. L. 2003. On the success of failure: A reassessment of the effects of retention in the primary grades 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Algozzine, B., Ysseldyke, J. E.,  Elliot, J. 2002. Strategies and tactics for effective instruction. Longmont, CO: Sopris West. Allen, C. S., Chen, Q., Willson, V. L.,  Hughes, J. N. 2009. Quality of research design moderates effects of grade retention on achievement: A meta-analytic multi-level analysis. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 31, 480499. doi:10.31020162373709352239 Anderson, G. E., Jimerson, S. R.,  Whipple, A. D. 2005. Students ratings of stressful experiences at home and school: Loss of a parent and grade retention as superlative stressors. Applied Journal of School Psychology, 21, 120. doi:10.1300J370v21n0101 Armbruster, P.,  Lichtman, J. 1999. Are school-based mental health care services effective? Evidence from 36 inner city schools. Community Mental Health Journal, 36, 493504. doi:10.1023A:1018755100381 Bali, V. A., Anagnostopoulos, D.,  Roberts, R. 2005. Toward a political explanation of grade retention. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 27, 133155. doi:10.3102 01623737027002133 Barnett, K. P., Clarizio, H. F.,  Payette, K. A. 1996. Grade retention among students with learning disabilities. Psychology in the Schools, 334, 285293. doi:10.1002SICI1520680719961033:4o285::AID-PITS3W3.3.CO;2-5 Barnett, W. S.,  Boocock, S. S. Eds. 1998. Early care and education for children in poverty. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. Beebe-Frankenberger, M., Bocian, K. M., MacMillan, D. L.,  Gresham, F. M. 2004. Sorting second-grade students: Differentiating those retained from those promoted. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96, 204215. doi:10.10370022-0663.96.2.204 Byrd, R., Weitzman, M.,  Auinger, P. 1997. Increased behavior problems associated with delayed school entry and delayed school progress. Pediatrics, 4, 654661. doi:10.1542 peds.100.4.654 Casto, G.,  Mastropieri, M. A. 1986. The efcacy of early intervention programs: A metaanalysis. Exceptional Children, 52, 417424. Retrieved from http:www.cec.sped.org ContentNavigationMenuPublications2ExceptionalChildrendefault.htm Chicago Longitudinal Study. 2005. A study of children in the Chicago public schools: Users guide Version 7. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin. Christenson, S. L. 1995. Supporting home-school collaboration. In A. Thomas  J. Grimes Eds., Best practices in school psychology, III pp. 253268. Washington, DC: National Association of School Psychologists. Clay, M. 1987. Implementing reading recovery: Systemic adaptations to educational innovation. New Zealand Journal of Educational Studies, 22, 3558. Retrieved from http:www.nzare.org.nzpublicationsnzjes.html Grade Retention 185

Cooper, H., Charlton, K., Valentine, J. C.,  Muhlenbruck, L. 2000. Making the most of summer school: A meta-analytic and narrative review. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development Vol. 65, pp. v118. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Crothers, L. M., Schreiber, J. B., Schmitt, A. J., Bell, G. R., Blasik, J., Comstock, L. A., y King, J. M. 2010. A preliminary study of bully and victim behavior in old-for-grade students: Another potential hidden cost of grade retention or delayed school entry. Journal of Applied Psychology, 264, 327338. doi:10.108015377903.2010.518843 Dretzke, B. J.,  Levin, J. R. 1996. Assessing students application and transfer of a mnemonic strategy: The struggle for independence. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 21, 8393. Retrieved from http:www.journals.elsevier.comcontemporary-educational-psychology Ehmke, T., Drechsel, B.,  Carstensen, C. H. 2010. Effects of grade retention on achievement and self-concept in science and mathematics. Studies in Educational Evaluation, 36, 2735. doi:10.1016j.stueduc.2010.10.003 Fan, X.,  Chen, M. 2001. Parental involvement and students academic achievement: A meta-analysis. Educational Psychology Review, 13, 122. doi:10.1023A:1009048817385 Forness, S. R., Kavale, K. A., Blum, I. M.,  Lloyd, J. W. 1997. Mega-analysis of metaanalyses: What works in special education and related services. Teaching Exceptional Children, 29, 49. Retrieved from http:www.cec.sped.orgcontentnavigationmenu publications2teachingexceptionalchildren Frederick, C. B.,  Hauser, R. M. 2008. Have we put an end to social promotion? Changes in school progress among children aged 6 to 17 from 1972 to 2003. Demography, 45, 719740. Retrieved from http:muse.jhu.edujournalsdemography Fuchs, L. A.,  Fuchs, D. 1986. Effects of systematic formative evaluation: A meta-analysis. Exceptional Children, 53, 199208. Retrieved from http:www.cec.sped.orgContent NavigationMenuPublications2ExceptionalChildrendefault.htm Goos, M., Van Damme, J., Onghena, P.,  Petry, K. 2010, August. First-grade retention: Effects on childrens academic and psychosocial growth throughout primary education. Presented at the biannual meeting of the Special Interest Group 18 of the European Association for Research on Learning and Instruction, Leuven, Belgium. Gredler, G. R. 1997. Intervention programs. Psychology in the Schools, 34, 161169. doi:10.1002SICI1520-680719970434:2o161::AID-PITS8W3.3.CO;2-P Greenberg, M. T., Kusche, C. A., Cook, E. T.,  Quamma, J. P. 1995. Promoting emotional competence in school-aged children: The effects of the PATHS curriculum. Development and Psychopathology, 7, 117136. doi:10.1017S0954579400006374 Gue vremont, A., Roos, N. P.,  Brownell, M. 2007. Predictors and consequences of grade retention: Examining data from Manitoba, Canada. Canadian Journal of School Psychology, 22, 5067. doi:10.11770829573507301038 Hauser, R. M., Frederick, C. B.,  Andrews, M. 2007. Grade retention in the age of accountability. In A. Gamoran Ed., Standards-based reform and the poverty gap: Lessons for No Child Left Behind pp. 120153. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. Holmes, C. T. 1989. Grade-level retention effects: A meta-analysis of research studies. In L. A. Shepard  M. L. Smith Eds., Flunking grades: Research and policies on retention pp. 1633. London: The Falmer Press. Holmes, C. T.,  Matthews, K. M. 1984. The effects of nonpromotion on elementary and junior high school pupils: A meta-analysis. Reviews of Educational Research, 54, 225236. doi:10.310200346543054002225 SHANE R. JIMERSON ET AL. 186

Hong, G.,  Raudenbush, S. W. 2005. Effects of kindergarten retention policy on childrens cognitive growth in reading and mathematics. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 27, 205224. doi:10.310201623737027003205 Hong, G.,  Yu, B. 2007. Early-grade retention and childrens reading and math learning in elementary years. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 29, 239261. doi:10.3102 0162373707309073 Jackson, G. B. 1975. The research evidence on the effects of grade retention. Review of Educational Research, 45, 613635. doi:10.310200346543045004613 Jacob, B. A.,  Lefgren, L. 2004. Remedial education and student achievement: A regressiondiscontinuity analysis. Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 226244. doi:10.1162 003465304323023778 Jimerson, S. R. 1999. On the failure of failure: Examining the association between early grade retention and education and employment outcomes during late adolescence. Journal of School Psychology, 37, 243272. doi:10.1016S0022-44059900005-9 Jimerson, S. R. 2001. Meta-analysis of grade retention research: Implications for practice in the 21st century. School Psychology Review, 30, 420437. Retrieved from http: www.nasponline.orgpublicationssprsprissues.aspx Jimerson, S. R., Anderson, G. E.,  Whipple, A. D. 2002. Winning the battle and losing the war: Examining the relation between grade retention and dropping out of high school. Psychology in the Schools, 39, 441457. doi:10.1002pits.10046 Jimerson, S. R., Carlson, E., Robert, M., Egeland, B.,  Sroufe, L. A. 1997. A prospective, longitudinal study of the correlates and consequences of early grade retention. Journal of School Psychology, 35, 325. doi:10.1016S0022-44059600033-7 Jimerson, S. R.,  Ferguson, P. 2007. A longitudinal study of grade retention: Academic and behavioral outcomes of retained students through adolescence. School Psychology Quarterly, 22, 314339. doi:10.10371045-3830.22.3.314 Jimerson, S. R.,  Skokut, M. 2008. Retention in grade. In S. Mathison  R. E. Wayne Eds., Battleground Schools Vol. 1, pp. 520525. Westport, CN: Greenwood Press. Karoly, L. A., Kilburn, M. R., Bigelow, J. H., Caulkins, J. P.,  Cannon, J. S. 2001. Assessing costs and benets of early childhood intervention programs: Overview and applications to the starting early starting smart program. Santa Monica, CA: RAND. Kratochwill, T.,  Stoiber, K. 2000. Empirically supported interventions and school psychology: Announcing a new standing section. School Psychology Quarterly, 15, 6974. doi:10.1037 h0088779 Lorence, J. 2006. Retention and academic achievement research revisited from a United States perspective. International Education Journal, 7, 731777. Retrieved from http: www.iejcomparative.org Martin, J. H.,  Friedberg, A. 1986. Writing to read. New York, NY: Warner. Mastropieri, M. A.,  Scruggs, T. E. 1998. Constructing more meaningful relationships in the classroom: Mnemonic research into practice. Learning Disabilities Research  Practice, 13, 138145. doi:10.1007BF01326638 May, D. C., Kundert, D. K.,  Brent, D. 1995. Does delayed entry reduce later grade retentions and use of special education services? Remedial and Special Education, 16, 288294. doi:10.1177074193259501600505 McCoy, A. R.,  Reynolds, A. J. 1999. Grade retention and school performance: An extended investigation. Journal of School Psychology, 37, 273298. doi:10.1016S002244059900012-6 Grade Retention 187

Nagin, D. S., Pagani, L., Tremblay, R. E.,  Vitaro, F. 2003. Life course turning points: The effect of grade retention on physical aggression. Development and Psychopathology, 15, 343361. doi:10.1017S0954579403000191 Nicholas, J. D.,  Nicholas, G. W. 2002. The impact of looping classroom environments on parental attitudes. Preventing School Failure, 47, 1825. doi:10.108010459880309604424 Ou, S.,  Reynolds, A. 2010. Grade retention, postsecondary education, and public aid receipt. Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 32, 118139. doi:10.31020162373 709354334 Owings, W. A.,  Magliaro, S. 1998. Grade retention: A history of failure. Educational Leadership, 56, 8688. Retrieved from http:www.ascd.orgpublicationseducationalleadership.aspx Pagani, L., Tremblay, R. E., Vitaro, F., Boulerice, B.,  McDuff, P. 2001. Effects of grade retention on academic performance and behavioral development. Development and Psychopathology, 13, 297315. doi:10.1017S0954579401002061 Peneld, R. D. 2010. Test-based grade retention: Does it stand up to professional standards for fair and appropriate test use?. Educational Researcher, 39, 110119. doi:10.3102 0013189  10363007 Pianta, R. C., Tietbohl, P. J.,  Bennett, E. M. 1997. Differences in social adjustment and classroom behavior between children retained in kindergarten and groups of age and grade matched peers. Early Education and Development, 8, 137152. doi:10.1207s1556 6935eed08023 Rafoth, M. A.,  Carey, K. 1995. Best practices in assisting with promotion and retention decisions. In A. Thomas  J. Grimes Eds., Best practice in school psychology 3rd ed., pp. 413420. Bethesda, MD: The National Association of School Psychologists. Reynolds, A. J. 1992. Grade retention and school adjustment: An explanatory analysis. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 14, 101121. doi:10.23071164496 Reynolds, J. C., Barnhart, B.,  Martin, B. N. 1999. Looping: A solution to the retention vs. social promotion dilemma? ERS Spectrum, 17, 1620. Robinson, T. R., Smith, S. W., Miller, M. D.,  Brownell, M. T. 1999. Cognitive behavior modication of hyperactivity-impulsivity and aggression: A meta-analysis of school-based studies. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 195203. doi:10.103700220663.91.2.195 Roderick, M.,  Nagaoka, J. 2005. Retention under Chicagos high stakes testing program: Helpful, harmful, or harmless? Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 27, 309340. doi:10.310201623737027004309 Rumberger, R. W. 1987. High school dropouts: A review of issues and evidence. Review of Educational Research, 57, 101112. doi:10.23071170232 Rumberger, R. W. 1995. Dropping out of middle school: A multilevel analysis of students and schools. American Educational Research Journal, 32, 583625. doi:10.23071163325 Schwartz, I. S., Garnkle, A. N.,  Davis, C. 2002. Arranging preschool environments to facilitate valued social and educational outcomes. In M. R. Shinn, H. M. Walker  G. Stoner Eds., Interventions for academic and behavior problems II: Preventative and remedial approaches pp. 455468. Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists. Shapiro, E. S. 1996. Step 3: Instructional modication, general strategies. In S. N. Elliot  J. C. Witt Eds., Academic skills problems pp. 138164. New York, NY: Guilford Press. SHANE R. JIMERSON ET AL. 188

Sheridan, S. M.,  Kratochwill, T. R. 1992. Behavioral parent-teacher consultation: Conceptual and research considerations. Journal of School Psychology, 30, 117139. doi:10.10160022-44059290025-Z Shinn, M. R., Walker, H. M.,  Stoner, G. Eds. 2002. Interventions for academic and behavior problems II: Preventive and remedial approaches. Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists. Silberglitt, B., Appleton, J. J., Burns, M. K.,  Jimerson, S. R. 2006. Examining the effects of grade retention on student reading performance: A longitudinal study. Journal of School Psychology, 44, 255270. doi:10.1016j.jsp.2006.05.004 Slavin, R. E.,  Madden, N. A. 2001. One million children: Success for all. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. Sugai, G., Horner, R. H.,  Gresham, F. M. 2002. Behaviorally effective school environments. In M. R. Shinn, H. M. Walker  G. Stoner Eds., Interventions for academic and behavior problems II: Preventative and remedial approaches pp. 315350. Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists. Swap, S. M. 1993. Developing home-school partnerships: From concepts to practice. New York, NY: Teachers College Press. Talbott, E., Lloyd, J. W.,  Tankersley, M. 1994. Effects of reading comprehension interventions for students with learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 17, 223232. doi:10.23071511075 Temple, J. A., Reynolds, A. J.,  Arteaga, I. 2010. Low birth weight, preschool education, and school remediation. Education and Urban Society, 42, 705729. doi:10.1177 0013124510370946 Temple, J. A., Reynolds, A. J.,  Ou, S. 2004. Grade retention and school dropout: Another look at the evidence. In H. J. Walberg, A. J. Reynolds  M. C. Wang Eds., Can unlike students learn together? Grade retention, tracking and grouping pp. 3564. Greenwich, CT: Information Age. Thomas, A. M. C., Armistead, L., Kempton, T., Lynch, S., Forehand, R., Nousianen, S., Neighbors, B.,  Tannenbaum, L. 1992. Early retention: Are there long-term benecial effects? Psychology in the Schools, 29, 342347. doi:10.10021520-6807199210 29:4o342::AID-PITS2310290407W3.0.CO;2-Y Tomchin, E. M.,  Impara, J. C. 1992. Unraveling teachers beliefs about grade retention. American Educational Research Journal, 29, 199223. doi:10.310200028312029001199 Uysal, S. D. 2010. The effect of grade retention on school outcomes: An application of doubly robust estimation method. Discussion Paper No. 2010-01. Retrieved from Center for Quantitative Methods and Survey Research website http:www.uni-konstanz.decms paperspublications.htm White, W. A. T. 1988. A meta-analysis of effects of direct instruction in special education. Education and Treatment of Children, 11, 364374. Retrieved from http:www.educationandtreatmentofchildren.net Wu, W., West, S. G.,  Hughes, J. N. 2008. Effect of retention in rst grade on childrens achievement trajectories over 4 years: A piecewise growth analysis using propensity score matching. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100, 727740. doi:10.1037a0013098 Wu, W., West, S. G.,  Hughes, J. N. 2010. Effect of grade retention in rst grade on psychosocial outcomes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 102, 135152. doi:10.1037 a0016664 Grade Retention 189

Yang, X. 1997, February. Educational benets in elementary school through looping and Friday in-services. Paper presented at the Annual Seminar of the National Association for Year-Round Education, San Diego, CA. Zigler, E.  Styfco, S. J. 2000. Pioneering steps and fumbles in developing a federal preschool intervention. Topics in Early Childhood Education, 20, 6770, 78. doi:10.1177 027112140002000201 Zins, J. E., Weissberg, R. P., Wang, M. C.,  Walberg, H. J. Eds. 2004. Building academic success on social and emotional learning: What does the research say? New York, NY: Teachers College Press. SHANE R. JIMERSON ET AL. 190

UNIVERSAL SYSTEMS FOR PREVENTING BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS Terrance M. Scott ABSTRACT School-wide positive behavior support PBS is a systems approach to prevention and intervention involving multiple levels of support. At the universal level all students, prevention of behavior problems involves four very basic steps that are repeated with smaller numbers of students and greater intensity as directed by data. The rst step is the prediction of problems or failures. To the extent to which we can predict a problem by time, location, student, and other contexts, we have the information to prevent. Prediction leads directly into the second step, which involves the development of effective prevention practices. The key to effective prevention is to approach all problems from an instructional perspective by considering what needs to be taught and how the environment can be arranged to increase the probability of success. The third step involves creating consistency with prevention efforts. Instructional efforts that are inconsistent are not effective in teaching new behavior. The last step involves development of the simplest way of monitoring performance so that those students who are not responding i.e., are falling through the screen may be quickly identied. This chapter describes the key features Classroom Behavior, Contexts, and Interventions Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, Volume 25, 191216 Copyright r 2012 by Emerald Group Publishing Limited All rights of reproduction in any form reserved ISSN: 0735-004Xdoi:10.1108S0735-004X20120000025011 191

of effective universal systems as they are specically related to the prevention of behavior problems and provides an overview of how such systems are developed, implemented, and sustained. In public schools, classroom teachers deal with a variety of challenging student behaviors. While instances of violence and crime in schools garner the most popular media attention, the most common disciplinary referrals are for behaviors whose purpose is to avoid class i.e., truancy and tardiness, followed by ghting and bothering others McFadden, March, Price,  Hwang, 1992; Morgan-DAtrio, Northup, LaFleur,  Spera, 1996. Many schools repeatedly cite instances of bullying, disrespect, verbal abuse, and general classroom disorder as daily or weekly occurrences DeVoe et al., 2004. The majority of challenging behaviors that teachers address on a daily basis, such as simple disrespect and noncompliance, are not typically violent or intense, but are frequent and usurp great amounts of instructional time Sprague  Walker, 2000. All together, teachers report that issues related to challenging student behavior are the most difcult and stressful aspect of their day Furlong, Morrison,  Dear, 1994; Simonsen, Britton,  Young, 2010. School-wide positive behavior support PBS is a systems approach to prevention and intervention involving multiple levels of support Sugai, Horner et al., 2000; Sugai, Sprague, Horner,  Walker, 2000. This conceptualization of PBS has been used to assist schools in promoting and encouraging success across all students. A founding premise of PBS is that the structure and actions of systems, or host environments Zins  Ponti, 1990 impact the behavior of individuals. In schools, the key to effective prevention is the development of strategies that affect both environments and the actions of adults, resulting in positive outcomes for students. Implementation of universal assessment and systemic prevention is based on a well-described conceptual foundation Sugai, Horner et al., 2000, supported by numerous positive examples in the literature e.g., Luiselli, Putman,  Sunderland, 2002; Nersesian, Todd, Lehmann,  Watson, 2000. At the universal tier, the goal is to examine the school environment and develop proactive interventions to prevent common challenging behaviors. When considering systems for preventing behavior problems, the term universal denotes an ambitious effort to control all facets of a students life to predict successful outcomes. In reality, despite political and personal efforts to create policy and practice to support children and youth wherever TERRANCE M. SCOTT 192

they may go, universal refers to the entirety of the school in which a particular group of students exists. That is, from the moment students step onto school property until the moment they leave the care of their school, the environment rules, relationships, routines, and physical arrangements predicts success and failure. Because the school environment is wholly controlled by the adults in the school Richter, Lewis,  Hagar, 2012; Ross, Romer,  Horner, 2012, the careful development of all aspects of the environment must be seen as an inherent responsibility or basic component of what it means to be an educator see Lane, Bocian, MacMillan,  Gresham, 2004. This chapter describes the key features of effective universal systems as they are specically related to the prevention of behavior problems, and provides an overview of how such systems are developed, implemented, and sustained. Examples from two representative schools, one an elementary and one a high school, are used to illustrate these key features. MULTITIERED SYSTEMS As is implied by its name, universal systems are the largest level or tier of prevention within a multitiered system. Other tiers are increasingly more focused on students for whom universal systems have not been sufcient to predict success. Secondary or targeted systems focus on students deemed at risk due to lack of success and are typically applied to small groups of students with similar needs. Tertiary or intensive systems focus on individual students who have continued to fail despite efforts of the previous two systems. While a good number of students at this tier may qualify for special education, it is not synonymous with special education, as there also will be students whose needs are great but who do not meet special education eligibility requirements. Multitiered systems are well established in the research literature and have been widely cited as an evidence-based practice Bradshaw, Mitchell,  Leaf, 2010; Spaulding, Horner, May,  Vincent, 2008. The best known of the multitiered systems in schools are Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports PBIS for behavior and Response to Intervention RTI for academics. The two approaches are identical in structure and similar in processes Sandomierski, Kincaid,  Algozzine, 2007. Indeed, one might think of PBIS as RTI for behavior. Regardless of their names, each multitiered system can be characterized as a complex screening system. Consider that all the students in the school are resting atop a giant screen. We can Universal Systems for Preventing Behavior Problems 193

consider staying atop the screen as success and falling through the gaps as failure. As such, we would want to make the screen as tight as possible, within the bounds of what is realistic for adults to do in the scope of a typical day. The strands of that screen are composed of clear rules that are taught, effective and consistent routines, consistent encouragement and enforcement of expectations, and well-considered arrangement of the physical environment. The more carefully conceived and implemented these strands, the tighter the screen and the fewer students will fall through as we monitor for success and failure. This is the idea behind universal systems. While about 15 of students will fall through and require a tighter screen Sugai, Sprague et al., 2000, this does not necessarily require us to tighten up the screen for the entire school. Rather, it will be more efcient in terms of time and effort to develop a new screen for this smaller group of students as they will require even more instruction for rules and some variations in how other components of the screen are developed. This is the concept of secondary systems. We continue to monitor and we will likely nd that a smaller number of individual students are slipping through even this tightened screen. These students will require individualized screens as part of a tertiary system. If we have done a good job of building the rst two screening systems, the number of students identied at this tier will be low Sugai, Horner et al., 2000. UNIVERSAL SYSTEMS: KEY FEATURES Universal systems for prevention of behavior problems involve four very basic steps that encompass the key features of an effective prevention system Sugai  Horner, 1999. The rst step is to predict problems or failures. To the extent we can predict a problem by time, location, student, and other contexts, we have the information necessary to prevent the problem from occurring. Prediction takes us directly into step 2, which involves the development of effective prevention practices. The key to effective prevention is to approach all problems from an instructional perspective by considering what needs to be taught and how the environment can be arranged to increase the probability of success Leedy, Bates,  Safran, 2004. The third step involves creating consistency with prevention efforts. Instructional efforts that are inconsistent are not effective in teaching new behavior. In the last step, we must nd the simplest way of monitoring performance so that we may quickly identify those students who are not responding i.e., are falling through the screen. Identication of students in need of TERRANCE M. SCOTT 194

further assistance brings us back to step 1, except that prediction is now focused on a smaller group of students e.g., Epstein et al., 2005. Predicting Failure Predicting student behavioral problems i.e., failures is best accomplished with a comprehensive system of data collection that affords schools the opportunity to ask detailed questions about the times, location, behaviors, and other contexts associated with common problems Roach  Kratochwill, 2004. Such comprehensive monitoring systems are tailored to the school so that the information gathered is unique to particular locations and contexts within a particular school. But when getting started with universal systems most schools do not have data with this degree of specicity and likely have the capacity to report no more than the total number of major incidents that have occurred. Under such circumstances, it is impossible to identify predictors from these data alone. However, the people who work in the school collect this data informally every day as they observe and respond to problem behaviors, and often have additional contextual data at their disposal. An introductory exercise with a school at this stage might be to encourage the faculty and staff to consider the most common behavior problems they observe directly most often. It is important to prompt people to think about their own experience, rather than what they have heard or what they believe data will show. The question can be as posed as Im coming to your school tomorrow and will follow you around for 10 minutes. If I see a problem behavior that you predict you get 10,000. When would you have me come, where would we be in the school, what should I be looking for, and who is likely to be the perpetrator? Most educators could probably answer this question with little thought, maybe suggesting You need to be here at 12:08 PM, in the Cafeteria, looking toward the lunch line for boys who will push and shove one another. While this may not represent the most reliable data we could have, it is the type of data that can serve as a start for discussion. It should be noted, however, that such reminiscences serve only to begin predicting failures. Future monitoring and evaluation of prevention efforts will require a more valid system of data collection. Another method of predicting problems across the school is to have the faculty and staff plot problems on a school map. For this we will consider a Universal Systems for Preventing Behavior Problems 195

running example using Greer Elementary, a 400-student school in an urban area. We asked that the school produce a large-scale map of the physical layout  in the form of a blueprint detailing all the areas both inside and outside the school building. Next, each adult was provided with two to three small adhesive paper dots. All were prompted to consider their own experiences at Greer Elementary and what predictors they can point to for behavior. On their dots, faculty and staff members wrote the name of a problem behavior, a time of day, and any other contextual predictor e.g., it was assembly day, only boys were involved. Finally, all were asked to approach and afx their dots to the map on the location where they have most often observed the problem they identied. When completed, the map is well covered with dots  but some areas clearly stand out as particularly predictive of problems. In Fig. 1, it is obvious that Greer Elementary had its most predictable problems in the cafeteria and hallways. The dots were then analyzed to identify the behaviors, times, and contextual factors most predictive of problems at this time. Table 1 presents the schools analysis of their predictable failures, setting the occasion for a discussion of prevention efforts. As a running secondary example we will consider the case of Brant High School, a 700-student school in a rural area. The school reported a total of more than 1,600 ofce referrals for tardy behavior in the previous 90 days, Fig. 1. Greer Elementary Map: Predicting Problem Locations. TERRANCE M. SCOTT 196

with the second largest category of ODR being for not attending the detention that was assigned as a result of being tardy. The school requested assistance with widespread tardy behavior and, although universal systems generally focus on the entire school and all potential problems, a system of rules, routines, and arrangements was developed and implemented solely for tardy behavior, both because of the intensity of the problem and as a way to get the school to buy into the process. The schools referral forms included only student name and offense and thus were of little use in predicting failure. The faculty were gathered together and asked to predict tardy behavior based on their experience and observations. Although there was wide agreement that tardy behaviors occurred across the majority of students and times of day, faculty and staff were able to identify some especially prominent predictors. First, it was noted that no clear denition of tardy was used consistently across the school. Rather, each teacher had his or her own rules about what constitutes being tardy. Generally speaking, when the denition of a rule includes it depends, it will be a rule with which students have more frequent errors. Thus, the lack of a clear denition was seen as a predictor of tardy behavior. Second, the Brant HS faculty and staff noted that even after the tardy bell sounded, many students continued to socialize in the hallways rather than moving toward their classes; faculty reasoned that students may assume that because they are already considered tardy, there is no incentive to move quickly to their classes. These issues were considered as the group moved into the prevention phase of the process. Table 1. Prediction Analysis for Greer Elementary. Where What When Why Hall Running During transitions, all day Rules not clearly taught Yelling Not enough adults in the hall Pushing Too many students at one time Hands on walls Cafeteria Loud Lunch: arrival and dismissal times Inconsistent rules Chaotic; students roaming Slow routines Trading food Students allowed to roam Leaving mess Universal Systems for Preventing Behavior Problems 197

Preventing Failure The second step of the universal process is to develop a full array of strategies and procedures to prevent the most predictable failures Windle  Mason, 2004. Again, active instruction offers the highest probability of success see Hattie, 2009. Thus, the development of prevention strategies may be thought of as a universal lesson plan. That is, the task is determining what to teach, how to teach it, what examples and activities will be most relevant and engaging, how to create routines to predict success, and how to provide immediate and consistent feedback. Developing Rules Effective teaching requires effective presentation of rules Johnson, Stoner,  Greene, 1996; Malone  Tietjens, 2000. Rules are easy to create and most schools have at least a basic set of rules that may take the form of a code of conduct or other legal document. But such documents do not represent effective instruction and cannot be considered a prevention component. Relying on the code of conduct to change behavior is akin to simply reading directly from a math text everyday and assuming students will acquire and effectively use all the skills presented. The rst consideration in developing effective rules is that they need to be positively stated in order to prevent problems Kerr  Nelson, 2010. For example, if the problem is running in the hall, teaching students to walk is a logical skill to emphasize in that when the students engage in walking they cannot be running i.e., failing with that predictable problem. To simply say that the rule is no running does not provide the student with sufcient instruction to predict walking anymore than crawling, sliding, or rolling. The second consideration is whether the student is capable of being successful with the rule; educators can create any number of rules based on their own desires or preferences, but these will be of no value if students are not capable of performing the behaviors specied. This means that it is very important to examine the natural environment and carefully consider not only what behaviors are appropriate from an adult point of view, but also what behaviors students consider socially acceptable in their natural environments, and are thus more likely to display. The third consideration in developing effective rules is the number of specic rules by location. Generally speaking, smaller numbers are easier to remember than larger numbers and schools must strive to highlight the most important aspects of success. Finally, effective rules must be made public and must be taught, reviewed, and enforced Johnson et al., 1996. These issues are further described below. TERRANCE M. SCOTT 198

Initial universal rules for Greer Elementary are presented in Table 2. At Greer Elementary, the initial set of rules was tied to the cafeteria and hallways. Each area is associated with three to ve clear and positively stated rules. The rules were created in response to the specic problems observed: noise, running, pushing, and hands on walls. As depicted in Table 2, the four hallway rules were a use an inside voice, b stay to the right, c keep hands to self, and d stop at stop signs. The cafeteria problems included loud talking, students moving about the room in an unorganized manner, trading food, and leaving a mess. The ve rules developed in response to these issues were a single le lines in and out of the cafeteria, b raise hand to move, c eat own food, d talk only to people next to or right across from you at the table, and e leave the table as clean as you found it. Further, the faculty agreed that these rules would be specically taught to all students and that reminders would be provided on a daily basis. At Brant HS, the faculty discussion was almost solely dedicated to dening a tardy. While this seems fairly straightforward, there was wide disagreement across different groups of faculty members. One group was of the opinion that a student must be seated when the bell rings in order to be considered on time, while another faction was much more lenient, preferring to say that a tardy should be dened as tardy only when the student is not present when important work begins. Because it is important to have a single consistent rule, the faculty at Brant HS discussed this issue for over an hour before nally reaching consensus that a tardy would be dened as not Table 2. Agreed-Upon Rules for Predictable Problem Areas at Greer Elementary. Rules Hallway Inside voice Stay to right Hands to self Stop at stop signs Cafeteria Single le inout Raise hand to move Eat own food Talk only to those next to you Leave as clean as you found it Universal Systems for Preventing Behavior Problems 199

being inside the classroom i.e., over the threshold of the door when the bell rings. In addition, they decided that students would be taught to be moving in the direction of their next assigned location, and to be doing so in the nal 30 seconds  which is tied to a new routine to be described below. Routines Rules can be thought of as the behaviors students are expected to exhibit. In contrast, routines and arrangements are the things adults do to alter the likelihood that students will be successful with the rules. In math and reading there are explicit rules regarding the content, yet effective instruction comes not just from reciting the rules but through instructional routines in which the teacher engages students with effective examples, prompts, encouragement, and feedback on performance Savage, 1999; Vaughn, Bos,  Schumm, 2000. These are the same teacher behaviors that must be considered for behavior. For example, would the probability of success be higher or lower if students sat in the cafeteria before lining up for lunch, or if they were excused from the cafeteria by table rather than entire grades? Either of these decisions represents a routine change. Instructionally, teachers must think back to the most common errors and use those examples during instruction. The more natural the examples during instruction, the more likely students will be to acquire and use the skills being taught Engelmann  Carnine, 1991. Further, understanding when and where errors are most likely to occur provides guidance for the most effective timing and location of simple verbal prompts, or reminders, which are an extremely effective preventive part of a routine Hodges, 2001; Werts, Caldwell,  Wolery, 2003. Another key feature of effective instructional routines is consistent feedback following both successful and unsuccessful attempts. Feedback, or what can be termed enforcement with regard to rules, is a useful tool in helping students discriminate between right and wrong, or correct and incorrect Engelmann  Carnine, 1991; Hattie  Timperley, 1997. Effective school rules are taught in a direct manner, modeled and discussed, encouraged with routines and arrangements such as prompts and signs, and enforced with feedback. At the universal tier, feedback need only provide the student with information about their performance, and need not include tangible reinforcers or punitive practices. Rather, specic verbal praise and public acknowledgement i.e., public praise are among the most naturally effective forms of positive feedback Reinke, Lewis-Palmer,  Martin, 2007. When errors occur, feedback should take the form of correction, involving a statement that the behavior was incorrect, prompts to lead the student TERRANCE M. SCOTT 200

to understand the error, and an appropriate demonstration by the student that results in verbal praise Barbetta, Heward, Bradley,  Miller, 1994. At Greer Elementary, the faculty spent a signicant amount of time discussing how their current routines were ineffective in promoting student success in the cafeteria and hallway. As a result, they determined that the hallway rules would be unlikely to have the desired effect in the absence of frequent reminders, and thus faculty agreed that hallway rules would be reviewed briey with all students immediately preceding transitions. They also decided that it would be important to adhere closely to the scheduled transition times in order to limit the number of students in the hall at any one time. Finally, they agreed to provide more frequent feedback in the form of praise for appropriate behavior and correction for errors. In the cafeteria, the faculty also determined that the rules they developed would be unlikely to have the desired effect in the absence of frequent reminders and agreed that both teachers and cafeteria staff would provide consistent and frequent reminders on a daily basis. In addition, all agreed that arrival and dismissal times needed to be prompt and consistent to prevent long lines or overcrowding and they worked with cafeteria staff to ensure consistency with rules. Finally, they agreed that feedback needed to be increased so that students would hear more positive statements. A summary of agreed-upon routines at Greer Elementary is presented in Table 3. At Brant HS, recall that faculty and staff determined the bell system was not helping to prevent tardy behavior, and in fact was likely causing students to arrive even later to class. As a result the school decided to implement a change in the bell system so that a warning bell sounded 30 seconds prior to the nal tardy bell. This routine was changed because it was believed that this simple prompt, provided consistently, would help Table 3. Agreed-Upon Routines at Greer Elementary. Routines Hallway Reminders before entering hall Feedback posneg in hall Prompt on transition times Cafeteria Prompt on delivery and pick-up of students Reminders on way in Work with cafeteria staff to be consistent Feedback throughout lunch Universal Systems for Preventing Behavior Problems 201

students perform the expected behavior arriving at class on time more successfully. However, the routine change necessitated development of a new rule that required all students to be moving during the 30 seconds after the warning bell. That is, students may stop at a locker or talk to friends between classes, but when the warning bell rings they must immediately begin walking  there is no standing still allowed in this nal 30 seconds. This rule was clearly and directly communicated to all students as part of instruction. Arrangement Arranging the physical environment involves an array of very basic and effective strategies Conroy, Asmus, Ladwig, Sellers,  Valcante, 2004; Hastings, 1995. Designating an area as out of bounds for students, decreasing the number of students in an area at one time, changing the number or placement of adults in a given area, and keeping doors open to maintain a sightline are all examples of environmental arrangements that can be manipulated Gunter  Shores, 1995; Hastings, 1995. The development of physical arrangements should be undertaken with the same driving question as routine generation: what changes will create the highest probability of success for the identied locations and problems? Perhaps more important with respect to arrangements than with other decisions is the balance of logic and reality. With all strategies it is imperative that the strategies chosen offer a high probability of success. But it is equally important to consider whether strategies are sufciently simple to be implemented on a consistent basis. The most logical strategy will not be effective if not implemented regularly and with delity, just as the simplest strategies will not necessarily be effective if they fail to move the odds of success in the desired direction. The key is in nding the best balance of logic and reality. One tact is to list all the agreed-upon logical strategies on paper, arranged from simplest to most difcult to implement. Obviously, the best course of action among equally logical choices will always be to choose the simplest. If this strategy proves ineffective, then the next simplest on the list can be brought in to replace it. Because arrangements involve both where adults are and what they do, more so than other strategies, there is more concern for reality and the adults must be honest in their assessment of what will and will not be consistently implemented. At Greer Elementary, the faculty and staff considered physical arrangements in the context of their agreed-upon rules and routines. New arrangements in the hallway include an agreement that teachers would be line leaders whenever students were moving through the hall. In addition, all TERRANCE M. SCOTT 202

adults agreed to supervise all students in the hall by observing and providing feedback on a consistent and frequent basis. In the cafeteria, teachers agreed that they should deliver students directly to their table or line and then pick students up from a designated table rather than meeting them at the door. In addition, all agreed that when entering or leaving the cafeteria any adult should move throughout the students to provide prompts and feedback. Staff at Brant HS realized that simply changing the rules and adding a modied bell system would not provide a sufcient probability of success for many students, and thus they agreed to two new arrangements. First, all teachers agreed that, as much as possible during transition times between classes, they would stand in their doorway so that they could see students in the hallway. Second, they agreed that they would step into the hallway to prompt particularly frequent offenders to make sure to be to class on time. Further, they agreed to be very vocal in prompting all students once the warning bell had rung keep moving, only 30 seconds!. Table 4 shows the full set of agreements for rules, routines, and arrangements developed by Brant HS in response to the identied predictors. Consistency Across the System Consistency and coherence are key features of successful schools see Hagermoser Sanetti, Dobey,  Gritter, 2012. Consistent implementation is dependent upon adults in the school being able to agree on both the Table 4. All Rules, Routines, and Arrangements as Agreed Upon by Brant HS. Problem Rules Routines Arrangements -Tardy Walk one way Tokens for on time Adults in hallway -All Move in direction of next class Praise for on time All stand in doorway -All day Must be in room when nal bell rings Stagger bells by class Look for repeat offenders and verbally prompt No talking 30 second warning bell Walk with repeat offenders Must be moving after warning bell Verbal prompts Trafc patterns on oor Note: Items denoted by strikethrough were part of initial brainstorming, but were not agreed upon by all faculty and staff. Universal Systems for Preventing Behavior Problems 203

expectations and the critical behavioral discriminations that distinguish each. When schools cannot come to consensus on these issues, inconsistencies in rule instruction and enforcement will inhibit student success and result in maintenance of problem behaviors Walker, Colvin,  Ramsey, 1995; Walker  Shinn, 2002. Program coherence is both the extent to which the schools programs for student and staff learning are coordinated, focused on clear learning goals, and sustained over a period of time Fullan, 2001, p. 146, and how schools arrange personnel behaviors, schedules, and physical environments to maximize student learning. The extent to which schools create this coherence largely determines the success of schoolwide programs. The process of including all faculty and staff in discussions is a strategy that facilitates full participation and consistency. That is, when individuals are engaged in the decision-making process, they are more likely to buy in and commit to decisions e.g., Fullan, 2001. However, not everyone can be expected to agree on any particular issue. In Table 4, note that brainstorming resulted in a number of suggestions, not all of which were ultimately agreed upon by the faculty and staff at Brant HS. Also recall that the school spent over an hour arguing about the appropriate denition of a tardy behavior. Although they eventually settled on and agreed to teach and enforce the rule that the student had to be over the threshold of the door at the bell in order to be considered on time, not all thought that this was the best denition. Rather, enough consensus emerged to allow all faculty to agree that they could live with this denition. Effective instruction requires consistency both in what is taught and the feedback that students receive across adults. Suppose a school identied a priority of having students answer 4 to the query, whats 2  2? Clearly, if some teachers were not in agreement and taught students either that 2  2 was 5, or that the answer to 2  2 was not important, we would expect that there would be a number of students who would not be able to demonstrate prociency when assessed at the end of the year. By that same token, if adults across the school do not agree on what the rules are, or what specic behaviors are to be taught, encouraged, and enforced as school rules, it can be predicted that more students will fail. The key is agreement and consistency. Student success in exhibiting the desired behavior is dependent on not just the selection of an appropriate replacement behavior for a given problem behavior, but also on the consistency with which faculty and staff approach the problem. Regardless of what rules are established, how consistently they are taught and enforced will affect the degree to which students are successful. TERRANCE M. SCOTT 204

At Greer Elementary, the staff simply set a criteria of 80 consensus for every rule see Scott  Hunter, 2001. After brainstorming a set of potential rules, routines, and arrangements, each was revisited and discussed. All decisions were submitted to a vote and any decision not receiving at least an 80 vote from the group was sent back for further discussion, revision, and compromise. Through this process, the faculty and staff were sure to include all in each decision and increase the probability of consistent application. While this process is often slow and involves tedious discussion of the minutia surrounding every decision, it is necessary to ensure faculty buy in and consistency in the initial stages of universal systems of prevention. As the universal process is implemented, it will not be realistic to continue dedicating blocks of time to school-wide discussion of universal issues. Instead, schools will develop representative teams whose job will be to meet on a monthly basis, look at available data, make decisions based on those data, and report back to the full faculty and staff. As a general rule, schools should begin with at least one and no more than three specic goals to be monitored throughout the year and the data should be evaluated at least once per month Scott, 2004. At Brant HS, a team of persons representing the MathScience, Language Arts, and Social Sciences departments joined with others representing Specialists, Teacher Assistants, and the Principal and Assistant Principal. Recall that Brant HS had only one goal when beginning the universal process, to decrease the number of tardy behaviors. They set one quarter 90 days as their target date and, on a monthly basis, they met to assess their progress. Monitoring Data-Based Decision Making The fourth step of the multitiered process involves monitoring outcomes to evaluate the effectiveness of the systems that have been developed and implemented. If data were initially available and used to identify problems, then a baseline for comparison already exists. In such cases the school can simply set a goal and formatively assess progress. However, as has been noted, most schools do not have good data coming into the process and instead rely on reporting and analysis of collective experiences as a means of identifying predictable problems. While this is an effective strategy to begin the universal process, a more valid and comprehensive data collection system must be developed for use across adults, students, and locations. Further, effective data systems must easily lend themselves to analysis for efcient decision making Tobin, Sugai,  Colvin, 2000. Universal Systems for Preventing Behavior Problems 205

Developing Effective Monitoring Systems Monitoring of behavior requires the school to use some sort of standardized collection format Irvin, Tobin, Sprague, Sugai,  Vincent, 2004. Generally, schools develop a paper form that is used to document all behavior problems. Often, these forms serve as both an ofcial ofce referral and as a simple report of misbehavior. A referral is used for more serious behaviors that require administrator involvement, while reports are used to note misbehaviors that are smaller in scale and handled by the faculty or staff who observed it. In either case, three keys to effective school-wide monitoring are accurate denition of behavior, reliable reporting, and regular analysis of outcomes for responsive decision making Colvin, Kameenui,  Sugai, 1993; Sugai, Sprague et al., 2000. The reason for collecting data on more minor infractions is that these smaller problems are predictive of larger problems Metzler, Biglan, Rusby,  Sprague, 2001. Monitoring minor incidents provides an excellent mechanism to help teachers better understand how to prevent major incidents. For example, if a student had a single minor problem with each of 10 different teachers, we would consider that student at risk and in need of some intervention. But if only major infractions are monitored, no one would be aware that such a student had more than one problem and no action would be taken. Similarly, if 10 different teachers all handle minor problems in the hallway, yet no major problems are reported in that location, an examination of the data will suggest that the hallway is problem-free, when in fact it is a big predictor of problems. Each school must determine how they will monitor and report student misbehavior across the school. Collection of a range of data allows for precise predictions including such specic information as the time of day that a ght is most likely to occur, the location in which problems are most probable, and the grade level of students most likely to have misbehavior in particular spots cafeteria, bus, gymnasium. The more precision with which data are collected, the more precise will be the predictions made. Inherent in the process of developing a monitoring system are considerations of accuracy i.e., denitions, contextual t extent to which system monitors issues important to the school, and simplicity. Monitoring processes that are either too onerous in terms of staff time and effort, or that yield inaccurate or irrelevant data are processes that will not sustain  and rightly so. The purpose of monitoring is to get an accurate picture of student success rates across the school, which is then used to drive decisions for future practice. If the process is unwieldy, inaccurate, or irrelevant, it is of no practical use. TERRANCE M. SCOTT 206

As with all universal decisions, there is no guide that can tell all schools to implement the same rules, routines, and arrangements. These decisions must be developed in accordance with each individual schools unique predictors and in consideration of what the faculty and staff believe to be both logical and realistic. The same issues apply to monitoring as each individual school must determine what problems, locations, times, and other dimensions of behavior are most relevant. The range of potential problem behaviors at the elementary level are likely much different than what is of concern at the high school level. For example, many high schools have concern with public displays of affection in the hallway, while elementary schools are more likely to be concerned with running. Similarly, whereas elementary schools are concerned with playground locations, high schools are more likely concerned with locker or common areas. As for time, middle and high schools generally break the day up by periods, while elementary schools typically use clock hours. Thus, each school must determine the nature of their monitoring system. In addition to specic problem behaviors, locations, and times, schools may wish to collect information on other issues that might help to better predict failures in the future. For example, some schools choose to monitor gender, grade level, or even how they respond to referrals as a way of assessing how future interventions may be better tailored to facilitate success. In schools where disproportional discipline practices are an issue, data forms designate offenders as minority or nonminority  allowing for analysis of where, when, and under what conditions disproportional outcomes are most likely to occur. The bottom line is that each school must develop its own monitoring system to t the questions that it nds important and relevant. Fig. 2 presents the data collection form used in Greer Elementary. This form is approximately 4v  3v, printed front and back, in tablet form so that reports can be completed and torn off individually with ease. Faculty members carry the forms in a pocket so that they can be used anywhere or at any time during the day. Note that the form is titled with both Report and Referral. When an adult observes a problem behavior, he or she rst determines whether the behavior meets the threshold for completing the form. Guidelines for making these decisions are developed by the full faculty and staff in advance, as not all behaviors will warrant a report or referral. If the behavior does warrant noting in some form, the adult determines whether it meets the criteria for a referral versus a report, circles the correct option on the form, and then completes all the required information. A monitoring system is accurate to the extent that all agree as to the denitions of the variables being collected Scott, 2004. For example, Universal Systems for Preventing Behavior Problems 207

consider that one faculty member denes a ght as being a physical altercation wherein blood is drawn, another believes that a ght is dened as any disagreement including verbal disagreements, and others have their own denitions varying throughout this range. If we know only that the school reported 20 ghts in a month, what do we really know? All we can say for sure is that there were 20 instances of behavior that met someones denition of ghting, and we would have no true understanding of what is happening in this school relative to ghting. Clear, concise, and observable denitions of behavior require all the adults in the school to discuss each item that is to be placed on the monitoring form. It is recommended that schools use fewer categories of behavior and strive to lump similar behaviors together. For example, Greer Elementary has both deance and insubordination on their forms incident list. Without knowing how they dene these two behaviors, it would be difcult to know how they differ. In fact, the faculty and staff agreed that there were two distinct types of noncompliant behavior and they dened deance as a more passive aggressive behavior in which the student skirted or avoided following directions  perhaps pretending to comply or subtly wandering off task. In contrast, insubordination was dened as a much more overt refusal to comply with a direction. It may involve the student saying no or staring at the teacher and simply refusing to comply. While there certainly is some fuzzy middle ground here, the important point is that the staff at this school Fig. 2. Behavior Monitoring Form for Greer Elementary Front and Back of Form. TERRANCE M. SCOTT 208

created denitions and examples that they believed were sufciently clear, and which they ultimately found useful. Accuracy is important with regard to predictors as well as behaviors. The faculty and staff of a school must clearly dene what constitutes a hallway versus a common area or an entry area. Similarly, it will be important to accurately dene how time of day is to be recorded, and to make certain that all other variables are distinct by agreed-upon denition. In most cases, accuracy can be enhanced by presenting clear options requiring only a checkmark rather than asking those completing a behavioral reporting form to write out their own descriptor. In Fig. 2, note that the restroom location has additional information to designate the specic restroom in which the problem occurred. All a staff member needs to do is check the restroom blank and circle the correct location. It is recommended that schools determine the full range of options for behaviors and locations to keep the denitions as tight as possible, essentially forcing accuracy. Sometimes, however, presenting all the possible options may make forms too long or complicated, and a diminishing returns effect may be observed in terms of consistent and accurate use of the system. The essential element is that faculty and staff understand and agree upon the denitions to be used, as well as how to complete the forms. For example, at Greer Elementary, faculty determined that in reporting when behavior problems occurred, they would round times to the nearest hour. Thus, any infractions observed between 8:00 AM and 8:59 AM would be recorded as 8. In contrast, Brant HS faculty and staff agreed that all incidents occurring before 7:45 AM would receive a 0 to designate that it occurred before school. All other incidents were recorded as occurring during one of the 7 daily periods 17, with 8 indicating that it occurred after school. Creating options to be simply checked by respondents also simplies the data collection and aggregation process. Schools would do well to consider how the monitoring form can be developed in a manner that is easily transportable small, compact, simple to complete checkmarks, clear options, and denitions, and part of a consistent routine. As data collection becomes more complex, faculty and staff will be less likely to report incidents due to the time and effort required, and the data will be incomplete and therefore inaccurate. But simplicity is not the only factor affecting consistent use of the monitoring system. Even simple systems will eventually be abandoned if they are not seen as useful. It is imperative that all monitoring data be shared back with the entire school. Seeing the data not only reinforces the monitoring process by showing people the fruits of their reporting labor; it also shows them the effects of their rules, routines, and Universal Systems for Preventing Behavior Problems 209

arrangements and allows them to understand when and why decisions need to be made with regard to whether those agreements should remain or be changed. Data-Based Decision Making The purpose of collecting data on behavior infractions is to use it both to continue predicting where failures are most likely in the future and to evaluate the effect of current policies Todd, Sampson,  Horner, 2005. When teams meet to look at data, there are typically three important tasks. First, the team looks at the data as an evaluation of their goals. If a goal is to decrease referrals from the cafeteria during lunch, then data must be analyzed and summarized in a way that provides an index of this outcome  which is then compared to outcomes observed from previous months to determine whether trends are apparent and whether changes in the intervention plan are warranted. Second, the team looks at the overall data in search of new predictors. That is, as the school year goes by new problem behaviors will surely become apparent, novel locations may become hot spots for failure, and certain times of the day will become more or less problematic. The team looks at the entire school, using the same logic that they used during initial brainstorming of predictors: considering predictors by location rst and then by the behaviors, times, and contexts within each location. As new predictors are found, the team brainstorms how rules, routines, and arrangements might most simply be altered to prevent failures. Third, the team has the task of looking for individual students whose failures as indicated by the data identify them as at risk of future problems. Every school will need to determine their own criteria for making these identications. However, a good rule of thumb is to set the criterion number of discipline issues at a point that would typically identify about 20 of the school Scott, 2004. Students identied by these data are then referred on to a secondary tier team to make decisions regarding individualized group interventions. It is important to note that although personal perceptions were used to make initial predictions and develop universal strategies, moving forward the data will be the sole source of information for decision making. That is, teams should not make decisions based on individual faculty or staff perceptions or complaints about problem areas or team impressions of change in progress toward a goal. Rather, teams should focus as objectively as possible on their data when determining what has occurred, and what impact their changes in rules, routines, or arrangements have produced Scott, 2004. Universal teams will do well to remind faculty and staff that it TERRANCE M. SCOTT 210

is their use of the monitoring forms that provides the information necessary for universal decisions. Thus, adults can affect the system best by providing consistently accurate data as part of the process. In the beginning of the universal process, staff at Brant HS knew little from their data except that there had been 1,600 ofce discipline referrals for tardy delivered in the previous 90 days. Information as to who, when, where, or any other contextual factors was either not collected or not summarized in a manner that allowed for the information to be useful. As part of the universal implementation process, the Universal Team drafted a new referral form that not just monitored name, date, and incident but also included areas for respondents to provide information as to location, time of day, and grade level. A procedure was set for moving these data from the monitoring forms into a simple spreadsheet on a weekly basis. Then, when Brant HS looked at their data each month, they were able to see the full range of potential predictors for tardy their goal and also the full range of problem behaviors and their predictors. Fig. 3 presents the data on tardy behavior collected by Brant HS, from the quarter prior to their implementation of PBIS baseline and the three subsequent quarters. Note that in the quarter following implementation of the universal system, the school observed about a 50 decrease in total incidents of tardy. Because a new and more comprehensive data system had been implemented, the school was also able to conduct a more in-depth analysis of their problems. In looking at the full data set the team found that they could best predict a tardy by three contextual factors: juniorand Fig. 3. Data on Tardy Behavior for Brant HS. Universal Systems for Preventing Behavior Problems 211

senior-level student, afternoon, changing classes between A-Wing and B-Wing in the school. After some consideration the team achieved consensus on the hypothesis that juniors and seniors were more likely to drive cars and that the parking lot where their cars were parked was directly between A-Wing and B-Wing. While it was not clear why more tardies occurred in the afternoon, it was determined that the routines and arrangements were insufcient to predict success with these students in these particular contexts. The teams response was very simple. They developed a new adult routine in which one faculty member stood outside of the A-Wing door and one stood outside of the B-Wing door. This occurred only during the two 5-minute transition times between classes each afternoon. These adults provided a simple prompt to each student coming out the door, Please stay on the sidewalk and do not go into the parking lot. After implementing these new strategies, data for the next quarter show a further decrease of approximately 75 from the previous quarter. Further analysis of the data indicated that 80 of the remaining 200 referrals could be accounted for by 10 students. Those 10 students out of the entire student body of 700 represent the students who will require the most intense and individualized interventions. Said differently, these students are those who did not respond to universal or secondary tier intervention. Finding these students began with effective prevention at the universal level. SUMMARY The examples of Greer Elementary and Brant HS presented here are descriptions of actual school processes, practices, and outcomes. The names and some of the circumstances have been changed to maintain anonymity for the schools, but they generally represent what is typical of the universal process steps. Bringing the school together and having a discussion to implement a universal system for prevention of behavior problems is easy. Actually guiding that discussion to produce a set of decisions that will be simple, effective, and sustainable requires attention to the key features of an effective process and persons dedicated to facilitating the process with delity Simonsen, 2010. Although the process detailed herein is fairly straightforward and might even be described as simplistic, there are areas where research needs to guide the process toward ultimately more effective and efcient processes and practice. While we know that a number of teacher practices have been TERRANCE M. SCOTT 212

empirically associated with increased student engagement and achievement see Hattie, 2009, for a review of effective practices, we have precious little knowledge regarding the degree to which varying rates of these practices have predictable effects on specic students or problems, under specic circumstances or contexts, or with different school levels. Research has not demonstrated empirical connections between the instructional practices associated with student achievement in the classroom and those same practices at the school level. That is, while we know that effective instructional practices during academic content instruction are strongly associated with student achievement and we continue to advocate for these practices across the school, research has not persuasively demonstrated the relative benets of this focus. For example, feedback has been well established as an effective practice for instruction of both academic and social behavior. But at present all we can honestly tell schools is to do more of such practices. Research needs to focus on the use of such practices under a variety of circumstances in an effort to create more prescriptive goals for teachers. It seems reasonable to assume that even a doubling of extremely low rates of feedback e.g., 1 per week would still be too low to demonstrate any practical benet. In such cases asking the teacher to do more is not specic enough to predict success. By that same logic, it seems reasonable to assume that there are rates of effective practice that become so high as to lose effectiveness or even become counterproductive. For instance, the teacher who provides feedback 75 times per minute is not likely to see benets over rates of 65 times per minute and may in fact nd that such high rates are distracting to students. In order for us to effectively guide schools in practice we require a research base to prescribe effective rates under a variety of conditions. Effective universal systems involve all adults in the school in a discussion of the contexts in which students will be most likely to have failures. These schools develop not just a set of rules but also a full complement of routines and physical arrangements that are really agreements among adults regarding a commitment to effective instructional practices to increase the likelihood of student success  especially in contexts where failure has been most predictable. Further, these schools are able to sustain the process through the development of a designated team that is charged with analyzing data and reporting back. Finally, what is effective in one school will not necessarily be effective in any other school, and thus, all decisions must be based on the data collected in that location. Universal behavior systems are focused on all students in the school and have as their goal the overall reduction of student behavior problems. However, without universal Universal Systems for Preventing Behavior Problems 213

systems in place, students with the most intensive problem behaviors will exhibit more failures, and have an even greater chance of overall school and life failure. REFERENCES Barbetta, P. M., Heward, W. L., Bradley, D. M. C.,  Miller, A. D. 1994. Effects of immediate and delayed error correction on the acquisition and maintenance of sight words by students with developmental disabilities. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 27, 177178. Bradshaw, C. P., Mitchell, M. M.,  Leaf, P. J. 2010. Examining the effects of schoolwide positive behavioral interventions and supports on student outcomes. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 123, 133148. doi:10.11771098300709334798 Colvin, G., Kameenui, E. J.,  Sugai, G. 1993. School-wide and classroom management: Reconceptualizing the integration and management of students with behavior problems in general education. Education and Treatment of Children, 16, 361381. Conroy, M. A., Asmus, J. M., Ladwig, C. N., Sellers, J. A.,  Valcante, G. 2004. The effects of proximity on the classroom behaviors of students with autism in general education settings. Behavioral Disorders, 292, 119129. DeVoe, J., Peter, K., Kaufman, P., Miller, A., Noonan, M., Snyder, T.,  Baum, K. 2004. Indicators of school crime and safety, 2004. U.S. Departments of Education and Justice. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofce. Engelmann, S.,  Carnine, D. 1991. Theory of instruction: Principles and applications. Eugene, OR: ADI Press. Epstein, M. H., Nordness, P. D., Gallagher, K., Nelson, J. R., Lewis, L.,  Schrepf, S. 2005. School as the entry point: Assessing adherence to the basic tenets of the wraparound approach. Behavioral Disorders, 302, 8594. Fullan, M. 2001. The new meaning of educational change. New York, NY: Teachers College Press. Furlong, M. J., Morrison, G. M.,  Dear, J. D. 1994. Addressing school violence as part of schools educational mission. Preventing School Failure, 383, 1017. Gunter, P. L.,  Shores, R. E. 1995. On the move: Using teacherstudent proximity to improve students behavior. Teaching Exceptional Children, 28, 1215. Hagermoser Sanetti, L. M., Dobey, L. M.,  Gritter, K. L. 2012. Treatment integrity of interventions with children in the Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions from 1999-2009. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 141, 2946. Hastings, N. 1995. Tasks and tables: The effects of seating arrangements on task engagement in primary classrooms. Educational Research, 373, 279292. Hattie, J.,  Timperley, H. 1997. The power of feedback. Review of Educational Research, 771, 81112. doi:10.3102003465430298487 Hattie, J. A. C. 2009. Visible learning: A synthesis of over 800 meta-analyses relating to achievement. New York, NY: Routledge Press. Hodges, R. 2001. Encouraging high-risk student participation in tutoring and supplemental instruction. Journal of Developmental Education, 243, 28. Irvin, L. K., Tobin, T. J., Sprague, J. R., Sugai, G.,  Vincent, C. G. 2004. Validity of ofce discipline referral measures as indices of school-wide behavioral status and effects of TERRANCE M. SCOTT 214

school-wide behavioral interventions. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 63, 131147. Johnson, T. C., Stoner, G.,  Greene, S. K. 1996. Demonstrating the experimenting society model with classwide behavior management interventions. School Psychology Review, 25, 199214. Kerr, M. M.,  Nelson, C. M. 2010. Strategies for addressing behavior problems in the classroom 6th ed. Columbus, OH: Pearson. Lane, K. L., Bocian, K. M., MacMillan, D. L.,  Gresham, F. M. 2004. Treatment integrity: An essential  but often forgotten  component of school-based interventions. Preventing School Failure, 48, 3643. Leedy, A., Bates, P.,  Safran, S. P. 2004. Bridging the research-to-practice gap: Improving hallway behavior using positive behavior supports. Behavioral Disorders, 292, 130139. Luiselli, J. K., Putman, R. F.,  Sunderland, M. 2002. Longitudinal evaluation of behavior support intervention in a public middle school. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 43, 182188. Malone, B. G.,  Tietjens, C. L. 2000. Re-examination of classroom rules: The need for clarity and specied behavior. Special Services in the School, 15, 159170. McFadden, A. C., March, G. E., II., Price, B. J.,  Hwang, Y. 1992. A study of race and gender bias in the punishment of handicapped school children. The Urban Review, 24, 239251. Metzler, C. W., Biglan, A., Rusby, J. C.,  Sprague, J. R. 2001. Evaluation of a comprehensive behavior management program to improve school-wide positive behavior support. Education and Treatment of Children, 24, 448479. Morgan-DAtrio, C., Northup, J., LaFleur, L.,  Spera, S. 1996. Toward prescriptive alternatives to suspensions: A preliminary evaluation. Behavioral Disorders, 21, 190200. Nersesian, M., Todd, A., Lehmann, J.,  Watson, J. 2000. School-wide behavior support through district-level system change. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 24, 244247. Reinke, W. M., Lewis-Palmer, T.,  Martin, E. 2007. The effect of visual performance feedback on teacher use of behavior-specic praise. Behavior Modication, 31, 247255. Richter, M. M., Lewis, T. J.,  Hagar, J. 2012. The relationship between principal leadership skills and school-wide positive behavior support: An exploratory study. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 144, 6977. Roach, A. T.,  Kratochwill, T. R. 2004. Evaluating school climate and school culture. Teaching Exceptional Children, 371, 1017. Ross, S. W., Romer, N.,  Horner, R. H. 2012. Teacher well-being and the implementation of school-wide positive behavior interventions and supports. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 144, 118128. Sandomierski, T., Kincaid, D.,  Algozzine, B. 2007. Response to intervention and positive behavior support: Brothers from different mothers or sisters with different misters? PBIS Newsletter, 42. Retrieved from http:www.pbis.orgpbisnewslettervolume4 issue2.aspx Savage, T. 1999. Teaching self-control through management and discipline. Boston, MA: Allyn  Bacon. Scott, T. M. 2004. Making behavior intervention planning decisions in a school wide system of positive behavior support. Focus on Exceptional Children, 361, 118. Universal Systems for Preventing Behavior Problems 215

Scott, T. M.,  Hunter, J. 2001. Initiating school-wide support systems: An administrators guide to the process. Beyond Behavior, 11, 1315. Simonsen, B. 2010. School-wide positive behavior support. In M. M. Kerr  C. M. Nelson Eds., Strategies for addressing behavior problems in the classroom 6th ed., pp. 3668. Columbus, OH: Pearson. Simonsen, B., Britton, L.,  Young, D. 2010. School-wide positive behavior support in an alternative school setting: A case study. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 123, 180. Spaulding, S. A., Horner, R. H., May, S. L.,  Vincent, C. G. 2008. Evaluation brief: Implementation of school-wide PBS across the United States. OSEP Technical Assistance Center on Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports. Retrieved from http: pbis.orgevaluationevaluationbriefsdefault.aspx Sprague, J.,  Walker, H. 2000. Early identication and intervention for youth with antisocial and violent behavior. Exceptional Children, 66, 367379. Sugai, G. M.,  Horner, R. H. 1999. Discipline and behavioral support: Preferred processes and practices. Effective School Practices, 17, 1022. Sugai, G., Horner, H., Dunlap, G., Hieneman, M., Lewis, T., Nelson, C., y Ruef, M. B. 2000. Applying positive behavior support and functional behavioral assessment in schools. Journal of Positive Behavioral Interventions, 2, 131143. Sugai, G., Sprague, J., Horner, R.,  Walker, H. 2000. Preventing school violence: The use of ofce discipline referrals to assess and monitor school-wide discipline interventions. Journal of Emotional  Behavioral Disorders, 8, 94101. Tobin, T., Sugai, G.,  Colvin, G. 2000. Using discipline referrals to make decisions. NASSP Bulletin, 84616, 106117. Todd, A. W., Sampson, N. K.,  Horner, R. 2005. Data-based decision making using ofce discipline referral data from the school-wide information system SWIS. APBS Newsletter, 22, 3. Vaughn, S., Bos, C. S.,  Schumm, J. S. 2000. Teaching exceptional, diverse, and at-risk students in the general education classroom 2nd ed. Boston, MA: Allyn  Bacon. Walker, H. M., Colvin, G.,  Ramsey, E. 1995. Antisocial behavior in schools. Pacic Grove, CA: BrooksCole Publishing Co. Walker, H. M.,  Shinn, M. R. 2002. Structuring school-based interventions to achieve integrated primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention goals for safe and effective schools. In M. R. Shinn, G. Stoner  H. M. Walker Eds., Interventions for academic and behavior problems: Preventive and remedial approaches pp. 126. Silver Spring, MD: National Association of School Psychologists. Werts, M. G., Caldwell, N. K.,  Wolery, M. 2003. Instructive feedback: Effects of a presentation variable. The Journal of Special Education, 37, 124133. Windle, M.,  Mason, A. W. 2004. General and specic predictors of behavioral and emotional problems among adolescents. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 121, 4962. Zins, J. E.,  Ponti, C. R. 1990. Best practices in school-based consultation. In A. Thomas  J. Grimes Eds., Best practices in school psychology-II pp. 673694. Washington, DC: National Association of School Psychologists. TERRANCE M. SCOTT 216

PREVENTING AND RESPONDING TO BULLYING AND HARASSMENT IN SCHOOLS: WHAT WE KNOW AND WHAT CAN BE DONE Jeffrey Sprague and Vicki Nishioka ABSTRACT Of the many serious challenges confronting schools today, bullying and harassment perhaps pose the most deleterious and persistent long-term outcomes for students. The effects of bullying are not limited to the students targeted by these behaviors, but also negatively affect the bullies and bystanders who witness the events. An array of factors inuence, or even perpetuate, school bullying. The factors are related to individual characteristics of the students, social relationships in school, family support, neighborhood inuences, and community systems. In this chapter, we describe the effects of bullying and harassment and, provide a current perspective of the magnitude of the problem. We also discuss effective responses to bullying and harassment in schools and approaches for prevention. School-wide implementation of programs is highlighted. Bullying and harassment represent perhaps the most serious challenges confronting our schools today. It harms the students who bully, those who Classroom Behavior, Contexts, and Interventions Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, Volume 25, 217245 Copyright r 2012 by Emerald Group Publishing Limited All rights of reproduction in any form reserved ISSN: 0735-004Xdoi:10.1108S0735-004X20120000025012 217

are targets of bullying behaviors, and student bystanders who witness the bullying incidents Arseneault et al., 2006; Gini  Pozzoli, 2009. Nationally, more than three quarters of middle school students are exposed to bullying and about a third of students in grades 610 are involved directly as the target, aggressor, or both Dinkes, Kemp,  Baum, 2009; Nansel et al., 2001. School administrators, particularly in middle school, identify bullying as the most frequently reported discipline problem in their school Nolle, Guerino,  Dinkes, 2007. Over half of our nations teachers and school staff members report they need more training in how to prevent and respond effectively to bullying situations Bradshaw, Waasdorp, OBrennan,  Gulemetova, 2011. Students who are involved in bullying  as the target or aggressor  often do poorly in school, have more social problems with peers, and are more likely to suffer from depression, substance abuse, and behavioral difculties Arseneault et al., 2006; DeVoe  Kaffenberger, 2005; Nansel et al., 2004. Bullying has also been a signicant factor in tragic events involving school violence, weapon carrying, and student suicides Kim  Leventhal, 2008; Klomek, Marrocco, Kleinman, Schonfeld,  Gould, 2007; Vossekuil, Fein, Borum,  Modzeleski, 2002. Our objectives with this chapter are twofold. First, we describe the background of school bullying and harassment in order to provide a current view of the scope of the problems. Second, we review the components of an effective response to bullying and harassment in schools. BACKGROUND ON BULLYING No matter what their experiences or backgrounds in growing up, most adults can remember at least one or two occasions during childhood where they were picked on, made fun of in front of peers, humiliated in some way, threatened, intimidated, or perhaps even beaten up Knoff, 2007; Nishioka, Coe, Burke, Hanita,  Sprague, 2011; Swearer  Cary, 2007. Most can clearly recall the students who did these things, as well as details and circumstances surrounding the bullying incidents, even though they may not be able to remember much else from this period in their lives. Not surprisingly, such unpleasant situations are often initiated and sustained by the same student or students who are commonly identied as school bullies. Nearly everyone who has attended school has had some experience with the school yard bully. In the vast majority of cases, such experience tends to be negative and emotionally intense, whether it plays out directly or indirectly. Perhaps the student picked on them or others, called them JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 218

names, teased them, or somehow embarrassed them in public. Maybe the bully took something from them or deliberately broke a prized possession just to be mean  or simply because the bully knew he or she could do it. What is Bullying? The generally accepted denition of bullying, and the one used for this chapter, denes bullying as a set of aggressive behaviors that meets three conditions. First, bullying is aggressive behaviors that are intentional and meant to cause harm. Second, the bullying behaviors occur repeatedly over time. Studies indicate that we should be concerned about students who are involved in bullying incidents  as the aggressors or targets  two or more times per month because they are more likely to suffer from social, behavioral, and emotional problems than those not involved in bullying Nansel et al., 2004; Solberg  Olweus, 2003. The third condition is an imbalance of power or strength exists between bullies and the students they target. This power imbalance may involve physical strength, social status, intellect, or psychological factors that make it difcult for the student target to feel safe or stand up to the student aggressor Nansel et al., 2001; Olweus, 1994; Ross, 2003. Bullying situations can involve boys or girls, one student bullying another, or a group of students ganging up on someone Olweus, 1994. The behaviors that students use to bully others fall into four forms of aggression: verbal, physical, relational, and cyber or electronic aggression. Direct aggression refers to verbal and physical forms of aggression such as name calling, threats, hitting, kicking, and shoving. It may also include ganging up on a student, playing mean tricks, touching or grabbing someone in a hurtful way, damaging or stealing anothers property, or chasing students to scare them Vernberg, Jacobs,  Hershberger, 1999; Wang, Iannotti,  Nansel, 2009. Overt, painful, and intimidating events of this nature are more characteristic of boys than girls and they tend to occur in school settings where there is limited adult supervision and monitoring to prevent them Peplar, Craig, Yuile,  Connolly, 2004. Younger students tend to engage in higher levels of physical aggression, but as students transition to middle school, they begin to engage in more verbal and relational forms of aggression Kim, Kamphaus, Orpinas,  Kelder, 2010; Wang et al., 2009. A third form of bullying is called indirect, social, or relational aggression and involves behaviors intended to deliberately harm someones friendships and social relationships with others. Those engaged in relational aggression Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 219

tend to exclude others from activities, intentionally ignore someone, damage reputations through backbiting, lies, and rumors, try to ruin existing friendships through alienation, and engage in social manipulation and discrimination of others for indefensible reasons Crick, 1996; Merrell, Buchanan,  Tran, 2006. Typically, girls do not display as much of the kind of overt, in your face physical aggression or verbal threats that is commonly identied as characteristic of boys. However, it should be noted and stressed that both genders engage in both direct overt verbal or physical and indirect social or relational bullying behavior Nishioka et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2009. Although some research suggests that boys tend to use physical and verbal aggression to bully and girls who bully tend to use relational forms of aggression, this division along gender lines seems to be blurring in society, and especially in schools. It is obvious from media accounts, school reports, and legal actions that girls are engaging in more aggression and violence. Likewise, any boy in school will tell you that boys regularly engage in relational aggression Nishioka et al., 2011. The upshot is that both genders may engage in the different forms of bullying and their involvement is extremely damaging to both the victim and, since long-term social and academic outcomes for bullies are so negative, the aggressors. Cyber bullying or electronic aggression has emerged as another form of aggression as students have increased access to computers, cell phones, and other electronic devices David-Ferdon  Hertz, 2009. This form of bullying refers to aggression that is executed through personal computers or cell phones to send e-mail, instant messaging, text messaging, or posting messages on social networks Hertz  David-Ferdon, 2008; Wang et al., 2009. Although research is limited about this new form of bullying, 935 percent of students report being the target of cyber bullying and 421 percent report being the aggressor David-Ferdon  Hertz, 2009; Wang et al., 2009; Ybarra, Diener-West,  Leaf, 2007. The differences across these studies are likely due to variations in how the survey questions are written, the characteristics of the students surveyed, and how cyber bullying was dened. For example, questions that asked about the students involvement in cyber bullying or electronic aggression during the past month may elicit different answers than questions that ask about their experiences during the past year. The majority of students 67 percent report receiving electronic aggression via instant messaging and about a quarter report being bullied by email messages, in chat rooms, or through posts on websites. Fifth-grade students report less problems with this type of bullying and eighth-grade students report the highest involvement Williams  Guerra, 2007. These electronic JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 220

communications can include unkind teasing, threats, playing mean tricks, and spreading rumors that are intended to harm the emotional well-being, social status, and peer relationships of another student Agatston, Kowalski,  Limber, 2007; Ybarra, Mitchell, Wolak,  Finkelhor, 2006. Cyber bullying presents unique challenges for students as well as school administrators. Among these is the ability of the aggressor to remain anonymous  a situation that many believe increases the level of cruelty, mean tricks, and power of the student bullies. Another challenge is the capacity of the bully to engage in the aggressive behavior at any time of day and to broadcast hurtful messages to a wide audience that extends beyond the classroom or school. Students receive the majority of hurtful cyber bullying messages when they are at home or away from school Agatston et al., 2007; David-Ferdon  Hertz, 2009. Bullying is Harmful Community and legislative demands to stop school bullying have escalated in response to public awareness of its detrimental effects on everyone involved and in reaction to heartbreaking stories of suicide and school shootings Gini  Pozzoli, 2009; Nansel et al., 2004. Yet, beyond the headlines, elementary school students who bully or are targets of bullying have more social problems with their peers, participate less in classroom activities, are more likely to dislike school, have difculty learning, and suffer from anxiety and somatic complaints such as stomachaches, headaches, or problems sleeping Arseneault et al., 2006; Buhs, Ladd,  Herald, 2006; Crick  Grotpeter, 1995; Due et al., 2005. Students of all ages who are chronically bullied avoid restrooms, hallways, and the school cafeteria, or are truant from school to avoid being subjected to bullying behaviors DeVoe  Kaffenberger, 2005; Dinkes et al., 2009. Middle and high school students who are bullied are also rejected by peers, fail academically, have more physical complaints and are more likely to suffer from depression, thoughts of suicide, and substance abuse Dill, Vernberg, Fonagy, Twemlow,  Gamm., 2004; Liu  Mustanski, 2012; Nansel et al., 2004; Skara et al., 2008. For many, the effects of these problems are long-term and persist throughout their adult lives. Bullying also harms student bystanders who witness the bullying. Some bystanders fear retaliation if they associate with or stand up for the victim Espelage, 2002. Many also feel guilty for watching the bullying without trying to help, or joining their peers in the bullying behaviors OConnell, Pepler,  Craig, 1999; Salmivalli, 1999. Student bystanders report feelings Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 221

of helplessness when witnessing bullying episodes caused by their inaction or participation in the aggressive behaviors OConnell et al., 1999. Concern about these negative effects on bystanders becomes more alarming given that 75 percent of middle school students and even more elementary school students report witnessing or exposure to bullying in their school, classroom, or neighborhood Atlas  Pepler, 1998; Bradshaw, Sawyer,  OBrennan, 2007. When Bullying Becomes Harassment Bullying touches nearly every student  either through direct experience or as a bystander. Because youth are bullied about external attributions related to how they look, talk, or dress Bradshaw et al., 2007, p. 370, racial and ethnic minorities; lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender LGBT youth; and youth with disabilities are especially vulnerable and frequent targets of bullying behaviors Harris Interactive  GLSEN, 2005; Kosciw, Greytak, Diaz,  Bartkiewicz, 2010; Pearce, Boergers,  Prinstein, 2002; Rivers, 2001. National surveys indicate 9 out of 10 LGBT middle and high school students experience harassment at school because of their sexual orientation, are subjected to homophobic comments such as faggot or dyke, and fear for their personal safety Kosciw et al., 2010. Because of this, the majority of students believe coming out was a mixed blessing in that it increased their psychological well-being but also exposed them to high levels of harassment. In these instances, bullying incidents may violate federal antidiscrimination laws that protect the right of each student to a safe learning environment and strictly prohibits peer harassment based on race, color, national origin, sex, or disability Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Of equal concern is the high prevalence of sexual harassment in schools. Hill  Kearl 2011 surveyed a nationally representative sample of students in grades 712 about their experiences with sexual harassment as the aggressor, target, or bystander. More girls 56 percent were subjected to sexual harassment than boys 40 percent, but all students, regardless of gender, reported feeling unsafe, problems sleeping, truancy, and problems concentrating on their studies. The sexual harassment included unwelcome sexual comments, jokes, and gestures; unwanted physical touching; and electronic forms of harassment. JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 222

Culture of Bullying An array of factors inuence and many perpetuate school bullying including the individual characteristics of the students, social relationships in school, family support, neighborhood inuences, and community systems Bronfenbrenner, 1979; Espelage  Swearer, 2011; Lee, 2011. Leading experts point out that the challenge of reducing school bullying goes well beyond resolving interpersonal problems between two students. It requires a cultural shift in the school from the social norms and behaviors that maintain bullying to ones that prevent or oppose its occurrence Bradshaw  Wassdorp, 2009; Swearer, Espelage, Vaillancourt,  Hymel, 2010. For example, the beliefs that teachers or students have about bullying, the quality of adult supervision, classroom and school social norms about aggression, and bystander responses to bullying may contribute to a school culture that promotes bullying Gini, Pozzoli, Borghi,  Franzoni, 2008; Kochenderfer-Ladd  Pelletier, 2008; Lee, 2011; Nickerson, Mele  Princiotta, 2008; Oh  Hazler, 2009; Reis, Trockel,  Mulhall, 2007. Factors that may be important inuences for students who have serious problems with bullying include individual characteristics e.g., social competence, mental health, physical characteristics, peer relationships, family support, and the safety of their neighborhood Bowes et al., 2009; Crick et al., 2006: Dill et al., 2004; Kuppens, Grietens, Onghena, Michiels,  Subramanian, 2008. Seriousness of Bullying Is Misunderstood A lack of awareness about the seriousness of bullying may lead to ineffective responses by both adults and students that, in turn, contribute to an increased tolerance of bullying Kochenderfer-Ladd  Pelletier, 2008 and reduced empathy for students who are victims of bullying Bradshaw et al., 2011; Vernberg et al., 1999. Adults and students both associate bullying with physical forms of aggression Bauman  Del Rio, 2006; Leff, Kupersmidt, Patterson,  Power, 1999; Prinstein, Boergers,  Vernberg, 2001 but many fail to recognize that relational forms of aggression are equally harmful Buhs et al., 2006; Merrell et al., 2006. Beliefs about aggression tend to predict our behavior and inuence our motivation to change Huesmann  Guerra, 1997; Swearer  Cary, 2007. Some teachers and students believe that verbal aggression, interpersonal conicts, and social exclusion are normal, a part of growing up, and that students should learn to cope with this on their own Bauman  Del Rio, 2006. In a large study conducted in the western United States, students in grades 38 Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 223

were asked an extensive set of questions about their beliefs and experiences regarding bullying and harassment in school Nishioka et al., 2011. In general, most students reported that they believe it is wrong to hit others, say mean things, push or shove others, get into physical ghts, or insult others. On the other hand, students, especially those in middle school, reported that retaliation is okay as long as someone else starts it and that students should be ready to ght for themselves Nishioka et al., 2011; Vernberg, Jacobs,  Hershberger, 1999. Many students also believed that the student being targeted did something wrong and is at least somewhat to blame for being bullied. Perhaps most disheartening, students reported that bullying does work  bullies get what they want and are respected by other students. Unfortunately, these beliefs result in a higher tolerance for bullying and, in some cases, a sense of inevitability about bullying that empowers the aggressor and reduces support for students targeted by bullying Dijkstra, Lindenberg,  Vennstra, 2008; Espelage, Holt,  Henkel, 2003; Oliver, Hoover,  Hazler, 1994; Pelligrini  Bartini, 2000; Rigby  Slee, 1999. We have summarized the results of these studies related to students and school staff members beliefs about aggression in Table 1. Students Dont Report Bullying More than two thirds of bullying incidents go unreported because students believe teachers will ignore the report or intervene in ways that will make Table 1. Beliefs About Aggression Among Students and School Staff Members. Beliefs About Aggression Students School Staff Members Relational aggression is not serious and is not harmful

Bullying behaviors are part of school  they are normal

Sometimes a student deserves to be bullied

Assertive students are not bullied

If someone provokes you, it is okay to yell or hit them back

Student who bully get what they want

Note: , indicates the beliefs about aggression that are common among Students or School Staff Members. JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 224

the situation worse Bradshaw et al., 2011; Petrosino, Guckenburg, DeVoe,  Hanson., 2010; Rigby  Barnes, 2002. Students state that adults who tell them to ignore the situation, to be more assertive, or to avoid being around students who bully are making them responsible for the bullying problem Bradshaw et al., 2007. Conversely, students view teachers who listen to them, give them advice, check in to see if they are okay, increase adult supervision, and intervene with the bully as helpful responses Bradshaw et al., 2007; Newman  Murray, 2005; Unnever  Cornell, 2004. Overall, however, students are more likely to report bullying to peers rather than school personnel Craig, Henderson,  Murphy, 2000; Rigby  Barnes, 2002; Unnever  Cornell, 2004. Student and Staff Perceptions of Bullying Differ The difference in teacher and student perceptions of bullying goes beyond their perceptions of effective reactions to bullying. Often, school staff underestimate the number of students involved in bullying Bradshaw et al., 2007; Hill  Kearl, 2011; Kosciw et al., 2010 and tend to associate bullying with physical acts of aggression causing them to overlook the more subtle but, equally harmful, forms of relational aggression Leff et al., 1999. Pepler and colleagues 1994 found that 84 percent of teachers report they intervene in bullying often,  more than double the percentage of students 35 percent who report their teachers intervene in bullying. Teachers and School Staff Members Require Professional Development Nationally, school personnel teachers, cafeteria workers, bus drivers, ofce personnel, classroom assistants believe it is their job to intervene in bullying, but less than half report being involved in their schools bullying prevention efforts Bradshaw et al., 2011. School personnel also report a lack of training in how to intervene in bullying situations, particularly in situations involving sexual orientation, gender, and disability Bradshaw et al., 2011. Teachers report that they lack training and, in turn, condence in their ability to manage bullying situations. This nding is concerning given the federal laws that prohibit discrimination in public schools on the basis of race, color, sex, national origin, and disability Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. Parent Involvement Is Important Most parents, especially those with children transitioning from elementary to middle school, recognize that bullying is harmful to their children and Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 225

expect schools to do more to address this problem Holt, Kantor,  Finkelhor, 2009. Surprisingly, over a third of parents believe their childs school should deal with bullying without parental involvement Holt et al., 2009. Lack of parental awareness and misconceptions about the seriousness and range of bullying behaviors also contribute to ineffective parental reactions that increase tolerance of bullying behaviors and reduced empathy for youth who are victims of bullying Sawyer, Mishna, Pepler,  Wiener, 2011; Wassdorp, Bradshaw,  Duong, 2011. For example, common advice given by parents include telling the child being victimized to ignore the situation, to retaliate or ght to avoid being picked on, or to be more assertive  reactions that increase the victims discomfort and empower the bully Mishna, Peplar,  Weiner, 2006; Mishna, Saini,  Solomon, 2009; Waasdorp, Pas, OBrennan,  Bradshaw, 2011. Whole School Approaches Have Proven Effectiveness Whole school also referred to as school-wide approaches comprise comprehensive interventions that are based on an ecological theory of social change that recognizes social phenomena like bullying result from an interaction between the individuals in the social setting and institutional factors that inuence the quality of these interactions Swearer et al., 2010. An ecological approach to bullying prevention responds to the following factors that contribute to and sustain bullying in middle schools:  If the school has bullying prevention systems such as a comprehensive anti-bullying policy, school-wide and classroom management systems that teach and reward pro-social behaviors such as positive behavior interventions and supports PBIS, then the school has management systems that will promote a school culture that prevents bullying.  If the adults in the school learn to prevent, respond, and intervene effectively to bullying behaviors and adopt attitudes that support reduction of bullying, then the school will adopt a culture that does not tolerate bullying, most students will decrease perpetrating these behaviors.  If students recognizeobserve that the adults in the school are intervening consistently and effectively in bullying behaviors, then they will be less likely to support or join in bullying as bystanders.  If student bystanders learn and use strategies to prevent, respond to, and report bullying situations and extend empathetic support to victims, then the adults and school will be able to devote more resources to supporting students who are bullies or chronic victims of bullies. JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 226

 If the school has school safety assessments and progress monitoring systems that gather information from adults and students, then school staff members can monitor progress and make data-informed decisions to improve the school-wide, classroom, and individual student interventions. Prevention Approaches: What Can be Done to Address the Problem? In this section, we outline a comprehensive, whole school approach to bullying prevention that is congruent with the scientic research reviewed earlier in this chapter, along with recommendations from the authors practical experiences in working with schools. We will suggest that a combination of a whole school, system-based approach that includes adoption of an evidence-based bullying prevention curriculum is an effective and feasible approach. School districts and school staff members face complex, and often emotionally difcult challenges, when attempting to effectively intervene with bullying and harassment. The frequently covert expression of these behaviors makes them very difcult to observe and document. This often limited capacity of most schools to observe and analyze bullying and harassment, when they do occur, makes the design and implementation of effective responses and supports problematic, at best. There are multiple social constraints and considerations that can limit screening, identication, and intervention in bullying. For instance, many students are reluctant to speak out or seek adult help. Similarly, teachers, other school staff members, and parents may be reluctant, unwilling, or unable to initiate and pursue the steps necessary to address and intervene. School personnel may nd that parents are defensive, and reluctant or unwilling, to address their childs aggressive behavior if he or she is a bully, or their childs experiences of victimization. Parents often nd that school personnel are subject to similar psychological barriers. The current social climate within schools places considerable stigma on youth who are accused of engaging in bullying or harassment Swearer  Cary, 2007. Further, the determination of our society to view harassment including harassment associated with bullying as a criminal and civil offense, with the attendant legal ramications, attaches a substantial accountability factor to the actions taken by those school ofcials responsible for todays students Sprague  Walker, 2005. The district, school, andor individual staff member most directly associated with the harassment situation may incur substantial legal liability and nancial risk, if found Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 227

negligent in cases involving harassment of any type. Interventions for bullying and harassment can also be quite difcult, complex, and costly depending on the nature and severity of the problem. Many educators do not view bullying and harassment interventions as cost effective and worth the effort since peer harassment and bullying have traditionally been regarded as peer-owned problems to be worked out within the peer group in the absence of adult involvement Bradshaw et al., 2011. However, there is now broad concern over this issue because of recent court decisions, the complaints and actions of parents of victimized children, and the distinct possibility that bullying and peer harassment have become more invasive, widespread, and public. The risks of not doing something about serious bullying and peer harassment currently outweigh the risks involved in formally addressing these problems. Addressing the perpetrators behavior, however, is only half of the task. Ongoing victim intervention and support must be part of any effective and lasting solution Brown, Low, Smith,  Haggerty, 2011; Ross, Horner,  Stiller, 2011. In fact, effective intervention should address the specic needs of a variety of impacted individuals including the victim, the perpetrator, parents, school staff, and others negatively affected by the problem behavior Olweus, 1994; Waasdorp et al., 2011. Reactionary after the fact interventions that have a crisis ambience to them are potentially the most costly. Reactionary interventions are the least likely to be effective and are difcult to successfully implement as they usually involve making changes in an established and long-held set of practices. These interventions typically are punishment based and focus on one or two individuals: the perpetrators, perhaps the victims, and occasionally selected bystanders. Prevention interventions aimed at addressing bullying through education social skills training and providing positive behavioral interventions and supports are typically less expensive to implement, are generally acceptable to most school personnel particularly if they are universal in nature, and are less socially stigmatizing Swearer  Cary, 2007. Educational prevention intervention programs can be used to address a wide range of problem behavior in addition to bullying and harassment, are usually focused on all students in the school, and are based on proven principles of teaching, reinforcing, and recognizing positive, expected forms of behavior including empathy, respect, positive regard for others, and responsibility Brown et al., 2011; Knoff, 2007; Olweus, 1993. A consensus of research Swearer et al., 2010; Tofti  Farrington, 2011 suggests that interventions aimed at bullyvictim problems should be a JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 228

coordinated and cooperative effort involving all concerned parties in every target environment and at every level i.e., playground, school-wide, family, individual in order to be effective. We recognize, however, that while professional interventions and supports at the family level are difcult to implement consistently, every effort should be made to involve parents as intervention participants to the extent they are willing and capable to be involved in them Sawyer et al., 2011. In the authors view, the school environment provides the only relatively accessible setting for the consistent implementation of interventions and services targeting bullyvictim behaviors. Olweus 1994 recommends the creation of a caring, positive school environment as a primary, rst step for intervening in the bullyvictim cycle. The creation and maintenance of such an environment is well within the capacity of most schools. There is some indication that consistent and universal e.g., all students and staff training in appropriate responses to bullyvictim situations can help eliminate a great deal of this problem behavior Waasdorp et al., 2011. Whole school interventions of this sort can target early problem behaviors such as teasing before they accelerate and lead to more extreme problems involving bullying and serious harassment. Table 2 presents prompts that school teams could use to reect on the current state of aggressive behavior and bullying prevention and intervention efforts in their school. Transforming the destructive peer culture of bullying and harassment is perhaps our most formidable task in the area of school safety and discipline. The origins of bullying are diverse and complex, and may result in stigma for the student who bullies and the student victim. Although this situation is not of the schools making, schools are perhaps the only social institution, excluding the family, capable of addressing it effectively. Addressing this problem is critically important, and complex. In the next section, we outline a series of practical steps that can be undertaken by schools to assess, prevent, and respond to bullying and harassment in schools. Recommended Steps for Use by Schools in Addressing Socially Aggressive Behavior and Bullying and Developing a Culture of Respect Effective interventions should consist of two research-based components:  Curricular or instructional programs centered around social skills training and adult response protocols Frey, Hirschstein, Edstrom,  Snell, 2009; Knoff, 2007; Olweus, 1993, and Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 229

 School wide PBIS programs designed to teach and reinforce positive behavior for the majority of the students and the school community Brown et al., 2011; Ross et al., 2011. These programs provide for the consistent and comprehensive teaching, practice, and re-teaching of social emotional skills such as:  Empathy,  Friendship building and maintenance,  How to recognize and respond to socially aggressive behavior or bullying and harassment, and  How to report socially aggressive behavior or bullying and harassment to adults. Overall, schools seeking to reduce or eliminate socially aggressive behaviorbullying and harassment problems should follow a series of steps designed to introduce, teach, embed, and infuse a systems-wide intervention program that is ongoing, supported at district and school administrative Table 2. Reection on Socially Aggressive Behavior and Bullying in Schools.  Does your school have a school-wide program that teaches pro-social skills to all students, creating a respectful social climate such as PBIS?  To what extent is socially aggressive behavior, bullying, and harassment a problem in our school?  Does our school or school district have a specic policy about socially aggressive behavior bullying?  If so, what does the policy require us to do?  What is the proper response if a student reports a socially aggressive behavior or bullying incident to you?  What should you say to the student?  What information do you need to collect?  Who do you report the socially aggressive behavior or bullying to?  Does our school have a specic plan or program to prevent and respond to socially aggressive behavior and bullying?  Do students know how to report socially aggressive behavior or bullying properly?  Do students know how to respond to a socially aggressive behavior or bullying incident?  When they are the victim?  When they are standing by and watching it happen?  How do we respond when the socially aggressive personbully wont stop?  Does our school have a specic plan and strategy for involving and informing parents about bullying and harassment?  Does our school have a policy and protocol regarding cyber bullying? JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 230

levels, is research-based, nancially feasible, and acceptable to the various stakeholders involved. These steps should include the following:  Formulation and implementation of a bullying and harassment policy at the campus-specic or district-based levels Knoff, 2007;  Assessment of the nature and extent of the problem through surveys and observations Nishioka et al., 2011;  Selection of an appropriate school-wide response Ross et al., 2011, with attention to the host environment and a specic bullying prevention program;  Training of all staff, students, and families Ross et al., 2011;  Solicitation of family support and collaboration Sawyer et al., 2011;  Promoting active supervision of students in common areas Sprague  Golly, 2005;  Specic instruction on the role of bystanders in preventing socially aggressive behavior or bullying Ross et al., 2011;  Responding to chronic socially aggressive behaviorbullies with increasing supports, sanctions, and proven interventions Knoff, 2007;  Assisting chronic victims to be more assertive, gain friendship skills, and avoid dangerous situations Vernberg et al., 1999; and  Recording all instances of socially aggressive behaviorbullying behavior and watching for patterns that will help in planning effective intervention strategies Irvin, Tobin, Sprague, Sugai,  Vincent, 2004. The following section adds detail to each implementation step. Formulate and Implement a Bullying and Harassment Policy at the Campus-Specic or District-Based Levels Increasingly, we see local school districts and states developing and requiring implementation of anti-bullying and harassment laws and policies  a practice we strongly recommend Stuart-Cassel, Bell,  Springer, 2011. Here are some questions to ask:  Does your state, district, or schools have a specic policy against social aggression, bullying, and harassment and a written code of conduct that publicizes it?  Does the policy address all forms of social aggression and bullying sexual, racialethnic, sexual orientation, and differently abled harassment? Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 231

 Does the policy contain the elements of a denition, procedures, sanctions, and prescribed method for notifying people?  Is there a procedure to inform new employees and students of the policy?  Are there references to social aggression, bullying in the student, staff, and parent handbooks?  Are there references to social aggression, bullying in the school discipline code?  Are student extracurricular activities, school-associated events, and job training work sites notied of the social aggression, bullying policy?  Are vendors and salespersons visiting the district informed of the social aggression, bullying policy? Assess the Nature and Extent of the Problem through Surveys and Observations There are a number of options to assist schools to conduct needs assessments regarding school-level prevention and response systems Sprague  Walker, 2005, procedures and policy Tofti  Farrington, 2011, and reporting protocols. Schools should use studentand adult-level surveys Bradshaw et al., 2011; Nishioka et al., 2011 and archival data collection systems such as those designed to track and summarize patterns of ofce referrals or suspensions Spaulding et al., 2010 to identify effective interventions for chronic problems and look at student reports of bullying and harassment from multiple perspectives. Developing and disseminating anti-bullying, anti-harassment, and antiintimidation policies, and the collection of school-based needs assessment data are considered best practice in effectively addressing the problem in schools Olweus, 1994. The importance of gathering information directly from students as one source of data for monitoring bullying in schools is underscored by the discrepancies between student and teacher reports of bullying; adults are often unaware of bullying and harassment behaviors that students witness or experience in school Bradshaw et al., 2007. The ability to gather needs assessment data and track progress toward reducing bullying across schools within the same district or state is hampered by variation in measurement, including the denition of bullying. For example, educators and researchers use student self-report surveys to assess and monitor bullying and victimization in schools, but there is considerable variation in the format of bullying survey questions at local and national levels. Sawyer, Bradshaw, and Brennan 2008 compared the JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 232

differences in the self-reported victimization of 24,345 students in grades 4 12 between denition-based and behavior-based surveys. The denitionbased survey provided a denition of bullying and asked students to respond to general questions such as, How often have you been bullied during the last month?p. 108. The behavior-based survey consisted of items that required students to specify their experience with particular behaviors such as threatening, teasing, pushingshoving, or spreading rumorslies. Examples of behavior-based items were Within the last month, has someone repeatedly tried to hurt you or make you feel bad by threatening you?p. 9. Overall, the study found behavior-based surveys may provide more reliable results by reducing the inuence of differences in how students e.g., boys and girls, or students from different racial or ethnic groups perceive aggression when presented with a denition-based survey. Select Appropriate School-Wide Response to Establish a Social Culture Our key recommendation is that multiple approaches to prevention be integrated in an effective and efcient manner Domitrovich et al., 2010. The integration of multiple approaches is the most appropriate response to designing and implementing a comprehensive approach to preventing and responding to antisocial behavior, including bullying and harassment. Building this host environment Zins  Ponte, 1990 will provide the basis for all intervention efforts to have a greater likelihood of adoption, implementation, and maintenance Glasgow, Vogt,  Boles, 1999. It is likely that simply adopting a bullying prevention curriculum will not achieve desired outcomes, or be sustained in a typical school setting Gottfredson  Gottfredson, 2002. As such, a system that pays attention to both systems of implementation as well as specic curricular and intervention approaches has the biggest chance of success. SWPBIS To prevent mild to serious forms of antisocial behavior, educators around the world are turning to a comprehensive and positive approach to behavior management commonly referred to as school-wide positive behavior interventions and supports SWPBIS; See Scott, this volume, for a discussion on universal systems such as SWPBIS. SWPBIS is based on the assumption that actively teaching and acknowledging expected behavior can change the extent to which students expect appropriate behavior from themselves and each other. When consistent expectations are established by Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 233

all adults, the proportion of students with serious behavior problems will be reduced and the schools overall social climate will improve Bradshaw, Koth, Bevans, Ialongo,  Leaf, 2008; Bradshaw, Koth, Thorton,  Leaf, 2009; Colvin, Kame nui,  Sugai, 1993. Bullying Prevention Curriculum Given the complexity of an appropriate response to bullying prevention and response, we recommend that schools adopt one of the excellent and scientically supported curriculum programs available. These include the Olweus Bullying Prevention Program Olweus, 1994, Steps to Respect Brown et al., 2011, and a recently developed intervention designed to be consistent with SWPBIS called Bullyproong PBIS Ross et al., 2011. Each of these programs includes features that are common to, or can be integrated into an SWPBIS host environment. To begin each of these programs, we recommend the establishment of a school-wide committee to oversee interventions to address antisocial behavior and bullying. In the authors view, the committee can be formed to address all prevention activities in the school, thus integrating SWPBIS and bullying and prevention and response. The following paragraphs outline the details of this integration. Train and Inform All Staff Members, Students, and Families As with any new program, there will be a need for systematic and ongoing staff development and marketing Bauer, Lozano,  Rivara, 2007; Mihalic  Irwin, 2003; Ross et al., 2011 to inform, inuence, and garner support or buy in from stakeholders school personnel, parents, students, community members. These activities can include the following:  Conducting committee and staff member training events  Holding staff discussion groups  Introducing the school rules that encourage pro-social behavior and discourage socially aggressive behavior or bullying  Holding a school kick-off event to launch the program  Teaching the denition of bullying and harassment behavior  If someone directs problem behavior toward you  If you see others receive problem behavior  If someone tells you to stop  Teaching a school-wide stop signal to all students and adults  Teaching how to use the Stop Signal JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 234

 Teaching walk away  Build social reward for victim for walking away  Teach getting help from adults  Report problems to adults  Teach how to reply What to do when you are asked to stop Solicit Family Support and Collaboration Soliciting active family support and collaboration is an active feature of all evidence-based bullying prevention programs Tofti  Farrington, 2011. Parents and family members need to be actively and regularly informed of the school bullying policy, and their responsibilities for supporting their child, either as a victim, bystander, or perpetrator Sprague  Walker, 2005. Promote Active Supervision of Students in Common Areas Active supervision is a method of student behavior support and management that is designed to maintain a safe and positive school setting for students Smith  Sprague, 2004. The approach involves adults, who are responsible for supervising students, to move and scan the area strategically in order to promote positive social interactions among students and, if problems do arise, to intervene early and effectively. The authors recommend that all schools, regardless of grade level, should systematically adopt and implement an active supervision system as common areas comprise a very high risk setting for bullying and harassment. Active supervision methods work well in the following school areas or situations: a large areas such as play grounds or bus loading zones, b cafeterias or other places that have a high-census many students, c lightly staffed areas, and d unstructured activities student-directed such as playgrounds, cafeterias, and hallways. Active supervision techniques also work very well in classrooms and other mediumto small-group activities or areas Colvin, Sugai, Good,  Lee, 1997; De Pry  Sugai, 2002. It is important to emphasize that simply maintaining an adult presence in common areas and merely attending to inappropriate behaviors is an insufcient and ineffective behavior support practice. Common area supervisors also need training required to perform the following skills: a develop and state the rules about expected behavior, b effectively and efciently teach the rules, c effectively and efciently enforce the rules, and d provide frequent monitoring and positive feedback to students. Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 235

Instruct Bystanders on Their Role in Preventing and Responding to Bullying All of the most commonly cited and used bully prevention programs focus on the role of the bystander. Each of the major bullying prevention programs include a bystander component Merrell, Gueldner, Ross,  Isava, 2008. Perhaps the most important role of the bystander is to provide empathetic support for the student who is targeted by bullying and to ensure that they do not reward the bullys behavior. Bystanders can get adult help to stop a bullying incident as it occurs and, if it is safe, they can tell the bully to stop and offer empathetic support to the student who is being harmed. Bystanders can also play an important role by reporting bullying problems so that the school authorities can intervene appropriately. Finally, students can be proactive in reaching out to peers who are left out or treated unkindly by others. Respond to Chronic Socially Aggressive BehaviorBullies with Increasing Supports, Sanctions, and Proven Interventions When any bullying or harassment situation persists or results in signicant harm to a child, there will be a need for more complex, individualized responses to the problem Knoff, 2007; Nation, 2007. The following list illustrates the range and type of responses needed:  Conduct individualized assessment of the victim and bully behavior patterns Ross et al., 2011.  Involve parents of the perpetrator and victim Brown et al., 2011; Sawyer et al., 2011.  Teach and re-teach appropriate social skills and bully response skills in a more intensive manner Ross et al., 2011.  Conduct individual conferences with the person displaying socially aggressive behaviorbully and victim Bauer et al., 2007. Assist Chronic Victims to be More Assertive, Gain Friendship Skills, and Avoid Dangerous Situations Perhaps one of the most difcult aspects of intervention involves supporting students who are chronic victims of bullying and harassment. School staff JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 236

members have a responsibility for ensuring that students who are targets of bullying are safe. In developing a safety plan or individualized behavior support plan, the school should ensure that the strategies selected do not inconvenience or penalize the student who is the target of the bullying behavior. In other words, strategies such as increases in supervision, rearranging student schedules, or restricted use of certain areas of the school should be imposed on the student bully  not the student victim. Interventions and supports for chronic victims may also require teaching assertiveness, and building friendship skills Merrell, 2010; Smith, Schneider, Smith,  Ananiadou, 2004; Tofti  Farrington, 2011. Skilled behavior consultants or the school counselor should teach the student what he or she should do in response to the bully, such as how to tell the bully to stop, walk away, and, if the bullying continues, report it to the teacher. The student who is targeted by bullies may also benet from learning how to join in and socialize with peer groups. Students who bully may also benet from learning social skills, such as how to deal with conicts, impulse control, negotiating, taking turns, or how to gain peer attention in socially appropriate ways. Schools should notify and involve parents if their child has chronic problems with bullying as the aggressor or the student targeted by the bullying behaviors. Parents can be helpful in developing individualized safety plans or behavior support plans to increase supervision and support for their child at home and in the community. If their child is the bully, they can establish rm limits and clear expectations for how their child should treat others. Conversely, if their child is being targeted by bullying, the parent can provide important emotional support that can help protect their child from the harmful effects of bullying Connors-Burrow, Johnson, Whiteside-Mansell, McKelvey,  Gargus, 2009. Finally, the school and parents should work together to ensure that the student receives the support he or she needs to be safe and successful in school including mentoring, mental health, and other community services. Record All Instances of Socially Aggressive BehaviorBullying Behavior and Watch for Patterns Data-based decision-making is a theme that is interwoven throughout SWPBIS, and builds on the assumption that staff members, family, and students will be most effective in the design of preventive and reactive supports if they have access to regular, accurate information about the behavior of students, including patterns of bullying and harassment. It is Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 237

equally important to regularly assess adherence or delity to support plans, and to share those data with implementers. The value of data for decisionmaking is emphasized for both the design of initial support systems and the ongoing assessment and adaptation of support strategies. The SWPBIS approach includes adoption of practical strategies for collecting, summarizing, reporting and using behavioral and delity data on regular cycles, and this technology can greatly benet responses to the problem of bullying and harassment in schools. RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS Although there is a great deal of current emphasis on bullying and harassment in schools, these problems have been a major issue in schools and communities for a very long time. Public concern is beginning to catch up with reality. We as educators, parents, or community members should recognize that the antisocial behavioral characteristics commonly associated with bullying and harassment are part of a widespread behavior pattern among some of todays children and youth. Outcomes for both boys and girls engaging in bullying and harassment tend to be negative. Severely aggressive behavior has been found to rarely change over time Patterson, Reid,  Dishion, 1992; Reid, Patterson,  Snyder, 2002. Males and females engaging in antisocial conduct are likely to continue the cycle of violence and abuse inherent in bullying and harassment by exposing their own children to the attitudes, beliefs, values, and actions that cause it to replicate across generations Loeber  Burke, 2011; Wahler, 1986. Unless children who chronically bully and harass others are exposed to early and continuing interventions and are supported by parents or caregivers, it becomes extremely difcult to turn this behavior pattern around. Currently, there is a need for further research and development in the area of bullying and harassment prevention technologies to build upon the solid work that has been contributed in this area to date Bradshaw et al., 2011. Teachers, school staff, and especially parents have a high stake in and a legal responsibility for alleviation of the negative effects of bullying and harassment in todays schools. The scope of the problem is staggering and continues to worsen. The need for access to effective, research-based interventions for these problems is critical for educational professionals as well as parents and community members. JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 238

REFERENCES Agatston, P. W., Kowalski, R.,  Limber, S. 2007. Students perspectives on cyber bullying. Journal of Adolescent Health, 41, 5960. Arseneault, L., Walsh, E., Trzesniewski, K., Newcombe, R., Caspi, A.,  Moftt, E. T. 2006. Bullying victimization uniquely contributes to adjustment problems in young children: A nationally representative cohort study. Pediatrics, 118, 130138. Atlas, R. S.,  Pepler, D. J. 1998. Observations of bullying in the classroom. Journal of Educational Research, 92, 8699. Bauer, N. S., Lozano, P.,  Rivara, F. P. 2007. The effectiveness of the Olweus Bullying Prevention Program in public middle schools: A controlled trial. Journal of Adolescent Health, 403, 266274. Bauman, S.,  Del Rio, A. 2006. Preservice teachers responses to bullying scenarios: Comparing physical, verbal, and relational bullying. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98, 219231. Bowes, L., Arseneault, L., Maughan, B., Taylor, A., Caspi, A.,  Moftt, T. E. 2009. School, neighborhood, and family factors are associated with childrens bullying involvement: A nationally representative longitudinal study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 48, 545553. Bradshaw, C. P., Koth, C. W., Bevans, K. B., Ialongo, N.,  Leaf, P. J. 2008. The impact of school-wide positive behavior interventions and supports PBIS on the organizational health of elementary schools. School Psychology Quarterly, 23, 462473. Bradshaw, C. P., Koth, C. W., Thorton, L. A.,  Leaf, P. J. 2009. Altering school climate through school-wide positive behavior interventions and supports: Findings from a group-randomized effectiveness trial. Prevention Science, 10, 100115. Bradshaw, C. P., Sawyer, A. L.,  OBrennan, L. M. 2007. Bullying and peer victimization at school: Perceptual differences between students and school staff. School Psychology Review, 36, 361382. Bradshaw, C. P.,  Wassdorp, T. E. 2009. Measuring and changing a culture of bullying. School Psychology Review, 38, 356361. Bradshaw, C. P., Waasdorp, T. E., OBrennan, L. M.,  Gulemetova, M. 2011. Findings from the National Education Associations nationwide study of bullying: Teachers and education support professionals perspectives. Retrieved from http:www.nea.org assetsimgcontentFindingsfromNEAsNationwideStudyofBullying.pdf Bronfenbrenner, U. 1979. The ecology of human development: Experiments by nature and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Brown, E. C., Low, S., Smith, B. H.,  Haggerty, K. P. 2011. Outcomes from a schoolrandomized controlled trial of steps to respect: A bullying prevention program. School Psychology Review, 403, 423443. Buhs, E. S., Ladd, G. W.,  Herald, S. L. 2006. Peer exclusion and victimization: Processes that mediate the relation between peer group rejection and childrens classroom engagement and achievement? Journal of Educational Psychology, 98, 113. Colvin, G., Kame nui, E. J.,  Sugai, G. 1993. Reconceptualizing behavior management and school-wide discipline in general education. Education  Treatment of Children, 16, 361381. Colvin, G., Sugai, G., Good, R.,  Lee, Y. 1997. Effect of active supervision and precorrectinon transition behaviors of elementary students. School Pscyhology Quarterly, 124, 344363. Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 239

Connors-Burrow, N. A., Johnson, D. L., Whiteside-Mansell, L., McKelvey, L.,  Gargus, R. A. 2009. Adults matter: Protecting children from the negative impacts of bullying. Psychology in the Schools, 467, 593604. Craig, W. M., Henderson, K.,  Murphy, J. G. 2000. Prospective teachers attitudes toward bullying and victimization. School Psychology International, 21, 521. Crick, N. R. 1996. The role of overt aggression, relational aggression, and prosocial behavior in the prediction of childrens future social adjustment. Child Development, 67, 23172327. Crick, N. R.,  Grotpeter, J. K. 1995. Relational aggression, gender, and social-psychological adjustment. Child Development, 66, 710722. Crick, N. R., Ostrov, J. M., Burr, J. E., Cullerton-Sen, C., Jansen-Yeh, E.,  Ralston, P. 2006. A longitudinal study of relational and physical aggression in preschool. Applied Developmental Psychology, 27, 254268. David-Ferdon, C.,  Hertz, M. F. 2009. Electronic media and youth violence: A CDC issue brief for researchers. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. De Pry, R. L.,  Sugai, G. 2002. The effect of active supervision and precorrection on minor behavioral incidents in sixth grade general education classroom. Journal of Behavioral Education, 11, 255267. DeVoe, J. F.,  Kaffenberger, S. 2005. Student reports of bullying: Results from the 2001 School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey. Statistical Analysis Report No. NCES 2005-310. U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Washington, DC. Dijkstra, J. K., Lindenberg, S.,  Vennstra, R. 2008. Beyond the class norm: Bullying behavior of popular adolescents and its relation to peer acceptance and rejection. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 36, 12891299. Dill, E. J., Vernberg, E. M., Fonagy, P., Twemlow, S. W.,  Gamm, B. K. 2004. Negative affect in victimized children: The roles of social withdrawal, peer rejection, and attitudes toward bullying. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 32, 159173. Dinkes, R., Kemp, J.,  Baum, K. 2009. Indicators of school crime and safety: 2009. NCES 2010012NCJ 228478. National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, and Bureau of Justice Statistics, Ofce of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice. Washington, DC. Domitrovich, C. E., Bradshaw, C. P., Greenberg, M. T., Embry, D., Poduska, J. M.,  Ialongo, N. S. 2010. Integrated models of school-based prevention: Logic and theory. Psychology in the Schools, 471, 7188. Due, P., Holstein, B. E., Lynch, J., Diderichsen, F., Gabhain, S. N., Scheidt, P., y the Health Behaviour in School-Aged Children Bullying Working Group. 2005. Bullying and symptoms among school-aged children: International comparative cross-sectional study in 28 countries. European Journal of Public Health, 15, 128132. Espelage, D. L. 2002. Bullying in early adolescence: The role of the peer group. Retrieved from http:www.eric.ed.govPDFSED471912.pdf Espelage, D. L., Holt, M. K.,  Henkel, R. R. 2003. Examination of peer-group contextual effects on aggression during early adolescence. Child Development, 74, 205220. Espelage, D. L.,  Swearer, S. M. 2011. Bullying in North American schools 2nd ed. New York, NY: Routledge. Frey, K. S., Hirschstein, M., Edstrom, L.,  Snell, J. 2009. Observed reductions in school bullying, nonbullying aggression, and destructive bystander behavior: A longitudinal evaluation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 1012, 466481. JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 240

Gini, G.,  Pozzoli, T. 2009. Association between bullying and psychosomatic problems: A meta-analysis. Pediatrics, 123, 10591065. Gini, G., Pozzoli, T., Borghi, F.,  Franzoni, L. 2008. The role of bystanders in students perception of bullying and sense of safety. Journal of School Psychology, 46, 617638. Glasgow, R. E., Vogt, T. M.,  Boles, S. M. 1999. Evaluating the public health impact of health promotion interventions: The RE-AIM framework. American Journal of Public Health, 899, 13221327. Gottfredson, D. C.,  Gottfredson, G. D. 2002. Quality of school-based prevention programs: Results from a national survey. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 391, 335. Harris Interactive,  GLSEN. 2005. From teasing to torment: School climate in America, a survey of students and teachers. New York, NY: GLSEN. Hertz, M. F.,  David-Ferdon, C. 2008. Electronic media and youth violence: A CDC issue brief for educators and caregivers. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hill, C.,  Kearl, H. 2011. Crossing the line: Sexual harassment at school. Washington, DC: American Association of University Women AAUW. Holt, M. K., Kantor, G. K.,  Finkelhor, D. 2009. Parentchild concordance about bullying involvement and family characteristics related to bullying and peer victimization. Journal of School Violence, 8, 4263. Huesmann, L. R.,  Guerra, N. G. 1997. Childrens normative beliefs about agression and aggressive behavior. Journal of Personal Social Psychology, 722, 408419. Irvin, L. K., Tobin, T., Sprague, J., Sugai, G.,  Vincent, C. 2004. Validity of ofce discipline referral measures as indices of school-wide behavioral status and effects of school-wide behavioral interventions. Journal of Positive Behavioral Interventions, 6, 131147. Retrieved from http:dx.doi.org10.11772F10983007040060030201 Kim, S., Kamphaus, R. W., Orpinas, P.,  Kelder, S. H. 2010. Change in the manifestation of overt aggression during early adolescence: gender and ethnicity. School Psychology International, 31, 95111. Kim, Y. S.,  Leventhal, B. 2008. Bullying and suicide: A review. International Journal of Adolescent Medicine and Health, 20, 133154. Klomek, A. B., Marrocco, F., Kleinman, M., Schonfeld, I. S.,  Gould, M. S. 2007. Bullying, depression, and suicidality in adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child  Adolescent Psychiatry, 46, 4049. Knoff, H. M. 2007. Teasing, taunting, bullying, harassment, and aggression: A school-wide approach to prevention, strategic intervention, and crisis management. New York, NY: Haworth Press. Kochenderfer-Ladd, B.,  Pelletier, M. E. 2008. Teachers views and beliefs about bullying: Inuences on classroom management strategies and students coping with peer victimization. Journal of School Psychology, 46, 431453. Kosciw, J. G., Greytak, E. A., Diaz, E. M.,  Bartkiewicz, M. J. 2010. The 2009 National School Climate Survey. New York, NY: GLSEN. Kuppens, S., Grietens, H., Onghena, P., Michiels, D.,  Subramanian, S. V. 2008. Individual and classroom variables associated with relational aggression in elementary-school aged children: A multilevel analysis. Journal of School Psychology, 466, 639660. Lee, C. 2011. An ecological systems approach to bullying behaviors among middle school students in the United States. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 26, 16641693. Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 241

Leff, S. S., Kupersmidt, J. B., Patterson, C. J.,  Power, T. J. 1999. Factors inuencing teacher identication of peer bullies and victims. School Psychology Review, 28, 505517. Liu, R. T.,  Mustanski, B. 2012. Suicidal ideation and self-harm in lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 42, 221228. Loeber, R.,  Burke, J. D. 2011. Developmental pathways in juvenile externalizing and internalizing problems. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 211, 3446. Merrell, K. W. 2010. Linking prevention science and social and emotional learning: The Oregon Resiliency Project. Psychology in the Schools, 471, 5570. doi:10.1002pits. 20451. Merrell, K. W., Buchanan, R.,  Tran, O. K. 2006. Relational aggression in children and adolescents: A review with implications for school settings. Psychology in the Schools, 43, 35360. Merrell, K. W., Gueldner, B. A., Ross, S. W.,  Isava, D. M. 2008. How effective are school bullying intervention programs? A meta-analysis of intervention research. School Psychology Quarterly, 23, 2642. Mihalic, S. F.,  Irwin, K. 2003. Blueprints for violence prevention: From research to realworld settings. Factors inuencing the successful replication of model programs. Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice, 14, 307329. Mishna, F., Peplar, D.,  Weiner, J. 2006. Factors associated with perceptions and responses to bullying situations by children, parents, teachers and principals. Victims and Offenders, 1, 255288. Mishna, F., Saini, M.,  Solomon, S. 2009. Ongoing and online: Children and youths perceptions of cyber bullying. Children and Youth Services Review, 31, 12221228. Nansel, T. R., Craig, W., Overpeck, M. D., Saluja, G., Ruan, W. J.,  the Health Behaviour in School-aged Children Bullying Analyses Working Group. 2004. Cross-national consistency in the relationshiop between bullying behaviours and psychosocial adjustment. Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 158, 730736. Nansel, T. R., Overpeck, M., Pilla, R. S., Ruan, W. J., Simons-Morton, B.,  Scheidt, P. 2001. Bullying behaviors among US youth: Prevalence and association with psychosocial adjustment. Journal of American Medical Association, 285, 20942100. Nation, M. 2007. Empowering the victim: Interventions for children victimized by bullies. New York, NY: Haworth Press. Newman, R. S.,  Murray, B. J. 2005. How students and teachers view the seriousness of peer harassment: When is it appropriate to seek help? Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 347365. Nickerson, A. B., Mele, D.,  Princiotta, D. 2008. Attachment and empathy as predictors of roles as defenders or outsiders in bullying interactions. Journal of School Psychology, 46, 687703. Nishioka, V., Coe, M., Burke, A., Hanita, M.,  Sprague, J. 2011. Student-reported overt and relational aggression and victimization in grades 38. Issues  Answers report, REL 2011-No. 114. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Regional Educational Laboratory Northwest. Retrieved from http:ies.ed.govncee edlabs Nolle, K. L., Guerino, P.,  Dinkes, R. 2007. Crime, violence, discipline, and safety in U.S. public schools: Findings from the School Survey on Crime and Safety: 200506. NCES JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 242

2007-361. National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. Washington, DC. OConnell, P., Pepler, D.,  Craig, W. 1999. Peer involvement in bullying: Insights and challenges for intervention. Journal of Adolescence, 22, 437452. Oh, I.,  Hazler, R. J. 2009. Contributions of personal and situational factors to bystanders reactions to school bullying. School Psychology International, 30, 291310. Oliver, R., Hoover, J. H.,  Hazler, R. 1994. The perceived roles of bullying in small-town Midwestern schools. Journal of Counseling and Development, 72, 416420. Olweus, D. 1993. Bullying at school: What we know and what we can do. Oxford, England: Blackwell. Olweus, D. 1994. Bullying at school: Long-term outcomes for the victims and an effective school-based intervention program. In L. R. Huesmann Ed., Aggressive behavior: Current perspectives pp. 97130. New York, NY: Plenum Press. Patterson, G. R., Reid, J. B.,  Dishion, T. J. 1992. Antisocial boys. Eugene, OR: Castalia Press. Pearce, M. J., Boergers, J.,  Prinstein, M. J. 2002. Adolescent obesity, overt relational peer victimization, and romantic relationships. Obesity Research, 10, 386393. Pelligrini, A.,  Bartini, M. 2000. A longitudinal study of bullying, victimization, and peer afliation during the transition from primary school to middle school. American Educational Research Journal, 37, 699725. Pepler, D., Craig, W., Yuile, A.,  Connolly, P. 2004. Girls who bully: A developmental and relational perspective. In M. Putazzaz  K. L. Bierman Eds., Aggression, antisocial behavior, and violence among girls: A developmental perspective pp. 90109. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Pepler, D. J., Craig, W. M., Ziegler, S.,  Charach, A. 1994. An evaluation of an antibullying intervention in Toronto schools. Canadian Journal of Community Mental Health, 13, 95110. Petrosino, A., Guckenburg, S., DeVoe, J.,  Hanson, T. 2010. What characteristics of bullying, bullying victims, and schools are associated with increased reporting of bullying to school ofcials? Issues  Answers Report, REL 2010No. 092. U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Regional Educational Laboratory Northeast and Islands, Washington, DC. Retrieved from http:ies.ed.govnceeedlabs. Prinstein, M. J., Boergers, J.,  Vernberg, E. M. 2001. Overt and relational aggression in adolescents: Social-psychological adjustment of aggressors and victims. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 30, 479491. Reid, J., Patterson, G.,  Snyder, J. 2002. Antisocial behavior in children and adolescents: A developmental analysis and model for intervention. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Reis, J., Trockel, M.,  Mulhall, P. 2007. Individual and school predictors of middle school aggression. Youth and Society, 38, 322347. Rigby, K.,  Barnes, A. 2002. Victimised students dilemma: To tell or not to tell. Youth Studies Australia, 21, 3336. Rigby, K.,  Slee, P. T. 1999. Australia. In P. K. Smith, J.-T. J. Morita, D. Olweus, R. Catalano  P. Slee Eds., The nature of bullying: A cross-national perspective pp. 324339. New York, NY: Routledge. Rivers, I. 2001. The bullying of sexual minorities at school: Its nature and long-term correlates. Educational  Child Psychology, 181, 3246. Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 243

Ross, D. M. 2003. Childhood bullying, teasing, and violence: What school personnel, other professionals, and parents can do 2nd ed. Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association. Ross, S. M., Horner, R. H.,  Stiller, B. 2011. Bully prevention in PBIS: Elementary school version. Eugene, OR: University of Oregon, Education and Community Supports. Salmivalli, C. 1999. Participant role approach to school bullying: Implications for intervention. Journal of Adolescence, 22, 453459. Sawyer, A. L., Bradshaw, C. P.,  Brennan, L. M. 2008. Examining ethnic, gender, and developmental differences in the way children report being a victim of bullying on selfreport measures. Journal of Adolescent Health, 43, 106114. Sawyer, J., Mishna, F., Pepler, D.,  Wiener, J. 2011. The missing voice: Parents perspectives of bullying. Children and Youth Services Review, 33, 17951803. Skara, S., Pokhrel, P., Weiner, M. D., Sun, P., Dent, C. W.,  Sussman, S. 2008. Physical and relational aggression as predictors of drug use: Gender differences among high school students. Addictive Behaviors, 33, 15071515. Smith, J. D., Schneider, B. H., Smith, P. K.,  Ananiadou, K. 2004. The effectivness of wholeschool antibullying programs: A synthesis of evaluation research. School Psychology Review, 334, 547560. Smith, S.,  Sprague, J. R. Writers. 2004. Systematic supervision: Creating a safe and positive playground. Eugene, OR: Iris Education Media. Solberg, M. E.,  Olweus, D. 2003. Prevalence estimation of school bullying with the Olweus bullyvictim questionnaire. Aggressive Behavior, 29, 239268. Spaulding, S. A., Irvin, L. K., Horner, R. H., May, S. L., Emeldi, M., Tobin, T. J.,  Sugai, G. 2010. Schoolwide social-behavioral climate, student problem behavior, and related administrative decisions. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 122, 6985. Sprague, J. R.,  Golly, A. 2005. Best behavior: Building positive behavior supports in schools. Longmont, CO: Sopris West Educational Services. Sprague, J. R.,  Walker, H. M. 2005. Safe and healthy schools: Practical prevention strategies. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Stuart-Cassel, V., Bell, A.,  Springer, J. F. 2011. Analysis of state bullying laws and policies. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Ofce of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development, Policy and Program Studies Service. Retrieved from http: www2.edgovershstatevalbullyingstate-bullying-lawsstate-bullying-laws.pdf Swearer, S. M.,  Cary, P. T. 2007. Perceptions and attitudes toward bullying in middle school youth: A developmental examination across the bullyvictim continuum. New York, NY: Haworth Press. Swearer, S. M., Espelage, D. L., Vaillancourt, T.,  Hymel, S. 2010. What can be done about school bullying? Linking research to educational practice. Educational Researcher, 39, 3847. Tofti, M. M.,  Farrington, D. P. 2011. Effectiveness of school-based programs to reduce bullying: A systematic and meta-analytic review. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 71, 2756. Unnever, J. D.,  Cornell, D. G. 2004. Middle school victims of bullying: Who reports being bullied? Aggressive Behavior, 30, 373388. Vernberg, E. M., Jacobs, A. K.,  Hershberger, S. L. 1999. Peer victimization and attitudes about violence during early adolescence. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 283, 386395. JEFFREY SPRAGUE AND VICKI NISHIOKA 244

Vossekuil, B., Fein, R. A. M., Borum, R.,  Modzeleski, W. 2002. The nal report and ndings of the Safe School Initiative: Implications for the prevention of school attacks in the United States. Washington, DC: U.S. Secret Service, U.S. Department of Education. Wassdorp, T. E., Bradshaw, C. P.,  Duong, J. 2011. The link between parents perceptions of the school and their responses to school bullying: Variation by child characteristics and the forms of victimization. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103, 324335. Waasdorp, T. E., Pas, E. T., OBrennan, L. M.,  Bradshaw, C. P. 2011. A multilevel perspective on the climate of bullying: Discrepancies among students, school staff, and parents. Journal of School Violence, 102, 115132. Wahler, R. G. 1986. Maintenance factors in coercive mother-child interactions: The compliance and predictability hypotheses. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 191, 13. Wang, J., Iannotti, R. J.,  Nansel, T. R. 2009. School bullying among adolescents in the United States: Physical, verbal, relational, and cyber. Journal of Adolescent Health, 454, 368375. Williams, K. R.,  Guerra, N. G. 2007. Prevalence and predictors of Internet bullying. Journal of Adolescent Health, 41, 1421. Ybarra, M., Mitchell, K., Wolak, J.,  Finkelhor, D. 2006. Examining characteristics and associated distress related to internet harassment: Findings from the Second Youth Internet Safety Survey. Pediatrics, 118, 11691177. Ybarra, M. L., Diener-West, M.,  Leaf, P. J. 2007. Examining the overlap in internet harassment and school bullying: Implications for school intervention. Journal of Adolescent Health, 41, S42S50. Zins, J. E.,  Ponte, C. R. 1990. Best practices in school-based consultation. In A. Thomas  J. Grimes Eds., Best practices in school psychology  II pp. 673694. Washington, DC: National Association of School Psychologists. Preventing and Responding to Bullying and Harassment in Schools 245

PREPARING TEACHERS TO EFFECTIVELY DELIVER READING INSTRUCTION AND BEHAVIORAL SUPPORTS IN RESPONSE TO INTERVENTION FRAMEWORKS Mary T. Brownell, Alexandra Lauterbach, Amber Benedict, Jenna Kimerling, Elizabeth Bettini and Kristin Murphy ABSTRACT Successful implementation of Response to Intervention frameworks in schools requires general and special education teachers to have wellintegrated knowledge bases for providing instruction and intervention in reading and behavior. Implementation-focused approaches to changing teacher behavior, favored traditionally in special education, however, are unlikely to help teachers acquire such knowledge. In this chapter, we discuss the knowledge and practice that denes expert teachers in reading and behavior and how such expertise might be achieved through practice-focused approaches to initial teacher education and professional development. Classroom Behavior, Contexts, and Interventions Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, Volume 25, 247277 Copyright r 2012 by Emerald Group Publishing Limited All rights of reproduction in any form reserved ISSN: 0735-004Xdoi:10.1108S0735-004X20120000025013 247

Successful Response to Intervention RtI implementation is predicated on identifying and applying the right prevention and intervention strategies in schools so that students can access the general education curriculum and meet rigorous content standards. Decades of research on interventions for students with challenging behaviors and early reading problems, fortunately, has yielded many appropriate strategies that can be applied within an RtI Framework to ensure student success; however, many scholars question whether general education teachers are prepared to implement the sort of prevention and intervention strategies that instruction in tiers I and II would require and if special education teachers have been prepared sufciently in reading and behavior to implement the sorts of strategies required by tier III. Many scholars assume that special and general education teachers need better initial preparation or more professional development PD to implement these strategies. The logic is that if teachers understand evidence-based strategies, know how to use them, and have proper support for implementation, then they will use them in their classroom. This implementation view of teacher learning is founded on implicit assumptions about teacher expertise and learning that are not supported in the research on expertise more generally, and effective teachers more specically. Implementation views of teacher learning often focus on long lists of knowledge or skill sets, commonly referred to as competencies, that teachers must acquire if they are to assist students with learning and behavior challenges in their classrooms. For instance, teachers need to know what a functional behavioral assessment is and how to conduct one in their classrooms; teachers need to know what phonological awareness is and some key strategies for developing it. Teachers do not become experts, however, just by simply learning to implement multiple strategies in a particular area. If ndings from studies of expertise in other professions hold true, then expert teachers are likely to have well-integrated knowledge bases that they can apply uently to many situations in the classroom, leaving cognitive space for them for problemsolving around more complex situations, such as those that would characterize tier III interventions. In this chapter, we assert that if general and special education teachers are to operate successfully within RtI frameworks, then teacher education both at the preservice and inservice levels needs to approach teacher learning in coordinated ways, such that general and special education teachers can acquire the integrated knowledge necessary to be responsive to students learning and behavior challenges. Such an approach should be founded in research on the knowledge and skills that effective special and general education teachers have been shown to demonstrate in managing behavior MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 248

problems and providing reading instruction. Additionally, teacher education should occur over time and adopt a practice-focused approach to developing teachers skills and knowledge in ways that are aligned with ndings from research on initial preparation and PD. To support these ideas, we explore what we currently know about effective teachers, particularly in the areas of behavior, reading, and collaboration, as these areas will be foundational to successful RtI efforts. We also explore what we know about research-based approaches to preparation and PD for the purpose of advocating for a practice-based approach to developing effective teachers for RtI. Finally, we make recommendations for how we might adopt a practice-based approach to teacher education in college and schools. WHAT DEFINES TEACHER EXPERTISE FOR STUDENTS WITH CHALLENGING BEHAVIORAL AND LEARNING NEEDS? Teachers abilities to create classrooms that are emotionally supportive and well managed have been documented as important in preventing problem behaviors and promoting academic achievement. Large-scale studies involving observations of classroom performance have demonstrated that teachers who provide a positive classroom climate and demonstrate sensitivity and regard for students perspectives are more likely to promote academic achievement, language competence, social competence, and ontask behavior Connor, Son, Hindman,  Morrison, 2005; Hamre  Pianta, 2005; Howes et al., 2008; Mashburn et al., 2008; Pianta, La Paro, Payne, Cox,  Bradley, 2002; Ponitz, Rimm-Kaufman, Grimm,  Curby, 2009; Rimm-Kaufman, La Paro, Downer,  Pianta, 2005. In Hamre and Piantas 2005 national study including 910 rst-grade students, results indicated that when children displaying early signs of behavioral, social, andor academic issues are placed with a teacher characterized as providing a high level of emotional support in her classroom, they had comparable scores on the rstgrade Woodcock-Johnson Tests of Achievement as low-risk peers. Conversely, students displaying these issues and placed in classrooms offering lower levels of emotional support had poorer results than their lower-risk peers. Additionally, the teachers providing higher levels of emotional support in their classrooms had better relationships and less conict with their students by the end of the school year. Yet, what is it that these more emotionally supportive teachers do to promote engagement in classrooms? Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 249

Effective Classroom and Behavioral Management Practices Effective instruction characterized by direct and focused teacher instruction that is infused with time for student performance and specic feedback from teachers about their progress can lead to improved focus on academic tasks in addition to increased positive interactions between students and teachers Pianta et al., 2002. Furthermore, Sutherland, Alder, and Gunter 2003 demonstrated that increasing students opportunities to respond to academic requests reduces disruptive behavior. Seo, Brownell, Bishop, and Dingle 2008 observed that beginning special education teachers whose classroom instruction was characterized by more overt and direct content instruction and classroom management instructions had students who were more likely to be engaged in academic tasks. As in the aforementioned studies, these teacher-led instructional sessions included many opportunities for student performance and feedback interaction with the teacher. Well-managed classrooms characterized by effective instruction should provide a foundation for promoting positive behaviors in general education, and in turn, should support the behavior and learning of most students in the school. Some students, however, will require more substantial behavioral supports to be successful in schools. Students with signicant behavioral challenges may require interventions that modify or change their behavior in order to prot from classroom instruction. Numerous intervention studies show that these students often benet from structured incentive systems, such as token economies, behavioral contracts, and behavior intervention plans that are individually tailored based on functional behavior assessments McIntosh  Av-Gay, 2007; Simonsen, Fairbanks, Briesch, Myers,  Sugai, 2008. Cognitive behavioral interventions also hold promise for addressing some of the severe behavioral challenges presented by these students Mayer, Lochman,  Van Acker, 2005. Less clear, however, are the ways in which effective special education teachers, providing tiered support to these students, integrate these strategies with academic instruction to support the needs of students with signicant emotional and behavioral disorders EBD. Observational studies have shown that such integration may be difcult to achieve Carr, Taylor,  Robinson, 1991; Gunter  Coutinho, 1997; Sutherland  Oswald, 2005; several studies demonstrate that teachers and students with severe problem behaviors engage in cycles of negative reinforcement, in which the teacher presents an academic task, the student engages in a problem behavior, and the teacher withdraws the task by, e.g., sending the student to the ofce. The student is reinforced by the withdrawal of aversive task MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 250

demands, while the teacher is reinforced by the absence of an aversive behavior Carr et al., 1991; Gunter  Coutinho, 1997. This pattern is hypothesized to be one reason why students with problem behaviors receive lower rates of academic instruction than their peers Sutherland  Oswald, 2005. Teacher Knowledge for Managing Classrooms The knowledge underlying teachers abilities to employ evidence-based behavioral and cognitive strategies for managing or changing students challenging behaviors has not been acknowledged in the research. Thus, we have major questions about what constitutes the knowledge needed for effective classroom and behavior management. Do effective teachers simply need to understand what interventions are available and how they can be used in a classroom? Or, do they have integrated knowledge that includes knowledge of interventions, the conditions under which they might be used in classrooms, the role classroom ecology plays in individual student behavior, and the ways in which behavioral interventions and all instruction, for that matter might be tailored to meet the developmental needs of both nondisabled students and those with EBD? Scholars in special education argue that skilled classroom managers have coherent theoretical knowledge of classroom management principles, as well as practical knowledge of how to implement both preventive and reactive strategies Conroy, Alter, Boyd,  Bettini, in press; Emmer  Stough, 2001; Oliver  Reschly, 2010. Further, this knowledge becomes integrated as a result of opportunities to practice. Sawka, Mccurdy, and Mannella 2002 examined the relationship between EBD teachers knowledge and practices, both before and after a PD on classroom management. They found that the PD increased teachers knowledge, but that their practices did not change until they participated in consultative sessions with feedback on their implementation of the practices. Once new knowledge was situated within their actual classrooms, teachers were able to accurately employ the strategies they had learned, which resulted in improvements in students on-task and disruptive behaviors. Teachers with more developed socialemotional competence also seem more able to produce stronger social, emotional, and behavioral outcomes for students Jennings  Greenberg, 2009. Social-emotional competence requires knowledge of self, of social and cultural dynamics, and of childrens social-emotional development. Additionally, general and special education teachers need to know how Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 251

typical and atypical development inuences behavior and how they can draw on those understandings during instruction and other periods of time. For instance, expecting students in the early grades to sit still for long periods of time or to line up in complete silence is probably not realistic. Finally, because well-designed academic instruction that engages students seems to play a strong role in managing student behavior, both special and general education teachers likely need considerable knowledge about how to teach academic subjects effectively, particularly if they are fully responsible for instruction in that area. WHAT DEFINES TEACHER EXPERTISE FOR PROVIDING SUCCESSFUL CORE AND TIERED READING INSTRUCTION? General education teachers providing core reading instruction to all students have the challenging task of organizing and providing instruction that is differentiated to meet a wide range of students needs. Not only must these teachers provide core instruction, they are often responsible for providing tier II instruction. Special education teachers should be working with their general education colleagues to plan this differentiated instruction, while also providing intensive, remedial tier III instruction to those students who need it. Effective Instructional Practices in Reading Providing carefully crafted core and tiered reading instruction requires both content and strategies that are appropriate to the needs of individual students. Carol Connor and her colleagues Connor, Morrison,  Petrella, 2004; Connor, Morrison,  Underwood, 2007; Connor et al., 2009 have shown that students with strong reading skills prot from more childmanaged instruction that has a stronger comprehension focus, whereas students who struggle require more teacher-directed instruction, initially in decoding and then later in comprehension. To provide such diverse instruction, general education teachers will need rather deep knowledge of classroom management and methods for differentiating instruction; research in the past has demonstrated that general education teachers often struggle to effectively engage whole classrooms of students in instruction MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 252

that is both differentiated according to their abilities and engaging. Yet, being able to engage students in content that meets their needs is one critical element of effective instruction. Both general and special education teachers working with students who struggle will also need to understand how to provide whole-class and smallgroup instruction that is focused on the right content and instructional strategies, cognitively rigorous, highly engaging, teacher-directed, explicit, and supportive of students needs Carlisle, Kelcey, Berebitsky,  Phelps, 2011; Connor et al., 2005, 2009; Taylor, Pearson, Peterson,  Rodriguez, 2001; Taylor, Peterson, Pearson,  Rodriguez, 2002. Small-group instruction might increase the intensity of the intervention for at-risk learners. Although not denitive in their conclusions, Wanzek and Vaughn 2010 noted that effect sizes for interventions delivered in groups of six to eight students seem to be smaller than those delivered in groups of two to three students. Brownell et al. 2007, in a study of special educators reading practice, found that instructional group size moderated the relationship between effective reading instruction and student achievement, such that smaller groups enhanced the impact of effective reading instruction on students oral reading uency rates by 9. Moreover, helping students have access to the right content and instructional strategies during small-group and large-group instruction matters. Carol Connor and her colleagues have provided compelling evidence for the need to match the content and type of instruction to struggling students needs, in order to move the needle on their achievement meter. Specically, Connor found that teacher-managed instruction in code and comprehension have a greater impact on students whose initial letter word recognition, vocabulary, and comprehension skills are weaker than typical. Younger students also prot more from teacher-managed vocabulary instruction than older students; child-managed comprehension strategies were better for students entering third grade at the 90th percentile or higher. Additionally, Connor et al. found that when rstand third-grade teachers participated in a PD that provided them with feedback on type and quantity of instruction, based on students ability, they provided more effective instruction 2007. While studying how teachers provided effective instruction to classrooms that included 80 and 81 percent English Language Learners ELLs, Gersten, Baker, Haager, and Graves 2005 found that explicit and interactive instruction in both phonemic awareness and decoding and vocabulary promoted achievement for the most struggling learners. Similarly, Coyne, McCoach, and Kapp 2007 found that explicit vocabulary instruction Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 253

facilitated high achievement in the most struggling students, particularly when the instruction focused on small groups of students and students were taught strategies learned in core instruction. Reviews of the instructional strategy literature have also identied numerous strategies that support the learning of struggling readers and students with disabilities, including using encoding instruction e.g., letter tiles, plastic letters to promote decoding and spelling skills Weiser  Mathes, 2011 and repeated readings Therrien, 2004. Other interventions demonstrated to have powerful effect sizes include systematic explicit instruction; mnemonic strategies; and learning strategies e.g., study skill instruction, self-questioning strategies; Scruggs, Mastropieri, Berkeley,  Graetz, 2009. When general and special education teachers use practices that promote instructional rigor and student engagement, students also achieve stronger reading outcomes. Taylor, Pearson, Peterson, and Rodriguez 2005 and Taylor et al. 2002 found that the use of higher-level questioning, coaching, modeling, and other forms of scaffolding, paired with higher levels of student on-task behavior, seems promising in promoting positive student reading achievement. Specically, classroom teachers who prompted students to apply their word-level knowledge to decoding novel words and used higherlevel questioning strategies to promote comprehension had students with higher reading achievement. The application of these strategies increased the cognitive level at which the students were engaged. Instruction that is explicit and provides multiple opportunities to practice is also critical to improving the achievement of students who struggle, including those with disabilities. Baker, Gersten, Haager, and Dingle 2006 found that explicit instruction predicted the reading achievement of both English speaking and Spanish speaking rst-grade students. Carlisle et al. 2011 also found that teacher-directed instruction and support for students learning were predictive of students reading achievement gains; moreover, teacher-directed instruction and support for students learning had a stronger impact on the reading comprehension scores of students on free and reduced lunch than those who were not. Additionally, Brownell et al. 2007 showed that instruction that was direct, intensive, engaging, and supported students in making connections and elaborating on their responses promoted the reading achievement of students with disabilities. The use of specic decoding practices and comprehension practices also played a role in student achievement. Research from both general and special education has helped us to dene the features and content of effective reading instruction for struggling readers and students with disabilities in both core and tiered instruction. MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 254

Yet, what is the knowledge that general and special education teachers need to have about the content of reading, the reading process, reading pedagogy, and students to provide such effective instruction? Teacher Knowledge for Reading Instruction Careful observations of effective teachers providing reading instruction reveal the considerable knowledge such teachers have Seo et al., 2008; yet, determining the nature of and measuring that knowledge has been challenging. Those studies that do exist provide some evidence that general and special education teachers have knowledge of the English language e.g., phonology, orthography, morphology and likely use it while teaching reading Brady  Moats, 1997; Moats, 1994; Moats  Lyon, 1996. Moats and Foorman 2003 developed a teacher knowledge survey that differentiates teachers by their linguistics knowledge level and has a predictive association with student performance in reading. Other scholars used this survey to establish signicant, positive relationships among teacher knowledge, classroom practice, and student reading achievement. Many of these studies included a PD effort designed to deepen teachers knowledge of the English language and provide strategies for enacting that knowledge in practice Carlisle, Correnti, Phelps,  Zeng, 2009; McCutchen et al., 2002; McCutchen, Green, Abbott,  Sanders, 2009; Piasta, Connor, Fishman,  Morrison, 2009. One of these studies demonstrated that while teachers knowledge of linguistics did not predict student achievement, it did play a role in teacher practice. Piasta et al. 2009 showed that teacher knowledge of linguistics moderated the relationship between classroom practice and student achievement. Other researchers have been able to establish a direct relationship between teacher knowledge and student achievement McCutchen et al., 2002, 2009; Moats  Foorman, 2003. General education teachers may also require knowledge of pedagogical practices for teaching the content of reading and knowledge of the sorts of difculties students might encounter in learning to read. Phelps and Schilling 2004 demonstrated that their assessment designed to measure this knowledge effectively differentiated experienced teachers from other professionals. Carlisle, Kelcey, Rowan, and Phelps 2011 found a relationship between rst-grade teachers knowledge and rst-grade students comprehension skills. However, no linkage could be identied between teachers knowledge and rst-grade students decoding skills, or teachers knowledge and secondand third-grade students decoding or comprehension skills. In a Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 255

second study investigating the relationship between teachers pedagogical knowledge and secondand third-grade students reading-related skills, Carlisle et al. 2011 found that teachers knowledge modied the relationship between students free and reduced lunch status and students academic outcomes. Teachers with higher knowledge were more effective with students who were not on free and reduced lunch. Special education teachers also likely need both linguistic knowledge and the pedagogical content knowledge, like that measured by Phelps and Schilling 2004, to provide the type of intervention students with disabilities need. Two studies specically sampled special education teachers knowledge of linguistics and the relationship of that knowledge to their instruction in a supervised eld experience Spear-Swerling, 2009; Spear-Swerling  Brucker, 2004. Spear-Swerling 2009 and Spear-Swerling and Brucker 2003 investigated special education preservice teachers knowledge of linguistics during coursework. After participating in initial training or coursework in the word structure of the English language e.g., graphophoneme segmentation of words, classication of pseudo words by syllable type, novice special education teachers demonstrated greater knowledge of the English language than before. However, signicant Pearson correlations between knowledge and student achievement were found for only one of the studies. No attempt was made to correlate teacher knowledge and classroom reading practices. Using a modied version of Phelps and Schilling knowledge survey, Brownell et al. 2007 investigated linkages between beginning special education teachers knowledge for teaching reading, classroom practices, and students reading gains. Teachers knowledge for teaching reading did not relate to student academic gains in reading, but knowledge did predict certain aspects of classroom practice. Specically, content knowledge for teaching word analysis predicted a moderate, but signicant portion of the variance in decoding instruction. WHAT DEFINES EXPERTISE IN COLLABORATION AMONG GENERAL AND SPECIAL EDUCATION TEACHERS? Coordinating aligned instruction and behavioral approaches across the different tiers of instruction requires active collaboration among general and special education teachers. Although many scholarly writings and research in this area acknowledge the need for the effective collaborative skills, few MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 256

explicitly dene what expertise in collaboration looks like or how it can be fostered. Similarly, many programs, interventions, and studies include collaboration as a goal or intended outcome, but they do not always dene the needed underlying skills of collaboration. Less than a handful of studies identify the skills of collaboration and include them in their coursework and eld experiences. These skills include a problem-solving, b active listening, c conict resolution, and d teaming with other professionals Bradley  Monda-Amaya, 2005; Fisher, Frey,  Thousand, 2003; Gerber  Popp, 2000; Van Laarhoven et al., 2006; however, it is unclear how these researchers specically address these skills. Only Bradley and Monda-Amaya 2005 studied an innovation for improving a specic collaborative skill. They taught conict negotiation skills to preservice special education teachers by helping them learn to analyze vignettes and provide steps for resolving the conict present in the vignettes. Bradley and Monda-Amaya showed that preservice special education teachers could learn to analyze conict situations and provide appropriate steps for resolving the conict. Though there is a general consensus that these collaborative skills are necessary to facilitate instruction for students with disabilities, the literature supporting this consensus is not conclusive. Most studies examine schoolbased professionals perspectives on the collaborative skills general and special education teachers need, rather than documenting the skills of those teachers identied as collaborative or describing how collaborative skills might be acquired. For example, Gerber and Popp 2000 conducted interviews and focus groups with administrators, collaborative special and general education teachers, parents of students with and without disabilities, and students with and without disabilities to determine the efcacy of collaborative service delivery in one district. Data analysis revealed that stakeholders felt team building, communication, problem-solving, and conict resolution skills were important for any teacher involved in collaboration. Additionally, in an evaluation of a preservice experience designed to promote collaboration, Richards, Hunley, Weaver, and Landers 2003 developed a survey of problem-solving, listening skills, time use, and interpersonal skills for participants to rate. The outcomes Richards et al. selected for the survey support consensus within the eld that those collaborative skills are important to promote. The two studies by Gerber and Popp 2000 and Richards et al. 2003 delineate specic skills that are believed to contribute to effective collaboration. In addition to more rened use of the general skills identied in the previous paragraphs i.e., problem-solving, listening skills, time use, and Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 257

interpersonal skills, it is likely that expert special education teachers must possess and use other and more specialized skills as they collaborate, negotiate, and partner with general education teachers Bradley  Monda-Amaya, 2005; Fisher et al., 2003; Gerber  Popp, 2000; Van Laarhoven et al., 2006. The nature of cross-tier collaboration requires the ability to engage in IEP planning and construction Arthaud, Aram, Breck, Doelling,  Bushrow, 2007, instructional and intervention planning Arthaud et al., 2007, peer evaluation Bradley  Monda-Amaya, 2005, positive behavior supports and educational practices such as instruction and assessment appropriate for all students in the classroom, regardless of disability Fisher et al., 2003. Expert special educators must also collaborate with a variety of other service-related professionals at the building level, such as administrators Wilcox  Wigle, 2000, coaches, paraprofessionals Fisher et al., 2003, and medical personnel Conoley  Conoley, 1991, and they must be able to effectively engage parents Murray  Curran, 2008 and families Fisher et al., 2003; Van Laarhoven et al., 2006; Wilcox  Wigle, 2000. There is, however, no research on what further skills such specialized forms of collaboration require, or information about the knowledge that underlies those skills. Summary Taken together, the studies reviewed demonstrate that general and special education teachers have specialized skill for teaching reading and managing student behavior. Additionally, effective teachers have knowledge for teaching reading that seems different from the knowledge that other professionals have about the process of reading. Effective teachers seem to have integrated knowledge linguistics, language, and pedagogy for teaching reading to students who struggle with decoding and spelling problems. We know less about what effective reading teachers know, however, about teaching uency, vocabulary, and comprehension, and we have no understanding of how the knowledge of effective general education teachers might be similar to or different from effective special education teachers. Even less clear is the knowledge behind effective classroom and behavior management as well as effective collaboration. Further, the skills needed for collaboration are not supported through research; there is some professional consensus about the skills that are needed, but research is nonexistent. Although research on effective teachers knowledge and skill is insufcient, ndings from existing studies do provide a direction for teacher education MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 258

efforts. As such, we turn our attention to the types of learning experiences that will be needed to further teachers knowledge and skill in these areas. DESIGNING A TEACHER EDUCATION SYSTEM TO DEVELOP EFFECTIVE TEACHERS The knowledge and skills needed to teach effectively in an RtI framework cannot be developed easily over a two-year period the length of most preparation programs, or in alternative routes to the classroom, particularly those that provide only minimal preparation. So, how can teacher educators help preservice teachers acquire some of the fundamental skills needed to teach students with disabilities and other students who struggle? Furthermore, what sorts of supports do special and general education teachers need after leaving their preparation program in order to become highly effective teachers? We argue that, for teachers to develop the expertise in reading and behavior that they will need to participate successfully in RtI, they will need repeated and sustained opportunities to learn about how to teach literacy and intervene in student behavior. These opportunities should begin in preservice programs and extend into their teaching careers. Initial Preparation: The Need for a Practice-Based Approach Any system of teacher education needs to promote the sorts of knowledge and skills effective general and special education teachers will need to operate in an RtI framework. Currently, however, special education preparation programs are quite heterogeneous, differing widely in the types of courses and experiences they offer to preservice teachers Goe, 2007. Moreover, many general education programs do not include sufcient coursework or eld experiences in working with students with disabilities. Although general education teacher preparation is clearly insufcient in this respect, limited evidence demonstrates that preparation in special education does make a difference in terms of a special education teachers ability to teach effectively and add value to the reading and mathematics achievement of students with disabilities served in pullout settings Feng  Sass, 2010; Nourgaret, Scruggs,  Mastropieri, 2005. Exactly why special education preparation contributes to the effectiveness of special education teachers, however, is less well known, and from the research on general Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 259

education teacher preparation, we know nothing about how to better prepare these teachers to provide effective instruction in an RtI framework. Clearly as a eld, we need to understand the sorts of coursework and eld experiences beginning special and general education teachers need to prepare them for effectively teaching students within an RtI framework. A thorough review of the literature in special education Leko, Brownell, Sindelar,  Murphy, 2012 suggests that a practice-based approach to teacher education that focuses on developing knowledge and skills in reading, classroom and behavior management, and collaboration might be effective. Opportunities to Apply Knowledge for Teaching and Collaborating Structured opportunities to acquire pedagogical content knowledge and implement that knowledge in applied settings appears to be helpful in improving preservice teachers knowledge, practice, and sometimes student achievement. In several studies designed to improve knowledge and skill in teaching reading, preservice special education teachers were provided opportunities to learn about the content of early reading instruction in a language arts course, including the structure of the English language, phonics, and reading assessments Al Otaiba, Schatschneider,  Silverman, 2005; Spear-Swerling, 2009; Spear-Swerling  Brucker, 2004. In the SpearSwerling studies, preservice special education teachers were also provided with a lesson planning structure and specic reading strategies for implementing the content. Next, preservice teachers were placed in tutoring situations in which the course instructor closely supervised them. The instructor was available to model strategies, provide instructional suggestions, and provide corrective feedback on their tutoring instruction. In the Al Otaiba et al. 2005 study, preservice teachers were taught to implement a specic tutoring program and were supervised to ensure they were implementing the program with integrity. In all of the studies, preservice teachers made signicant gains on knowledge tests that examined their understanding of the English language structure and phonology. Preservice teachers were also able to help students make signicant gains on some combination of measures that assessed letter sound knowledge, reading and spelling of irregular words, and phonics concepts. Additionally, in the Al Otaiba et al. 2005 study, preservice teachers demonstrated a stronger capacity for analyzing the needs of individual students, suggesting that they were integrating their knowledge for teaching content with knowledge of their students as a result of the opportunity to engage in guided practice. MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 260

In one study by Gettinger, Stoiber, and Koscik 2008, teacher educators aligned opportunities to learn content and strategies with eld experiences. Instead of relying on coursework, Gettinger et al. used extended workshops, combined with eld experiences, to develop preservice teachers knowledge about challenging behaviors and strategies for responding to these behaviors. Specically, preservice teachers were taught information about and strategies for engaging in interdisciplinary teaming for the purpose of conducting and interpreting functional behavior assessments. Readings, hypothetical cases, and guidelines for eld-based activities were provided in the workshops. Then, preservice teachers were coached to implement functional behavioral assessments and positive behavioral supports in classroom settings. At the conclusion of the experience, preservice teachers demonstrated gains in knowledge. They also made gains on a consultation simulation task and their target students attained their goals. Findings from this study, and those in reading, show that preservice teachers benet from opportunities to acquire knowledge and then apply it in natural settings, particularly when those applied opportunities are well structured, focused in terms of skill and knowledge learned, and structured to provide feedback on either preservice teachers analysis of student data or their implementation of effective practice. Preservice teachers also proted from opportunities to learn and apply collaboration skills and strategies associated with successful co-teaching. In two different studies, preservice programs that were designed to help general and special education teachers acquire the skills necessary for co-teaching e.g., how to make accommodations, how to use collaborative problemsolving skills used a combination of coursework, simulation activities, and eld experiences. In the Richards et al. 2003 study, secondary and special education preservice teachers rated their collaborative experiences as benecial and indicated that they felt better prepared on a variety of collaborative skills. Van Laarhoven, Munk, Lynch, Bosma, and Rouse 2007 found that the collaborative experiences they provided improved general and special education preservice teachers attitudes about inclusion, their ability to analyze a classroom vignette and produce solutions, and their ability to teach a co-taught lesson. Strategies for Developing Applied Knowledge in Coursework The clinical experiences described in the preceding section are expensive in terms of the human resources necessary to support them. Case-based instruction, video instruction, and simulations, including virtual simulations, all have demonstrated some limited potential for supporting preservice Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 261

teachers in acquiring the essential knowledge and skills they need. Case-based instruction uses narratives and video to represent authentic problems of practice, where preservice teachers can apply knowledge they are acquiring in coursework to solve problems. Alexander, Lignugaris-Kraft, and Forbush 2007 used cases as part of the coursework and eld experiences they designed to assist preservice teachers in developing more effective mathematics instruction. Specically, preservice teachers were required to develop skill sequences for the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Standards and apply those sequences to three different hypothetical cases. Additionally, Mitchem et al. 2009 used cases to help preservice teachers learn about planning, instruction, intervention, and assessment of students with social, emotional, and behavioral disorders. Specically, they used cases combined with activities where preservice teachers had to use knowledge acquired in class to critically analyze the instruction, versus instances where cases were used to contextualize instruction. Concept maps were used as preand post-measures of knowledge gains. Comparisons of concept maps showed that preservice special education teachers knowledge was greater only when they had to use the knowledge they were acquiring to analyze the case. Simply having a case as an example of knowledge taught was not helpful. Findings from both of these studies suggest that opportunities to access knowledge acquired in coursework and apply it to authentic problems are likely benecial to preservice special education teachers. Video modeling and simulations also have been shown to help teachers develop applied knowledge. Dieker et al. 2009 used video models of three different content strategies: the Text Talk strategy for teaching vocabulary, dynamic assessment approaches for evaluating students understanding of mathematics, and the 5-E Learning Cycle, a directed inquiry approach to science instruction. After viewing the videos, preservice teachers were able to describe more of the strategy steps than they were after simply learning about the strategy in coursework. Bradley and Monda-Amaya 2005 used vignettes combined with roleplaying to teach conict management strategies to special education preservice teachers. Preservice special education teachers who participated in the training were assessed using a multiple baseline design. After treatment, participants were better able to analyze vignettes for determining the basis for the conict and to provide steps for resolving the conict than they were during baseline. Finally, virtual simulations hold great potential for preparing preservice teachers, but their potential has not yet been realized. At the University of Central Florida, researchers have developed TeachLivE. This virtual lab provides simulated learning experiences in classroom management by MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 262

incorporating avatars that represent real students. Preservice teachers engage with the avatars manned by TeachLivE interactors. The avatars respond to actions taken by the preservice teachers. The avatar responses are designed to mimic what might happen in a real classroom, but the interaction is controlled by the interactors, so that preservice teachers can practice routines and receive feedback without experiencing negative consequences often accrued from failed attempts in real classrooms Dieker, Hynes, Hughes,  Smith, 2008; Synthetic Reality Lab, 2012. Although TeachLivE appears to have potential for promoting preservice teacher learning, there are no known studies of its impact. Further, it is the only application of simulation experiences known thus far to assist the learning of preservice teachers. Beyond Initial Preparation: Practice-Focused PD To develop the effective teachers we need for RtI frameworks, carefully articulated opportunities to learn, beyond the preservice years, must be available to general and special education teachers. Teacher educators and school-based professionals have long recognized the need for teachers to have ongoing learning opportunities, and therefore have proposed a variety of strategies, including professional learning communities, lesson study, teacher study groups, and the like. The degree to which these opportunities are successful will depend, however, on their capacity for extending knowledge and skill acquired during preservice education and providing the sorts of learning opportunities described in the research on PD. Extending Learning Opportunities Research from both general education and special education has demonstrated that short-term PD, also referred to as sit and get PD, is relatively ineffective in changing teachers classroom practices Boyle, While,  Boyle, 2004; Butler, Lauscher, Jarvis-Selinger,  Beckingham, 2004; Joyce  Showers, 2002; Lang  Fox, 2003; Little, 1993; McLeskey  Waldron, 2002; Richardson  Placier, 2001; Sprinthall, Reiman,  Thies-Sprinthall, 1996; Waldron  McLeskey, 2009. In a review of research on PD in general education, Joyce and Showers 2002 found that short-term knowledge dissemination types of PD resulted in the development of both knowledge and skill for some of the teachers, but this information was rarely used in the classroom. Research ndings in special education have been similar Klingner, 2004; Lang  Fox, 2003. Instead, teachers need more extended opportunities to learn how to use strategies in the classroom, and these Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 263

opportunities should be focused on helping teachers develop both content knowledge and the knowledge they need for teaching content. In other words, they should be practice-focused. Deepening and Integrating Knowledge As indicated earlier, general and special education teachers need the type of knowledge that informs their teaching. In other words, they need to understand that the vowels short a and short e are difcult for students with learning disabilities to distinguish and what they should do to remediate this difculty. PD should promote ways of focusing on and acquiring the content and practice-based knowledge teachers need to improve their practice Desimone, 2009; Mayer, 2009. Zaslow, Tout, Halle, and Starr 2011, in a review of early literacy PD studies, found that PD focused on developing content knowledge as well as practice-based knowledge was effective in improving teachers reading instruction, whereas PD that incorporated university coursework focused exclusively on content or practice-based knowledge was inadequate in developing more effective reading teachers. For example, Mayer 2009 found that PD with an exclusive focus on implementation of evidence-based practice did not consistently lead to better performance on more complex aspects of teaching. Additionally, two studies in special education demonstrated that when special education teachers had opportunities to acquire both content knowledge and practice-based knowledge they were able to improve their classroom instruction and student achievement. Sawka et al. 2002 examined the relationship between EBD teachers knowledge and management practices, both before and after a PD on classroom management. They found that the PD increased teachers knowledge, but that their practices did not change until they participated in consultative sessions with feedback on their implementation of the management practices. Once new knowledge was situated within their actual classrooms, teachers were able to accurately employ the strategies they had learned, which resulted in improvements in students on-task and disruptive behaviors. Brownell et al. 2011 showed that extended opportunities to learn about the reading process and the structure of language along with evidence-based strategies in decoding and uency enabled special education teachers to change their classroom instruction in decoding and uency and improve the decoding skills of their students. The ndings of these studies show that combining knowledgeand practice-based approaches to PD enables the integration of teachers content and practice-based knowledge. The need for knowledge integration MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 264

raises questions about the type of PD typically provided in special education, which tends to emphasize implementation of evidence-based practices and pays less attention to the knowledge teachers need to integrate evidence-based practices into their practice Boudah, Blair,  Mitchell, 2003; Greenwood, Tapia, Abbott,  Walton, 2003. The exible thinking necessary to provide tiered instruction likely will not be secured through teacher learning opportunities that focus primarily on implementation. Providing Carefully Crafted Practice Opportunities with Feedback Special and general education teachers are unlikely to integrate the content and procedural knowledge they need to provide reading and behavioral interventions in core and tiered interventions if they do not have active opportunities to learn with feedback. Findings from the research on PD and studies examining the development of expertise have afrmed the need for guided practice with feedback. Further, this practice must be deliberate; that is, it must be designed to carefully teach the knowledge and skills underlying expert performance Boshuizen, 2009; Bransford  Schwartz, 2009; Ericsson, 2009; Fletcher, 2009. In elds such as medicine and engineering, researchers have found that access to deliberate practice with feedback was essential for improving practice Ericsson, 2009 and that often such practice opportunities could be delivered through virtual environments. Similar ndings have been achieved in general and special education studies of effective PD. In an experimental study of 78 secondary teachers, Allen, Pianta, Gregory, Mikami, and Lun 2011 showed that video-based coaching specically designed to change teacherstudent interactions had a signicant effect on year-end student achievement test scores. Specically, the coaching intervention focused on providing a positive emotional classroom climate, supporting adolescent students need for autonomy, fostering an active role in learning, and promoting the relevance of learning content. In a longitudinal randomized eld trial of a comprehensive literacy coaching intervention, Matsumura, Garnier, Correni, Junker, and Bickel 2010 demonstrated that ELLs had signicantly higher end-of-the-year achievement scores on state standardized reading assessments if their teachers participated in the coaching intervention. In special education, expert coaching, combined with other collaborative opportunities for teachers to discuss implementation issues, has enabled general education teachers to implement various literacy interventions successfully Abbott, Walton, Tapia,  Greenwood, 1999; Bryant, Linan-Thompson, Ugel, Hamff,  Hougen, 2001; Vaughn, Hughes, Schumm,  Klingner, 1998, and in one case changed student achievement Baker  Smith, 1999. Finally, Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 265

Brownell et al. 2011 demonstrated that a comprehensive approach for improving word study and uency instruction that included monthly cohort meetings, video self-reections, and expert coaching with feedback improved special education teacher practice in decoding and uency and student achievement on various decoding measures. Differentiating to Meet Teachers Needs Even when teachers have access to supportive and sustained PD focused on both content and practice, they differ in how willing they are to change their practice. These differences appear to affect the strategies they choose to use Brownell et al., 2010; Dingle, Brownell, Leko, Boardman,  Haager, 2011; Hill, 2009. Teachers continued use of strategies is dependent on the support they receive during PD and the accountability they feel for using new practices Klingner, Ahwee, Pilonieta,  Menendez, 2003. These differences suggest that peer support and accountability mechanisms must be built into PD efforts so that teachers will have condence to change and feel some accountability for changing. Additionally, the format and activities used during the PD should be responsive to the needs of the participants, the context in which the teachers are working, and the amount of previous knowledge and experience the teachers bring with them to the PD innovation. In a qualitative study, Brownell et al. 2010 developed a grounded theory demonstrating how teachers individual qualities, including their knowledge for teaching reading and special education as well as their motivation, interacted with contextual variables, such as curriculum, and components of the PD effort to inuence the ways in which they integrated new strategies into their practice. Summary Most of the research we have about preparing effective special education teachers for working with students with disabilities is limited to approximately 1015 studies, and these studies are scattered across reading, mathematics, behavior, and collaboration. Further, we have no research examining how to prepare general education teachers to work in RtI frameworks. If general and special education teachers are to develop the knowledge and skill they need to design and implement core and tiered evidence-based practices, then they must have access to learning opportunities that help them develop the knowledge and skill that characterizes effective teachers. Findings from current research suggest that these learning opportunities must be MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 266

extended over time, carefully crafted to allow the simultaneous development of content and pedagogical knowledge, and designed to meet teachers individual needs. Furthermore, teachers must receive consistent feedback on their attempts to use knowledge in practice. These focused learning opportunities must begin in initial preparation and be extended well into teachers careers if they are to develop into effective teachers. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE FUTURE Developing effective general and special education teachers for RtI frameworks depends on our ability to a further dene the essential knowledge underlying effective practice and the skills that comprise effective practice, b amass a body of research in initial preparation and PD that better supports how to prepare teachers for core instruction and tiered interventions, and c determine how schools can support teachers to enact what they have learned. Improving Our Understanding of Effective General and Special Education Teachers Although researchers have been able to dene some of the essential knowledge underlying effective instructional practice in reading, this research is not sufciently comprehensive or consistent in its ndings to claim that scholars have identied the knowledge effective reading teachers need, either in general or special education. Further, we have little understanding of the knowledge behind effective classroom and behavior management or collaboration. We need more research that focuses on what general and special education teachers must understand about students emotional and social development, and how development in these two areas affects the selection and use of classroom and behavior management strategies. The same is true for professional collaboration, where research dening the knowledge needed for collaboration is nonexistent. Additionally, we need a much stronger understanding of effective practice for reading instruction, classroom and behavior management, and collaboration. Effective practice is not simply a matter of implementing a string of evidence-based strategies. Effective practice represents the integration of evidence-based strategies into existing classroom routines or ways of interacting with colleagues and parents. Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 267

Establishing this knowledge base will be very difcult. In RtI systems, how will researchers attribute teaching practices to the outcomes of students with disabilities when both general and special education teachers are sharing responsibility for the instruction of students with disabilities? Further, how will lesson duration, a particular issue for special education teachers providing intervention instruction for 30 minutes or less a day, inuence the types of classroom practices that are exhibited? A similar problem is associated with relating knowledge for teaching to classroom practice. If general or special education teachers do not have the opportunity or responsibility for delivering the full complement of reading instruction, then how can knowledge for teaching reading be used to predict effective instructional practices in reading? Finally, there is the thorny problem of assessing outcomes for students with disabilities and linking performance on these outcomes to teacher knowledge and practice. Currently, states do not maintain a statewide database linking teachers to important student outcomes, including student engagement in class and school, social competence, or other behavioral outcomes, such as discipline referrals; yet, all these outcomes are essential if we are to identify effective practice in classroom and behavior management. Moreover, student achievement is assessed primarily through performance on state assessments. These assessments, however, are notoriously problematic for determining achievement growth among students with disabilities. Clearly, teams of researchers, composed of experts in reading, behavior, disability, measurement, and research design, will be needed to solve the complex problems associated with assessing the knowledge and practice of effective general and special education teachers working with students with disabilities. We will need both theoretical and measurement models that allow us to dene what is different about general and special education teachers knowledge and practice and how these differences contribute uniquely to the outcomes of students with disabilities. Additionally, we will need better assessments of student outcomes that are calibrated to capture the growth of students with disabilities on important behavioral, social, and academic indicators, and these assessments must be collected at the state level. Collecting individual student assessment data in research studies focused on teachers incurs an expense that is too costly for the budgets of most research projects. Alternatively, funding for special education research needs to be at a level sufcient to support the collection of such data by individual researchers. Regardless of the challenges, we need this research on teacher effectiveness for students with disabilities. If we do not understand the knowledge and skills that underlie effective teaching for MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 268

students with disabilities or collaboration with parents and professionals, then how can we argue that teaching has a professional knowledge base? Moreover, if we cannot argue that effective teachers have a knowledge base that is different from other professionals, then how can we assert that teacher education is important? Improving Research on Initial Preparation and Professional Development The limited number of studies of teacher preparation and PD, most of which focus on core instruction in general education, are clearly insufcient to build a solid evidence base regarding the types of learning opportunities special and general education teachers will need to teach and collaborate in RtI frameworks. At this point in time, the evidence on teacher preparation and PD only seems to provide us with the most general information about the dening features of effective teacher education. We still do not understand how much and what types of knowledge special and general education teachers will need to represent content effectively for students, and even if we could dene the needed knowledge, we still do not have strong understandings of how to help teachers acquire it. For instance, what knowledge would teachers need to help students learn strategies for acquiring morphological awareness versus strategies for summarizing narrative and expository texts? Moreover, what vehicles would be best for making the necessary knowledge accessible to teachers? Then, exactly how do extended learning opportunities help knowledge develop or become more integrated with effective instructional strategies? We know that we can help teachers implement strategies with extended learning opportunities, but how exactly do extended learning opportunities change knowledge and help it become more integrated with practice? We can raise similar questions about deliberate practice opportunities with feedback and strategies for differentiating PD. What sorts of practice opportunities appear to be the most productive in terms of implementing a strategy and sustaining it e.g., those provided by an expert coach or those provided through peer observations and coaching? Further, are strategies that are productive for promoting the ability to implement an evidencebased practice equally effective in building the type of integrated knowledge that enables teachers to apply what they learned to their instruction in other areas? For instance, would a teacher be able to apply what he or she learned about teaching a cognitive strategy for solving word problems to some other Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 269

aspect of mathematics instruction? Or, would additional support be necessary to facilitate such transfer, and what would that support look like? Similar questions could be asked about learning collaborative skills. Finally, what sorts of collaborative structures e.g., lesson study, teacher study groups would help general and special education teachers plan core and tiered supports and instruction that is aligned and sufciently differentiated to help meet students needs? Determining How to Support Teachers for RtI For teachers to acquire the knowledge and skills they will need over time, the schools they work in must provide them with opportunities to learn and work together. Three of the biggest barriers that will stand in the way of successful RtI implementation are role diversity and role overload for special education teachers and the struggles general education teachers seem to encounter when providing differentiated instruction. Special education teachers play so many different instructional roles in schools e.g., teaching reading or mathematics in pullout instruction, co-teaching academic subjects, teaching multiple academic subjects in resource rooms that it is impossible to design initial preparation and PD programs that can prepare them for the integrated knowledge they will need. To provide effective intervention, special education teachers are going to need time to teach small groups of students. Recent research shows that special education teachers devote a small percentage of their time to direct instruction but are instead inundated with paperwork, meetings, and other duties Vannest  Hagan-Burke, 2010, and this likely affects their ability to impact academic and social outcomes for students with disabilities. In a study of elementary special education teachers, Brownell et al. 2007 found that time for reading instruction and instructional group size positively moderated the oral reading uency gains that students with reading disabilities made. General education teachers are also challenged in roles where they must serve students diverse academic and behavioral needs. Research shows that general education teachers have a hard time differentiating instruction for students with disabilities and those that struggle, and that targeted efforts to improve their abilities in these areas will be needed. Moreover, even though we have some evidence about how PD efforts might be structured to improve general education teachers practice for differentiation, the studies are small in number, limited to elementary teachers, and have yielded conicting ndings. We need to examine how schools that are successfully MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 270

implementing RtI are designing roles for special and general education teachers that are more focused, and to determine how initial preparation and school-based PD might be structured to help them acquire the knowledge and skills they need to fulll those roles. Finally, we need to understand how school environments can be designed to support general and special education teachers working in an RtI framework. Though it is intuitive that special and general education teachers will need to collaborate in order to plan for core and tiered instruction that is effective and well aligned, we have little knowledge about how to promote effective collaboration between general and special education teachers. The research on co-teaching and collaboration is replete with ndings about barriers to collaboration, but little is known about how to structure collaboration in order to maximize its effectiveness for improving teacher planning and learning. Additionally, we have little research about how to promote teachers collaborative skills. For RtI to be effective, we will need more research-based information about how to develop collaborative skill, promote effective collaborative planning, and understand the contribution collaborative learning structures make to the development of the skills and knowledge that special and general education teachers will need to foster teacher learning. REFERENCES Abbott, M., Walton, C., Tapia, Y.,  Greenwood, C. 1999. Research to practice: A Blueprint for closing the gap in local schools. Exceptional Children, 65, 339352. Alexander, M., Lignugaris-Kraft, B.,  Forbush, D. 2007. Online mathematics methods course evaluation: Student outcomes, generalization, and pupil performance. Teacher Education and Special Education, 30, 199216. Allen, J. P., Pianta, R. C., Gregory, A., Mikami, A. Y.,  Lun, J. 2011. An interaction-based approach to enhancing secondary school instruction and student achievement. Science, 3336045, 10341037. Al Otaiba, S., Schatschneider, C.,  Silverman, E. 2005. Tutor-assisted intensive learning strategies in kindergarten: How much is enough? Exceptionality, 13, 195208. Arthaud, T. J., Aram, R. J., Breck, S. E., Doelling, J. E.,  Bushrow, K. M. 2007. Developing collaboration skills in pre-service teachers: A partnership between general and special education. Teacher Education and Special Education, 30, 112. Baker, S., Gersten, R., Haager, D.,  Dingle, M. 2006. Teaching practice and the reading growth of rst-grade English learners: Validation of an observation instrument. Elementary School Journal, 107, 199221. Baker, S.,  Smith, S. 1999. Starting off on the right foot: The inuence of four principles of PD in improving literacy instruction in two kindergarten programs. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 14, 239253. Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 271

Boshuizen, H. P. A. 2009. Teaching for expertise: Problem-based methods in medicine and other professional domains. In K. A. Ericsson Ed., The development of professional performance: Approaches to objective measurement and designed learning environments pp. 379404. UK: Cambridge University Press. Boudah, D. J., Blair, E.,  Mitchell, V. J. 2003. Implementing and sustaining strategies instruction: Authentic and effective professional development or business as usual? Exceptionality, 11, 323. Boyle, B., While, D.,  Boyle, T. 2004. A longitudinal study of teacher change: What makes professional development effective? Curriculum Journal, 15, 4568. Bradley, J. F.,  Monda-Amaya, L. E. 2005. Conict resolution: Preparing preservice special educators to work in collaborative settings. Teacher Education and Special Education, 28, 171184. Brady, S.,  Moats, L. 1997. Informed instruction for reading success: Foundations for teacher preparation Opinion paper 120. Baltimore, MD: International Dyslexia Association. Bransford, L.,  Schwartz, D. L. 2009. Prospective adaptation in the use of external representations. Cognition and Instruction, 274, 370400. Brownell, M. T., Boardman, A., Kiely, M. T., Corbett, N., Algina, J., Haager, D., Dingle, M. D. 2011. The inuence of collaborative professional development groups and coaching on the literacy instruction of upper elementary special education teachers. Annual Performance Report to the U.S. Department of Education, Institute for Education Sciences. Brownell, M. T., Haager, D., Bishop, A. G., Klingner, J. K., Menon, S., Peneld, R.,  Dingle, M. 2007, April. Teacher quality in special education: The role of knowledge, classroom practice, and school environment. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Education Research Association, Chicago, IL. Brownell, M. T., Lauterbach, A. A., Dingle, M. P., Boardman, A. G., Urbach, J. E.,  Leko, M. 2010, May. Individual and contextual factors inuencing special education teacher learning in literacy learning cohorts. Presentation at the annual conference of the American Educational Research Association, Denver, CO. Bryant, D. P., Linan-Thompson, S., Ugel, N., Hamff, A.,  Hougen, M. 2001. The effects of PD for middle school general and special education teachers on implementation of reading strategies in inclusive content area classes. Learning Disability Quarterly, 24, 251264. Butler, D. L., Lauscher, H. N., Jarvis-Selinger, S.,  Beckingham, B. 2004. Collaboration and self-regulation in teachers professional development. Teaching and Teacher Education, 20, 435455. Carlisle, J., Kelcey, B., Berebitsky, D.,  Phelps, G. 2011. Embracing the complexity of instruction: A study of the effects of teachers instruction on students reading comprehension. Scientic Studies of Reading, 15, 409439. Carlisle, J. F., Correnti, R., Phelps, G.,  Zeng, J. 2009. Exploration of the contribution of teachers knowledge about reading to their students improvement in reading. Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 22, 459486. Carlisle, J. F., Kelcey, B., Rowan, B.,  Phelps, G. 2011. Teachers knowledge about early reading: Effects on students gains in reading achievement. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 4, 289321. Carr, E. G., Taylor, J. C.,  Robinson, S. 1991. The effects of severe behavior problems in children on the teaching behavior of adults. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 24, 523535. MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 272

Connor, C. M., Morrison, F. J., Fishman, B. J., Ponitz, C. C., Glasney, S., Underwood, P. S., y Schatschneider, C. 2009. The ISI classroom observation system: Examining the literacy instruction provided to individual students. Educational Researcher, 38, 8599. Connor, C. M., Morrison, F. J.,  Petrella, J. N. 2004. Effective reading comprehension instruction: Examining child  instruction interactions. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96, 682698. Connor, C. M., Morrison, F. J.,  Underwood, P. S. 2007. A second chance in second grade: The independent and cumulative impact of rstand second-grade reading instruction and students letter-word reading skill growth. Scientic Studies of Reading, 11, 199233. Connor, C. M., Son, S., Hindman, A. H.,  Morrison, F. J. 2005. Teacher qualications, classroom practices, family characteristics, and preschool experience: Complex effects on rst graders vocabulary and early reading outcomes. Journal of School Psychology, 43, 343375. Conoley, J. C.,  Conoley, C. W. 1991. Collaboration for child adjustment: Issues for schooland clinic-based child psychologists. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59, 821829. Conroy, M. A., Alter, P. J., Boyd, B. A.,  Bettini, E. in press. Teacher preparation for students who demonstrate challenging behaviors. In P. T. Sindelar, E. D. McCray, M. T. Brownell,  B. Lingnugaris-Kraft Eds., Handbook of research on special education teacher preparation. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor  Francis. Coyne, M. D., McCoach, B.,  Kapp, S. 2007. Vocabulary intervention for kindergarten students: Comparing extended instruction to embedded instruction and incidental exposure. Learning Disability Quarterly, 302, 7488. Desimone, L. 2009. Improving impact studies of teachers professional development: Toward better conceptualizations and measures. Educational Researcher, 38, 181199. Dieker, L., Hynes, M., Hughes, C.,  Smith, E. 2008. Implications of mixed reality and simulation technologies on special education and teacher preparation. Focus on Exceptional Children, 40, 120. Dieker, L. A., Lane, H. B., Allsopp, D. H., OBrien, C., Wright, T., Kyger, M., y Fenty, N. 2009. Evaluating video models of evidence-based instructional practices to enhance teacher learning. Teacher Education and Special Education, 32, 180196. doi: 10.1177 0888406409334202 Dingle, M., Brownell, M. T., Leko, M. M., Boardman, A. G.,  Haager, D. 2011. Developing effective special education reading teachers: The inuence of professional development, context, and individual qualities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 34, 115. Emmer, E. T.,  Stough, L. M. 2001. Classroom management: A critical part of educational psychology, with implications for teacher education. Educational Psychologist, 36, 103112. Ericsson, K. A. Ed. 2009. Development of professional expertise: Toward measurement of expert performance and design of optimal learning environments. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Feng, L.,  Sass, T. 2010. What makes special education special? Teacher training and achievement of students with disabilities. Working Paper No. 49. Retrieved from http: www.caldercenter.orgpublications.cfm Fisher, D., Frey, N.,  Thousand, J. 2003. What do special educators need to know and be prepared to do for inclusive schooling to work? Teacher Education and Special Education, 261, 4250. Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 273

Fletcher, J. D. 2009. The value of expertise and expert performance: A review of evidence from the military. In K. A. Ericsson Ed., Development of professional expertise pp. 449469. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Gerber, P. J.,  Popp, P. A. 2000. Making collaborative teaching more effective for academically able students: Recommendations for implementation and training. Learning Disabilities Quarterly, 23, 229236. Gersten, R., Baker, S. K., Haager, D.,  Graves, A. 2005. Exploring the role of teacher quality in predicting reading outcomes for rst-grade English learners: An observational study. Remedial  Special Education, 38, 212222. Gettinger, M., Stoiber, K.,  Koscik, R. 2008. Effects of a preparation program focused on accommodating children with challenging behaviors. Teacher Education and Special Education, 31, 164181. Goe, L. 2007. The teacher preparation teacher practices student outcomes relationship in special education: Missing links and next steps. A research synthesis. Washington, DC: National Comprehensive Center for Teacher Quality. Retrieved from http:resource.tqsource. orgSearchtqResources.aspx Greenwood, C. R., Tapia, Y., Abbott, M.,  Walton, C. 2003. A building-based case study of evidence-based literacy practices: Implementation, reading behavior, and growth in reading uency, K-4. Journal of Special Education, 37, 95110. Gunter, P. L.,  Coutinho, M. J. 1997. Negative reinforcement in classrooms: What were beginning to learn. Teacher Education and Special Education, 20, 249264. Hamre, B. K.,  Pianta, R. C. 2005. Can instructional and emotional support in the rst grade classroom make a difference for children at risk of school failure? Child Development, 76, 949967. Hill, H. 2009. Fixing teacher professional development. Phi Delta Kappan, 90, 470477. Howes, C., Burchinal, M., Pianta, R., Bryant, D., Early, D., Clifford, R.,  Barbarin, O. 2008. Ready to learn? Childrens pre-academic achievement in pre-kindergarten programs. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 23, 2750. Jennings, P. A.,  Greenberg, M. T. 2009. The prosocial classroom: Teacher social and emotional competence in relation to student and classroom outcomes. Review of Educational Research, 79, 491525. Joyce, B.,  Showers, B. 2002. Student achievement through staff development. Alexandria, VA: ASCD. Klingner, J. K. 2004. The science of professional development. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 37, 248255. Klingner, J. K., Ahwee, S., Pilonieta, P.,  Menendez, R. 2003. Barriers and facilitators in scaling up research-based practices. Exceptional Children, 69, 411429. Lang, M.,  Fox, L. 2003. Breaking with tradition: Providing effective professional development for instructional personnel supporting students with severe disabilities. Teacher Education and Special Education, 261, 1726. Leko, M. M., Brownell, M. T., Sindelar, P. T.,  Murphy, K. 2012. Promoting special education preservice teacher expertise. Focus on Exceptional Children, 44, 116. Little, J. W. 1993. Teachers professional development in a climate of educational reform. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 15, 129151. Mashburn, A. J., Pianta, R., Hamre, B. K., Downer, J. T., Barbarin, O., Bryant, D., y Howes, C. 2008. Measures of classroom quality in pre-kindergarten and childrens development of academic, language and social skills. Child Development, 79, 732749. MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 274

Matsumura, L. C., Garnier, H. E., Correni, R., Junker, B.,  Bickel, D. D. 2010. Investigating the effectiveness of a comprehensive literacy coaching program in schools with high teacher mobility. The Elementary School Journal, 111, 3562. Mayer, M., Lochman, J.,  Van Acker, R. 2005. Introduction to the special issue: Cognitive-behavioral interventions with students with EBD. Behavioral Disorders, 30, 197212. Mayer, R. E. 2009. Advances in specifying what is to be learned: Reections on the themes in chapters 68. In K. A. Ericsson Ed., Development of professional expertise pp. 203211. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. McCutchen, D., Abbott, R. D., Green, L. B., Beretvas, N., Cox, S., Potter, N. S.,  Gray, A. L. 2002. Beginning literacy: Links among teacher knowledge, teacher practice, and student learning. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 35, 6986. McCutchen, D., Green, L., Abbott, R. D.,  Sanders, E. A. 2009. Further evidence for teacher knowledge: Supporting struggling readers in grades three through ve. Reading and Writing, 22, 401423. McIntosh, K.,  Av-Gay, H. 2007. Implications of current research on the use of functional behavior assessment and behavior support planning in school systems. International Journal of Behavioral Consultation and Therapy, 31, 3852. McLeskey, J.,  Waldron, N. L. 2002. Inclusion and school change: Teacher perceptions regarding curricular and instructional adaptations. Teacher Education and Special Education, 25, 4154. Mitchem, K., Koury, K., Fitzgerald, G., Hollingsead, C., Miller, K., Tsai, H.,  Zha, S. 2009. The effects of instructional implementation on learning with interactive multimedia case-based instruction. Teacher Education and Special Education, 32, 297318. Moats, L. 1994. The missing foundation in teacher education: Knowledge of the structure of spoken and written language. Annals of Dyslexia, 44, 81102. Moats, L. C.,  Foorman, B. R. 2003. Measuring teachers content knowledge language and reading. Annals of Dyslexia, 53, 2345. Moats, L. C.,  Lyon, G. R. 1996. Wanted: Teachers with knowledge of language. Topics in Language Disorders, 16, 7386. Murray, M. M.,  Curran, E. M. 2008. Learning together with parents of children with disabilities: Bringing parent-professional partnership education to a new level. Teacher Education and Special Education, 31, 5963. Nourgaret, A. A., Scruggs, T. E.,  Mastropieri, M. A. 2005. Does teacher education produce better special education teachers? Exceptional Children, 71, 217229. Oliver, R. M.,  Reschly, D. J. 2010. Special education teacher preparation in classroom management: Implications for students with emotional and behavioral disorders. Behavioral Disorders, 35, 188199. Phelps, G.,  Schilling, S. 2004. Developing measures of content knowledge for teaching reading. The Elementary School Journal, 105, 3148. Pianta, R. C., La Paro, K. M., Payne, C., Cox, M. J.,  Bradley, R. 2002. The relation of kindergarten classroom environment to teacher, family, and school characteristics and child outcomes. Elementary School Journal, 102, 225238. Piasta, S. B., Connor, C. M., Fishman, B.,  Morrison, F. J. 2009. Teachers knowledge of literacy, classroom practices, and student reading growth. Scientic Studies in Reading, 13, 224248. Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 275

Ponitz, C. C., Rimm-Kaufman, S. E., Grimm, K. J.,  Curby, T. W. 2009. Kindergarten classroom quality, behavioral engagement, and reading achievement. School Psychology Review, 38, 102120. Richards, S. B., Hunley, S., Weaver, R.,  Landers, M. F. 2003. A proposed model for teaching collaboration skills to general and special education preservice candidates. Teacher Education and Special Education, 26, 246250. Richardson, V.,  Placier, P. 2001. Teacher change. In V. Richardson Ed., Handbook of research on teaching 4th ed., pp. 905950. Washington, DC: American Education Research Association. Rimm-Kaufman, S. E., La Paro, K. M., Downer, J. T.,  Pianta, R. C. 2005. The contribution of classroom setting and quality of instruction to childrens behavior in kindergarten classrooms. The Elementary School Journal, 105, 377394. Sawka, K. D., Mccurdy, B. L.,  Mannella, M. C. 2002. Strengthening emotional support services: An empirically based model for training teachers of students with behavior disorders. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 10, 223232. Scruggs, T. E., Mastropieri, M. A., Berkeley, S.,  Graetz, J. E. 2009. Do special education interventions improve learning of secondary content? A meta-analysis. Remedial and Special Education, 31, 437449. Seo, S., Brownell, M. T., Bishop, A. G.,  Dingle, M. 2008. Beginning special education teachers classroom reading instruction: Practices that engage elementary students with learning disabilities. Exceptional Children, 75, 97122. Simonsen, B., Fairbanks, S., Briesch, A., Myers, D.,  Sugai, G. 2008. Evidence-based practices in classroom management: Considerations for research to practice. Education and Treatment of Children, 31, 351380. Spear-Swerling, L. 2009. A literacy tutoring experience for prospective special educators and struggling second graders. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 42, 431443. Spear-Swerling, L.,  Brucker, P. O. 2003. Preparing novice teachers to develop basic reading and spelling skills in children. Annals of Dyslexia, 54, 332364. Spear-Swerling, L.,  Brucker, P. O. 2004. Preparing novice teachers to develop basic reading and spelling skills in children. Annals of Dyslexia, 54, 332364. Sprinthall, N., Reiman, A.,  Thies-Sprinthall, L. 1996. Teacher professional development. In J. Sikula, T. Buttery  E. Guyton Eds., Handbook of Research on Teacher Education vol. 2, pp. 666702. New York, NY: Simon  Schuster Macmillan. Sutherland, K. S., Alder, N.,  Gunter, P. L. 2003. The effect of varying rates of opportunities to respond to academic requests on the classroom behavior of students with EBD. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 11, 239248. Sutherland, K. S.,  Oswald, D. P. 2005. The relationship between teacher and student behavior in classrooms for students with emotional and behavioral disorders: Transactional processes. Journal of Child and Family Studies, 14, 114. Synthetic Reality Lab. 2012. TeachLivE. University of Central Florida. Retrieved from http: mclserver.eecs.ucf.eduteachlivearticles.php Taylor, B. M., Pearson, P. D., Peterson, D.,  Rodriguez, M. C. 2001. Year one of the CIERA school change project: Supporting schools as they implement home-grown reading reform. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota. Taylor, B. M., Pearson, P. D., Peterson, D.,  Rodriguez, M. C. 2005. The CIERA school change framework: An evidence-based approach to professional development and school reading improvement. Reading Research Quarterly, 40, 4069. MARY T. BROWNELL ET AL. 276

Taylor, B. M., Peterson, D. S., Pearson, P. D.,  Rodriguez, M. C. 2002. Looking inside classrooms: Reecting on the how as well as the what in effective. The Reading Teacher, 56, 270279. Therrien, W. J. 2004. Fluency and comprehension gains as a result of repeated reading: A meta-analysis. Remedial and Special Education, 25, 252261. Van Laarhoven, T. R., Munk, D. D., Lynch, K., Bosma, J.,  Rouse, J. 2007. A model for preparing special and general education preservice teachers for inclusive education. Journal of Teacher Education, 58, 440455. Van Laarhoven, T., Munk, D. D., Lynch, K., Wyland, S., Dorsch, N., Zurita, L., y Rouse, J. 2006. Project ACCEPT: Preparing pre-service special and general educators for inclusive education. Teacher Education and Special Education, 29, 209212. Vannest, K. J.,  Hagan-Burke, S. 2010. Special education teacher time use. Remedial and Special Education, 312, 126142. Vaughn, S., Hughes, M. T., Schumm, J. S.,  Klingner, J. 1998. A collaborative effort to enhance reading and writing instruction in inclusion classrooms. Learning Disability Quarterly, 21, 5774. Waldron, N.,  McLeskey, J. 2009, July. Developing schools that are both effective and inclusive. Proceeding of the Annual International Association of Special Education Conference, Alicante, Spain. Wanzek, J.,  Vaughn, S. 2010. Response to varying amounts of time in reading intervention for students with low response to intervention. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 41, 126142. Weiser, B.,  Mathes, P. 2011. Using encoding instruction to improve the reading and spelling performances of elementary students at risk for literacy difculties: A best-evidence synthesis. Review of Educational Research, 82, 170200. Wilcox, D. J.,  Wigle, S. E. 2000, March. Special educators ability to function as leaders in inclusionary settings. Proceeding of capitalizing on leadership in rural special education: Making a difference for children and families. Alexandria, VA. Zaslow, M., Tout, K., Halle, T.,  Starr, R. 2011. Professional development for early childhood educators: Reviewing and revising conceptualizations. In S. B. Neuman  D. K. Dickenson Eds., Handbook of early literacy research Vol. 3, pp. 425434. New York, NY: Guilford. Preparing Teachers for Successful RtI Implementation 277

TEACHERS CAUSAL ATTRIBUTIONS FOR STUDENT PROBLEM BEHAVIOR: IMPLICATIONS FOR SCHOOL-BASED BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTIONS AND RESEARCH Andrew L. Wiley, Melody Tankersley and Andrea Simms ABSTRACT Although we have improved identication of and access to evidence-based interventions for addressing student problem behavior, teacher use of these practices remains low. In this chapter, we examine teachers causal attributions for student problem behavior and their implications for use of effective school-based behavioral interventions and supports. Attribution theory and research suggest that causal attributions strongly inuence how individuals e.g., teachers perceive and respond to the problem behavior of others e.g., students. Teacher perception regarding problem behavior and appropriate responses to it can be a signicant barrier to the Classroom Behavior, Contexts, and Interventions Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, Volume 25, 279300 Copyright r 2012 by Emerald Group Publishing Limited All rights of reproduction in any form reserved ISSN: 0735-004Xdoi:10.1108S0735-004X20120000025014 279

adoption and sustained implementation of empirically supported practices. In light of these factors, causal attribution theory and research can be used as a framework for better understanding and even changing teacher beliefs related to acceptance, implementation, and sustained use of effective behavior management practices. In this chapter, we make the case for cultivating an understanding of teachers causal attributions of student problem behavior and considering implications of causal attributions in future research. We explore how such research endeavors can potentially positively impact teacher implementation of effective school-based behavioral interventions and supports. Why do students exhibit problem behavior at school? What causes students to display behaviors such as noncompliance, disruption, aggression, or social withdrawal? It is unlikely that a more useful question could be asked in the effort to effectively address students problem behaviors at school. By carefully and systematically examining factors that are associated with problem behaviors, researchers and educators have developed evidencebased practices that schools can use to prevent and reduce such behavior, while simultaneously promoting positive behavior associated with academic and social success Epstein, Atkins, Cullinan, Kutash,  Weaver, 2008; Lane, Menzies, Bruhn,  Crnobori, 2011; Simonsen, Fairbanks, Briesch, Myers,  Sugai, 2008. Accumulated knowledge about the causes and correlates of student problem behavior has been critical to the emergence and evolution of the multi-tiered prevention model that currently guides much research and practice in school-based behavioral interventions and supports see Scott, 2012, this volume; Horner, Sugai, Todd,  Lewis-Palmer, 2005; Lewis  Sugai, 1999. Through a tiered prevention model, schools are able to implement practices for assessing and modifying variables associated with problem behavior within different systems e.g., school-wide, class-wide, individual and for varying levels of risk for negative outcomes i.e., low risk, moderate risk, high risk; Sugai  Horner, 2009. These and other advances underscore the usefulness of focusing on why and under what conditions students are more or less likely to engage in problem behavior. It is perhaps ironic, then, that the question of why students display problem behavior at school may also play a signicant role in the persistent research-to-practice gap in school-based behavioral interventions. In schools and classrooms around the country, consistent and sustained ANDREW L. WILEY ET AL. 280

implementation of research-validated behavior management practices remains relatively rare, while less effective and even counterproductive disciplinary approaches continue to be widely embraced Cook, Landrum, Tankersley,  Kauffman, 2003; Maag, 2001; Ringeisen, Henderson,  Hoagwood, 2003. To understand how thinking about the causes of problem behavior could contribute to a gap between research and practice, it is important to recognize that the question of why students violate social norms or break classroom rules can take on a qualitatively different meaning in the context of the day-to-day perceptions and experiences of the people who work with these students. Everyday thinking about the nature and origins of problem behavior evokes tricky questions and emotions that do not necessarily lend themselves to the objective and deliberative procedures of ecologicalbehavioral analysis and intervention e.g., ONeil, Horner, Albin, Storey,  Sprague, 1997. Tricky questions include those such as, do students choose to engage in problem behavior? Do students who exhibit problem behavior deserve to be helped? Are students who misbehave at school victims or perpetrators? Walker, Zeller, Close, Webber,  Gresham, 1999. Can changing behavior management practices make any real difference in student conduct at school? Such questions are tricky because, depending on how they are answered, they may impede implementation of evidence-based practices for preventing problem behavior and promoting social competence in schools. In this chapter, we examine teachers causal attributions for student problem behavior and their implications for effective school-based behavioral interventions and supports. Causal attributions are a basic and pervasive form of social cognition that involves attributing causes to the actions and experiences of others Miller, S., 1995, p. 1557. First, we provide a brief overview of attribution theory, including how causal attributions relate to how people perceive, feel about, and respond to the behavior and circumstances of other people. Next, we review research on parents and teachers causal attributions for problem behavior and the relationship between causal attributions, behavior management practices, and child outcomes. Finally, we explore the potential benets and pitfalls of directly targeting teachers causal attributions within the framework of multi-tiered behavioral intervention. We conclude with suggestions for future research to investigate the impact of causal attributions on the implementation of evidence-based behavioral interventions and student outcomes, as well as the effects of interventions designed to change how teachers think about students who exhibit problem behavior. Teacher Attributions for Problem Behavior 281

ATTRIBUTION THEORY Attribution theory is a long-standing model of motivation that provides a framework for understanding how people perceive and respond to the behavior and experiences of others and, as appropriate, oneself Heider, 1958; Schmidt  Weiner, 1988; Weiner, 1980, 1993, 2006. The central idea of attribution theory is that the way we respond to the actions or circumstances of other people is heavily inuenced by the causes we attribute to those actions or circumstances. The causes we attribute vary along several important dimensions, including locus causes that are internal vs. external to the other person, controllability causes that are more vs. less under personal control, and stability causes that are relatively xed vs. uctuating. The theory predicts that when we attribute internal, controllable, stable causes to the negative behavior or problems of another person, we tend to feel anger andor disgust and we are not motivated to help that person, andor we are motivated to punish them. Conversely, if we attribute causes that are external, unstable, and not controllable by the other person, we tend to feel sympathy and we are motivated to help if we can Weiner, 1980, 1993. For example, consider differences in how people respond to poverty. People who attribute poverty primarily to internal, controllable causes laziness, nancial irresponsibility, substance abuse are less likely to support programs to help the poor than people who attribute poverty mostly to causes that are not personally controllable lack of opportunity, low wages, illness, old age. The latter group is more likely to support programs that help the poor than the former group Weiner, Osborne,  Rudolph, 2011; Zucker  Weiner, 1993. Thus, causal attributions are, to a large extent, judgments about whether someone is personally responsible for her actions or circumstances and, consequently, whether she deserves help. Emotions angerdisgust vs. sympathypity mediate the relationship between causal attributions and responses help vs. not helppunish. Causal attributions have been found to be powerful predictors of how people respond to many different types of societal maladies, such as obesity Crandall, 1994; Crandall  Schiffauer, 1998, homelessness Pellegrini, Queirolo, Monarezz,  Valenzuela, 1997, and the suffering experienced by the victims of natural disasters Skitka, 1999. Succinctly said, whether the event is viewed as a sin result of internal, controllable variables or sickness result of external, noncontrollable variables determines responses to help or not help Weiner, 1993. ANDREW L. WILEY ET AL. 282

Wiley and Siperstein 2011 discussed the importance of causal attributions in their study of identication rates of behavioral disorders BDs across the U.S. building on research that showed people who identify themselves as conservative or liberal tend to hold divergent views on many societal issues, with conservatives emphasizing internal, controllable causes for certain social problems and liberals emphasizing external and uncontrollable causes. Their ndings showed that states identied as conservative distinguished by multiple sources of information including exit poll and census data had signicantly lower BD rates than states that identied as nonconservative liberal. Wiley and Siperstein 2011 interpreted these results to show that in relation to BDs, causal attributions might be at play in whether students are identied and receive special education services. Thus, higher levels of conservatism may be associated with decreased willingness to perceive problem behavior as indicative of a disorder or disability uncontrollable cause and the need for special education services treatment or help p. 202. Two important observations about causal attributions should be highlighted here. First, although causal attributions can emerge from explicit cognitive processes involving conscious although not necessarily errorless reasoning and evaluation of evidence, they frequently emerge from implicit cognitive processes that operate more or less automatically, with little deliberate effort or thought Bargh  Chartrand, 1999; Kahneman, 2012. Thus, researchers have suggested that causal attributions are determined in large part by internal working models schemas or by attributional styles Bugental  Johnston, 2000; for a discussion of origins of individual differences in attributional styles, see Dodge, 2006. Second, people are generally more likely to attribute internalcontrollable causes to maladies that are presumed to be principally behavioral in nature e.g., drug addiction, obesity, child abuse than those presumed to be physiologically based e.g., cancer, Alzheimers, blindness; Weiner, 1993. In fact, the tendency to over-attribute dispositional internalcontrollablestable versus situational external uncontrollableunstable causes for the behavior of others has been observed with sufcient consistency in psychological research to be referred to as the fundamental attribution error Ross, 1977; see also Gilbert  Malone, 1995. As we will see, both of these observations  that causal attributions are generally implicit, emotion-mediated judgments that occur almost automatically in our everyday interactions with our social environments, and that we are all more likely to attribute internalcontrollable causes to problems that appear to be primarily behavioral vs. physiologically-based  are relevant Teacher Attributions for Problem Behavior 283

to any consideration of the impact of teachers causal attributions on student behavior and the use of interventions. PARENTS AND TEACHERS CAUSAL ATTRIBUTIONS FOR PROBLEM BEHAVIOR Causal attributions have received a great deal of attention in research examining parent-child interactions. A robust nding of this research is that parents causal attributions are strongly related to how parents respond to their children, particularly in the context of addressing child misbehavior e.g., Bugental  Happaney, 2002; Grace, Kelley,  McCain, 1993; Johnston  Freeman, 1997; Mash  Johnston, 1990; Miller, S., 1995; Smith  OLeary, 1995. Parents who attribute their childrens problem behavior to internal, stable causes e.g., genetic predispositions, personality traits exhibit more negative affective and disciplinary responses to their children than do parents who attribute their childrens problem behavior to external, unstable causes e.g., eeting moodiness or temporary frustration e.g., Dix  Reinhold, 1991; Dix, Ruble,  Zambarano, 1989; Geller  Johnston, 1995; Montes, de Paul,  Milner, 2001; Snarr, Slep,  Grande, 2009. Compared to parents of children without signicant behavior problems, parents of children with externalizing behavior problems are more likely to attribute their childs negative behavior to internal, stable causes rather than their own parenting practices Baden  Howe, 1992; Bickett, Milich,  Brown, 1996. Moreover, evidence suggests that parents who do attribute the cause for behavioral problems to traits within the child are unwilling to alter their parenting practices Miller  Prinz, 2003. Research focusing on parents at risk for maltreating their children also demonstrates that parent attributions of controllability and intentionality i.e., deliberately misbehaving, especially in order to upset the parent are central factors inuencing parent anger and the use of harsh or abusive discipline Ateah  Durrant, 2005; Bauer  Twentyman, 1985; Bradley  Peters, 1991; Bugental, Blue,  Cruzcosa, 1989; Dadds, Mullins, McAllister,  Atkinson, 2003; Larrance  Twentyman, 1983; Leung  Slep, 2006; Slep  OLeary, 2007. In an experimental study Slep  OLeary, 1998, mothers who were led to believe that their childs misbehavior was controllable and intentional experienced higher levels of anger and were more over-reactive in their discipline than mothers who were led to believe their childs misbehavior was unintentional. Longitudinal ndings also suggest that mothers attributions of hostile intent to their childrens behavior foster harsh discipline ANDREW L. WILEY ET AL. 284

practices Nix, Pinderhughes, Dodge, Bates,  Pettit, 1999. Parent perceptions that their child deliberately chooses to misbehave elicits and intensies parent anger Pidgeon  Sanders, 2009, and these negative thoughts and emotions appear to contribute to and maintain the use of harsh and overly punitive behavior management strategies Smith  OLeary, 1995. The evidence is clear that parental causal attributions are related to how parents perceive and respond to the problem behavior of their children Seng  Prinz, 2008. What causes causal attributions? Parents causal attributions appear to be inuenced by a number of factors, including characteristics of the child e.g., age, types of behavior positive vs. negative behavior, and contextual cues and other sources of information about the behavior Bugental  Happaney, 2002; Miller, S., 1995; Milner, 2003. Some ndings suggest that negative parental attributions for child problem behavior may be a result, rather than a cause, of having a child who is difcult to manage Wilson, Gardner, Burton,  Leung, 2006. Because parents attributions ascribe meaning to their childrens behavior, it stands to reason that the attributions then guide parents responses to their children. For example, research shows that when parents of elementaryschool aged children with externalizing behavior problems view their childrens misbehavior as more intentional or dispositional, they blame the child for the problem behaviors. These negative or child-blaming cognitions are associated with harsh, less responsive parenting practices. In contrast, parents who assigned positive attributions to their childrens behavior e.g., acknowledging childs effort, linking behavior to an external factor beyond childs control used more positive parenting practices e.g., Dix  Lochman, 1990; Johnston  Leung, 2001; Leung  Slep, 2006; Slep  OLeary, 1998; Wilson et al., 2006. While the exact relationships between causal attributions, parenting practices, and child outcomes are not yet fully known, there is little question that, to understand the dynamics of negative parent-child interactions, it matters what parents think. Education researchers have also examined the role of causal attributions in how teachers perceive and respond to student problem behavior in the classroom. The majority of this research has focused on the locus dimension of teachers causal attributions for student problem behavior  specically, whether the students problems were caused mainly by within-child factors, family factors, or schoolclassroom factors. The results of most of these studies suggest that teachers largely attribute the causes of student problem behavior to factors internal to the student andor related to the students family, and very infrequently attribute them to classroom or instructional factors e.g., Brophy  Rohrkemper, 1981; Christenson, Ysseldyke, Teacher Attributions for Problem Behavior 285

Wang,  Algozzine, 1983; Guttman, 1982; Medway, 1979; Miller, A., 1995; Soodak  Podell, 1994. This phenomena is not unique to U.S. teachers; cross-cultural studies indicate that teachers from around the globe also attribute student problem behavior mainly to child and family factors Bibou-Nakou, Kiosseoglou,  Stogiannidou, 2000; Ho, 2004; Mavropoulou  Padeliadu, 2002; Poulou  Norwich, 2000. Certainly, the fact that teachers attribute student problem behavior to child and family factors is interesting; however, the implications for such attributions are far-reaching. A major concern that these ndings raise is that if teachers attribute student problem behaviors only to child and family factors, they will overlook or undervalue classroom-based solutions to improve student behavior. In fact, some researches supports the prediction that teachers who attribute problem behavior to child and family factors will be less likely to endorse classroom-based strategies and interventions, and are more likely to endorse non-classroom-based programs andor more punitive approaches to addressing the students problem behavior Medway, 1979; Soodak  Podell, 1994. However, it is important to note that some ndings also suggest that teachers may consider the contribution of teacher or classroom factors to student problem behavior, but usually under the circumstances that they are not personally involved in the situation. For example, Hughes, Barker, Kemenoff, and Hart 1993 presented teachers with vignettes the same vignettes used in Brophy  Rohrkemper, 1981 and found that teachers were willing to consider teacher and classroom factors when the ctional students problem was not depicted as their problem. It may be that teachers feel less defensive andor angry when they are not directly or personally affected by student problem behavior, and are thus better able to consider causal factors in the instructional environment. Interestingly, teacher attributions of controllability and intentionality i.e., the student is deliberately misbehaving, especially in order to upset the teacher have received signicantly less attention in research about teachers causal attributions than locus, with a few notable exceptions. This paucity of research on teachers attributes of controllability and intentionality is surprising given the strong associations observed between parent attributions of child control over misbehavior, parent anger, and harsh disciplinary practices e.g., Pidgeon  Sanders, 2009; Seng  Prinz, 2008. In one of the exceptions, Brophy and Rohrkemper 1981 found that teachers attributed high levels of control and intentionality to student problem behaviors that directly and negatively impacted the teacher referred to as teacher-owned problems. In these situations, teachers also advocated more punitive ANDREW L. WILEY ET AL. 286

responses, rejected more supportive or positive strategies, and had lower expectations for improved student behavior than teachers who attributed low levels of control and intentionality to student problem behaviors. Teachers attributed less control and intentionality to problems that mainly affected only the student, and in these cases teachers also endorsed more positive approaches, expressed more commitment to help, and held more optimistic expectations for improved outcomes than they did for problems that affected themselves and others. Yet, as useful as these ndings are, there is still much to learn about teachers attributions of controllable and intentional causes for student problem behavior and their relationship to the use or disuse of evidence-based behavioral interventions in schools. Before we move on to explore the potential implications of teachers causal attributions for research and practice in school-based behavioral interventions, several issues related to existing research on teachers attributions for student problem behavior merit further discussion. For instance, why is there such a heavy emphasis in this research on the locus dimension of causal attributions? Is focusing on the locus of teachers attributions likely to produce the most helpful ndings for improving practice? It is true that concentrating on classroom variables that are within the teachers control is an important aspect of effective behavior management. However, there is a ne line between this concept and the more uncertain idea that, to be effective, teachers must accept blame for their students problems. To the extent that, in this research, attributing student problem behavior to teacher or classroom factors is interpreted by researchers or teachers to mean accepting blame, the nding that teachers do not do so is unremarkable. Not only are we all biased to make chiey external attributions for our failures student problem behavior is likely to be viewed as teacher failure in this context and internal attributions for our successes Zuckerman, 1979, this bias is, in most cases, a highly adaptive mechanism that protects us from serious emotional harm and helps us overcome adversity Bandura, 1989; Schlenker, Pontari,  Christopher, 2001; Seligman, 1991; Snyder  Higgins, 1988. The adaptive bias is one reason why attribution researchers in psychology have cautioned that the locus dimension of causal attributions may have limited explanatory value, especially in isolation from other dimensions, such as controllability and stability Peterson, 2000. Additionally, we should not forget that even though it is best for teachers to concentrate primarily on classroom variables they can directly control, within-child and family factors actually do, in fact, contribute to the development and maintenance of student problem behavior Kauffman  Landrum, 2009; Walker, Ramsey,  Gresham, 2004. Finally, it is not Teacher Attributions for Problem Behavior 287

completely unreasonable that teachers do not attribute the problem behavior of one or a few of their students to teacher or classroom factors if most of the other students in that classroom are behaving well. Another concern related to this research is that if we focus too narrowly on the locus dimension of teachers causal attributions, or on teacher attributions in general, we might overlook or underestimate other situational factors that impact teacher implementation of effective behavioral interventions and supports. Other critical factors that inuence teacher use or disuse of research-validated behavior management practices include the quality of preservice and in-service training, working conditions as they relate to initiating and sustaining such practices, and the technical adequacy of the interventions themselves Durlak  Dupre, 2008; Fixsen, Naoom, Blase, Friedman,  Wallace, 2005; Gersten, Vaughn, Deshler,  Schiller, 1997; Oliver  Reschly, 2010; Pogrow, 1996; Ringeisen et al., 2003. In other words, there is a danger that implementation researchers and practitioners could attribute internal and presumably controllable causes teacher beliefs for teacher behavior to the exclusion of other signicant situational factors. Relatedly is the important question of whether and under what conditions it is possible, or even necessary, to change teachers causal attributions in order to change teachers behavior management practices. In their review of what research says about technical assistance to teachers, Gersten and Dimino 2001 pointed out that there is little empirical support for the claim that teachers beliefs about the potential effectiveness of a practice must be changed in order to change their practices, and that the causal chain is usually the other way around  the adoption of effective practices leads to changes in teacher beliefs about the usefulness of that practice. However, Gersten and Dimino did point out that research is clear that teachers understandings of why they need to alter and enhance their practices can be a powerful stimulant p. 121, emphasis added. We believe these are two separate issues  whether teachers believe a practice will work and whether teachers understand why they need to change a practice  and that understanding causal attributions of students behavior is most closely aligned with teachers understanding of why they need to change a practice. Given how these two issues are closely related, it is perhaps not surprising that very little research has been conducted to directly examine or attempt to manipulate the relationship between teacher attributions of student problem behavior and teacher use of behavior management practices Erbas, Turan, Asian,  Dunlap, 2010. Nonetheless, we believe that there are good reasons to further investigate the relationship between teachers causal attributions ANDREW L. WILEY ET AL. 288

for student problem behavior, teachers responses to student problem behavior, and student outcomes. We discuss these reasons next. PARENTING INTERVENTIONS TARGETING CAUSAL ATTRIBUTIONS Research on parenting practices and interventions suggests several possible directions for future research on teacher attributions and school-based behavioral interventions. Behavioral parent training BPT is a scientically validated intervention for children and adolescents with problem behavior Eyberg, Nelson,  Boggs, 2008. BPT is designed to teach and strengthen parenting skills related to promoting positive child behavior, and it can be used to address the needs of families at low, moderate, and high risk for negative outcomes associated with problem behavior Sanders, 2008. Although there are many different empirically supported BPT programs, they are all primarily behaviorally focused and based on principles of social learning theory Maughan, Christiansen, Jenson, Olympia,  Clark, 2005. Some BPT programs also include components that directly target cognitive aspects of parenting, including parental attributions for child behavior e.g., Bugental et al., 2002; Sanders, Markie-Dadds, Tully,  Bor, 2000; Sanders  McFarland, 2000; Sanders et al., 2004. For example, Triple P, Positive Parenting Program, includes both a standard program and an enhanced program Sanders et al., 2004. Both programs include training in 17 effective behavior management strategies 10 to promote positive competence and development, 7 to address misbehavior. The enhanced program teaches additional skills aiming to challenge parental beliefs about child behavior that may be contributing to negative disciplinary practices. Specically, the attribution retraining component of enhanced Triple P teaches parents about the harmful effects of harsh discipline; the causes of negative parental feelings and behavior; how to prevent anger escalation and negative parenting practices; how to recognize and dispute unhelpful thoughts that lead to counterproductive responses; and how to use coping strategies in difcult parenting situations Sanders  Pidgeon, 2005. Although the purpose of targeting maladaptive parental attributions within BPT programs is to increase the effectiveness of BPT for improving child behavior and meeting treatment goals, the evidence for the incremental benet of cognitive-behavioral parent training over behavioral training alone is mixed. Bugental et al. 2002 found that training parents to generate constructive i.e., non-blame-oriented attributions for caregiving problems Teacher Attributions for Problem Behavior 289

resulted in signicant reductions in harsh discipline and abuse compared to both controls no treatment and standard BPT. Cognitive components may be useful in special cases or when standard BPT does not lead to changes in either parent or child behavior Scott  Dadds, 2009. For instance, some research indicates that BPT with attribution retraining can be effective for parents at higher risk for signicant parenting problems andor for parents who do not respond to more standard versions of BPT e.g., Wiggins, Sofronoff,  Sanders, 2009. Indeed, the importance of the parent skills developing and using the skills is consistently found to be the critical intervention in BPTs Kaminski, Valle, Filene,  Boyle, 2008; Sanders et al., 2000; Sanders  McFarland, 2000. However, when skills are not enough  when parents have a history of difculty, or when change is not observed through skill training alone  adding attribution retraining can improve outcomes e.g., Sanders et al., 2004. What, then, are the implications of causal attributions for research and practice in either BPT or school-based behavioral interventions and supports? Although directly targeting causal attributions does not necessarily increase the effectiveness of behavioral interventions per se, changing causal attributions might play a critical role in increasing the acceptability of and engagement in research-validated behavioral interventions, especially for some teachers who are resistant to try the intervention Mah  Johnston, 2008. To illustrate how this might be, Mah and Johnston used the analogy of diet and exercise, stating that although regular exercise and healthy eating are known predictors of weight loss, many individuals struggle to initiate andor maintain these lifestyle changes p. 224. Similarly, while certain behavior management practices are known to be generally effective, many parents and teachers do not use them or sustain them over time. The issue of treatment acceptability is critical  a practice cannot be said to be effective if it is never or rarely used Cook et al., 2003. In regard to behavioral interventions for problem behavior, causal attributions can interfere with treatment acceptability, initiation, and engagement in multiple ways. For instance, an emphasis on internal, stable causal attributions, or attributions to causes beyond the teachers control, may be associated with feelings of futility and the perception that environmental changes are pointless and that behavioral improvements cannot be achieved For example, teachers who attribute student problem behavior to his home environment or parents actions may be unmotivated to implement a classroom-based behavior intervention program. Moreover, attributions of controllable causes may be associated with feelings of anger and the rejection of research-validated behavioral interventions based on the belief that the ANDREW L. WILEY ET AL. 290

student is being bad on purpose and does not deserve help andor deserves only punishment Miller  Prinz, 2003; Morrissey-Kane  Prinz, 2000. Such beliefs could also inuence a teacher to not waste her time with classroom-based behavioral interventions. Indeed, a recurrent nding of school-based behavioral intervention research is that the perceptions of teachers and other school personnel regarding problem behavior and appropriate responses to it can be a signicant barrier to the adoption and sustained implementation of empirically supported practices. Qualitative research by Lohrman, Forman, Martin, and Palmieri 2008 suggests that staff resistance to universal, school-wide behavioral interventions and supports is at times related to the preference for punitive responses and the belief that the causes of problem behavior are beyond the control of the school. Similarly, Kincaid, Childs, Blase, and Wallace 2007 found that a lack of staff buy-in i.e., the perception that school-wide interventions were necessary, appropriate, and at least potentially benecial was a primary impediment to implementation. Inaccurate or unhelpful beliefs about behavior and discipline also interfere with implementation of more intensive, individualized supports for students exhibiting more severe or chronic problem behavior. Some school staff interviewed by Bambara, Nonnemacher, and Kern 2009 insisted that students with more severe problem behavior did not deserve special treatment and providing students with individualized supports was often viewed as making excuses for the child and spoiling, being soft, or giving into the child by providing the student what he or she wants p. 167. Although none of these studies explicitly mentioned teachers causal attributions for student problem behavior, it seems clear to us from these ndings and others that attribution theory and research could provide a useful framework for understanding and changing teacher beliefs related to accepting, implementing, and sustaining effective behavior management practices. TEACHERS CAUSAL ATTRIBUTIONS AND SCHOOL-BASED BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTIONS AND SUPPORTS: A FEW IDEAS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH The relationship between teachers causal attributions, implementation of evidence-based behavioral interventions, and child outcomes, especially within a tiered model of progressively more intensive supports seems worthy Teacher Attributions for Problem Behavior 291

of exploring further. Along these lines, Myers, Simonsen, and Sugai 2011 applied such a tiered model of supports to teacher in-service training in order to increase teacher use of contingent praise, a research-validated behavior management technique. Standard in-service methods were used school-wide to train all teachers to use contingent praise. Teachers who did not increase their use of contingent praise received more intensive training in the form of additional coaching, performance feedback, and, as necessary, individualized support. In the discussion that follows, we will likewise use a tiered model to explore how targeting teachers causal attributions could enhance implementation of behavioral interventions. We stress here again that improving implementation of evidence-based behavioral interventions requires far more than changing teachers causal attributions for student problem behavior; yet at the same time, we think that directly addressing how teachers think and feel about student problem behavior and how to respond to it may also be a necessary aspect of successful reform of school discipline. At the universal level, all teachers could receive basic training in the causes of negative teacher feelings and negative teacher behavior in the context of classroom management, as well as in the harmful effects of negative disciplinary practices. Teachers should learn about child development in order to understand the social, emotional, and behavioral characteristics that are typical of different ages. Critically, all teachers also need to learn about individual differences in behavioral functioning, including differences related to atypical development i.e., BDs and other disabilities. To increase implementation of effective school-based behavioral interventions, helping teachers recognize internal, uncontrollable causes of problem behavior like disability may be as important as helping teachers recognize teacher or classroom factors. If it becomes more widely understood that some students have a diminished ability to control their behavior, just like some students have a diminished ability to read, walk, or see, teachers and other school personnel may feel less anger and more compassion toward these students and may thus be more willing to embrace intervention and treatment as appropriate responses Wiley  Siperstein, 2011. A concern that may continue to arise when addressing problem behavior of students with a disability or at risk of school failure is whether acknowledging disability as an explanation for problem behavior is equivalent to offering an excuse and being soft or abandoning any expectation that students will learn to take responsibility for their behavior. Researchers and practitioners must be prepared to deal with this concern, understanding that it is not true that acknowledging BDs has to mean excusing problem behavior ANDREW L. WILEY ET AL. 292

or dropping any expectation that the student will learn more appropriate behavior, just as it is not true that acknowledging learning disabilities has to mean abandoning all attempts to teach academic skills and content. What it does mean is recognizing that punishment-only approaches uniformly applied are neither adequate nor defensible, and recognizing that some students require specialized behavioral interventions that address their unique needs. Coming full circle, all teachers should a attain at least a basic understanding of techniques that emphasize identifying and modifying factors in the immediate instructional environment that could prevent problem behavior from occurring and b teach and encourage appropriate behavior, including self-control Erbas et al., 2010. Causal attributions could also be targeted within selected, more intensive interventions designed to assist teachers and schools that are at-risk for failure to implement evidence-based behavioral interventions. Teachers who struggle to adopt and sustain effective behavior management practices despite good universal training could receive, among other things, attribution retraining similar to what is provided to high-risk or nonresponsive parents in enhanced Triple P, i.e., more intensive training in identifying and challenging unhelpful thoughts, preventing anger escalation and the use of negative behavior management practices, and coping with situations that arouse angry feelings Sanders  Pidgeon, 2005. Shared causal attributions within an organizational culture present another possible target for selected interventions. Schools that struggle with adopting and sustaining effective behavior management practices could receive organizational interventions aimed at building an organizational culture and climate that supports, rather than impedes, implementation of evidence-based interventions for student problem behavior Glisson, 2002; Hemmelgarn, Glisson,  James, 2006. Of course, appropriately designed research must be conducted to determine whether directly targeting causal attributions within universal or selected interventions produces any signicant benets in terms of positive changes in teacher or student behavior. First, additional basic research describing how teachers causal attributions for student problem behavior inuence teachers emotions and decision-making is needed. In particular, future research should focus on teachers attributions of controllability and intentionality and whether such attributions relate to teacher anger toward students and the rejection of research-validated interventions and strategies. Moreover, school-based intervention researchers could adapt attribution retraining methods and materials from evidence-based BPT programs and evaluate their effects in educational settings. Research on teachers causal attributions could contribute substantially to understanding and closing Teacher Attributions for Problem Behavior 293

the research-to-practice gap in school-based behavioral interventions and supports. CONCLUSION Great strides have been made in knowing how to effectively address student problem behavior in schools. A major advance in the science of schoolbased behavioral intervention has been the adoption of a public health perspective that emphasizes neutralizing or eliminating risk factors and enhancing protective factors to prevent problem behavior and reduce its incidence and prevalence Sugai  Horner, 2006, pp. 245246. Unfortunately, less progress has been made in the actual implementation of effective behavioral interventions in schools. This lack of progress may be because of a disconnect between the public health perspective or sickness metaphor that drives research and the moral perspective or sin metaphor that drives everyday thinking about problem behavior Weiner, 1993. Causal attributions are implicit, everyday moral judgments about the degree to which a person is or is not responsible for his or her actions. These judgments of responsibility elicit moral emotions angerdisgust or sympathypity that, in turn, prompt a response help or punish. Attribution theory and research suggest that in this way, causal attributions strongly inuence how caregivers perceive and respond to problem behavior. Thus, to close the implementation gap in school-based behavioral interventions and supports, it may not be enough to promote a public health perspective, as useful as such a perspective may be. It may also be necessary to understand and address teachers causal attributions and the moral perspectives on which they are based. REFERENCES Ateah, C. A.,  Durrant, J. E. 2005. Maternal use of physical punishment in response to child misbehavior: Implications for child abuse prevention. Child Abuse  Neglect, 29, 169185. Baden, A. D.,  Howe, G. W. 1992. Mothers attributions and expectancies regarding their conduct-disordered children. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 20, 467485. Bambara, L. M., Nonnemacher, S.,  Kern, L. 2009. Sustaining school-based individualized positive behavior support: Perceived barriers and enablers. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 11, 161176. Bandura, A. 1989. Human agency in social cognitive theory. American Psychologist, 44, 11751184. ANDREW L. WILEY ET AL. 294

Bargh, J. A.,  Chartrand, T. L. 1999. The unbearable automaticity of being. American Psychologist, 54, 462479. Bauer, W. D.,  Twentyman, C. T. 1985. Abusing, neglectful, and comparison mothers responses to child-related and non-child-related stressors. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 53, 335343. Bibou-Nakou, I., Kiosseoglou, G.,  Stogiannidou, A. 2000. Elementary teachers perceptions regarding school behavior problems: Implications for school psychological services. Psychology in the Schools, 37, 123134. Bickett, L. R., Milich, R.,  Brown, R. T. 1996. Attributional styles of aggressive boys and their mothers. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 24, 457472. Bradley, E. J.,  Peters, R. D. 1991. Physically abusive and nonabusive mothers perceptions of parenting and child behavior. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 61, 455460. Brophy, J.,  Rohrkemper, M. 1981. The inuence of problem ownership on teachers perceptions of and strategies for coping with problem students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 73, 295311. Bugental, D. B., Blue, J. B.,  Cruzcosa, M. 1989. Perceived control over caregiving outcomes: Implications for child abuse. Developmental Psychology, 25, 532539. Bugental, D. B., Ellerson, P. C., Lin, E. K., Rainey, B., Kokotovic, A.,  OHara, N. 2002. A cognitive approach to child abuse prevention. Journal of Family Psychology, 16, 243258. Bugental, D. B.,  Happaney, K. 2002. Parental attributions. In 2nd ed., pp. 509535 M. H. Bornstein Ed., Handbook of parenting. Volume 3: Status and social conditions of parenting pp. 509535. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Bugental, D. B.,  Johnston, C. 2000. Parental and child cognitions in the context of the family. Annual Review of Psychology, 51, 315344. Christenson, S., Ysseldyke, J., Wang, J.,  Algozzine, B. 1983. Teachers attributions for problems that result in referral for psychoeducational evaluation. Journal of Educational Research, 76, 174180. Cook, B. G., Landrum, T. J., Tankersley, M.,  Kauffman, J. M. 2003. Bringing research to bear on practice: Effecting evidence-based instruction for students with emotional or behavioral disorders. Education and Treatment of Children, 26, 345361. Crandall, C. S. 1994. Prejudice against fat people: Ideology and self-interest. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 882894. Crandall, C. S.,  Schiffauer, K. L. 1998. Anti-fat prejudice: Beliefs, values, and American culture. Obesity Research, 6, 458460. Dadds, M. R., Mullins, M. J., McAllister, R. A.,  Atkinson, E. 2003. Attributions, affect, and behavior in abuse-risk mothers: A laboratory study. Child Abuse  Neglect, 27, 2145. Dix, T.,  Lochman, J. E. 1990. Social cognition and negative reactions in children: A comparison of mothers of aggressive and nonaggressive boys. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 9, 418438. Dix, T.,  Reinhold, D. P. 1991. Chronic and temporary inuences on mothers attributions for childrens disobedience. Merrill Palmer Quarterly, 37, 251271. Dix, T., Ruble, D. N.,  Zambarano, R. J. 1989. Mothers implicit theories of discipline: Child effects, parent effects, and the attribution process. Child Development, 60, 13731391. Teacher Attributions for Problem Behavior 295

Dodge, K. A. 2006. Translational science in action: Hostile attributional style and the development of aggressive behavior problems. Development and Psychopathology, 18, 791814. Durlak, J. A.,  Dupre, E. P. 2008. Implementation matters: A review of research on the inuence of implementation on program outcomes and factors affecting implementation. American Journal of Community Psychology, 41, 327350. Epstein, M., Atkins, M., Cullinan, D., Kutash, K.,  Weaver, R. 2008. Reducing behavior problems in the elementary school classroom: A practice guide. NCEE No. 2008-012. National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, Washington, DC. Erbas, D., Turan, Y., Asian, Y. C.,  Dunlap, C. 2010. Attributions for problem behavior as described by Turkish teachers of special education. Remedial and Special Education, 31, 116125. Eyberg, S. M., Nelson, M. M.,  Boggs, S. R. 2008. Evidence-based psychosocial treatments for children and adolescents with disruptive behavior. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 37, 215237. Fixsen, D. L., Naoom, S. F., Blase, K. A., Friedman, R. M.,  Wallace, F. 2005. Implementation research: A synthesis of the literature. FMHI Publication No. 231. University of South Florida, Louis de la Parte Florida Mental Health Institute, The National Implementation Research Network, Tampa, FL. Geller, J.,  Johnston, C. 1995. Predictors of mothers responses to child noncompliance. Attributions and attitudes. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 24, 272278. Gersten, R.,  Dimino, J. 2001. The realities of translating research into classroom practice. Learning Disabilities Research  Practice, 16, 120130. Gersten, R., Vaughn, S., Deshler, D.,  Schiller, E. 1997. What we know about using research ndings: Implications for improving special education practice. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 30, 466476. Gilbert, D. T.,  Malone, P. S. 1995. The correspondence bias. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 2138. Glisson, C. 2002. The organizational context of childrens mental health services. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 5, 233253. Grace, N. C., Kelley, M. L.,  McCain, A. P. 1993. Attribution processes in motheradolescent conict. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 21, 199211. Guttman, J. 1982. Pupils, teachers, and parents causal attributions for problem behavior. Journal of Educational Research, 76, 1421. Heider, F. 1958. The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York, NY: Wiley. Hemmelgarn, A. L., Glisson, C.,  James, L. R. 2006. Organizational culture and climate: Implications for services and interventions research. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 13, 7389. Ho, I. T. 2004. A comparison of Australian and Chinese teachers attributions for student problem behavior. Educational Psychology, 24, 375391. Horner, R. H., Sugai, G., Todd, A. W.,  Lewis-Palmer, T. 2005. School-wide positive behavioral support: An alternative to discipline in schools. In L. M. Bambara  L. Kern Eds., Individualized supports for students with problem behaviors pp. 359390. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Hughes, J. N., Barker, D., Kemenoff, S.,  Hart, M. 1993. Problem ownership, causal attributions, and self-efcacy as predictors of teachers referral decisions. Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation, 4, 369384. ANDREW L. WILEY ET AL. 296

Johnston, C.,  Freeman, W. 1997. Attributions for child behavior in parents of children without behavior disorders and children with attention-decit-hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 636645. Johnston, C.,  Leung, D. W. 2001. Effects of medication, behavioral, and combined treatments on parents and childrens attributions for the behavior of children with attention decithyperactivity disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 6776. Kahneman, D. 2012. Thinking, fast and slow. New York, NY: Farrar, Strauss. Kaminski, J. W., Valle, L. A., Filene, J. H.,  Boyle, C. L. 2008. A meta-analytic review of components associated with parent training program effectiveness. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 36, 567589. Kauffman, J. M.,  Landrum, T. J. 2009. Characteristics of emotional and behavioral disorders of children and youth 9th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill Prentice. Kincaid, D., Childs, K., Blase, K. A.,  Wallace, F. 2007. Identifying barriers and facilitators in implementing schoolwide positive behavior support. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 9, 174184. Lane, K. L., Menzies, H. M., Bruhn, A. L.,  Crnobori, M. 2011. Managing challenging behaviors in schools: Research-based strategies that work. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Larrance, D. T.,  Twentyman, C. T. 1983. Maternal attributions and child abuse. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 92, 449457. Leung, D. W.,  Slep, A. M. 2006. Predicting inept discipline: The role of parental depressive symptoms, anger, and attributions. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74, 524534. Lewis, T. J.,  Sugai, G. 1999. Effective behavior support: A systems approach to proactive schoolwide management. Focus on Exceptional Children, 316, 124. Lohrman, S., Forman, S., Martin, S.,  Palmieri, M. 2008. Understanding school personnels resistance to adopting schoolwide positive behavior support at a universal level of intervention. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 10, 256269. Maag, J. W. 2001. Rewarded by punishment: Reections on the disuse of positive reinforcement in schools. Exceptional Children, 67, 173186. Mah, W. T.,  Johnston, C. 2008. Parental social cognitions: Considerations in the acceptability of and engagement in behavioral parent training. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 11, 218236. Mash, E. J.,  Johnston, C. 1990. Determinants of parenting stress: Illustrations from families of hyperactive children and families of physically abused children. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 19, 313328. Maughan, D. R., Christiansen, E., Jenson, W. R., Olympia, D.,  Clark, E. 2005. Behavioral parent training as a treatment for externalizing behaviors and disruptive behavior disorders: A meta-analysis. School Psychology Review, 34, 267286. Mavropoulou, S.,  Padeliadu, S. 2002. Teachers causal attributions for behavior problems in relation to perceptions of control. Educational Psychology, 22, 191202. Medway, F. 1979. Causal attributions for school-related problems: Teacher perceptions and teacher feedback. Journal of Educational Psychology, 71, 809818. Miller, A. 1995. Teachers attributions of causality, control, and responsibility in respect of difcult pupil behaviour and its successful management. Educational Psychology, 15, 457471. Teacher Attributions for Problem Behavior 297

Miller, G. E.,  Prinz, R. J. 2003. Engagement of families in treatment for childhood conduct problems. Behavior Therapy, 34, 517534. Miller, S. A. 1995. Parents attributions for their childrens behavior. Child Development, 66, 15571584. Milner, J. S. 2003. Social information processing in high-risk and physically abusive parents. Child Abuse  Neglect, 27, 720. Montes, M. P., de Paul, J.,  Milner, J. S. 2001. Evaluations, attributions, affect, and disciplinary choices in mothers at high and low risk for child physical abuse. Child Abuse  Neglect, 25, 10151036. Morrissey-Kane, E.,  Prinz, R. J. 2000. Engagement in child and adolescent treatment: The role of parental cognitions and attributions. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 2, 183198. Myers, D. M., Simonsen, B.,  Sugai, G. 2011. Increasing teachers use of praise with a response-to-intervention approach. Education and Treatment of Children, 34, 3559. Nix, R. L., Pinderhughes, E. E., Dodge, K. A., Bates, J. E.,  Pettit, G. S. 1999. Do parents hostile attribution tendencies function as self-fullling prophecies? An empirical examination of a theoretical sequence of aggressive transactions. Child Development, 70, 896909. Oliver, R. M.,  Reschly, D. J. 2010. Special education teacher preparation in behavior management: Implications for students with emotional and behavioral disorders. Behavioral Disorders, 35, 188199. ONeil, R., Horner, R., Albin, R., Storey, K.,  Sprague, J. 1997. Functional analysis of problem behavior: A practical assessment guide. Sycamore, IL: Sycamore. Pellegrini, R. J., Queirolo, S. S., Monarezz, V. E.,  Valenzuela, D. M. 1997. Political identication and perceptions of homelessness. Psychological Reports, 80, 11391148. Peterson, C. 2000. The future of optimism. American Psychologist, 55, 4455. Pidgeon, A. M.,  Sanders, M. R. 2009. Attributions, parental anger and risk of maltreatment. International Journal of Child Health and Human Development, 2, 5769. Pogrow, S. 1996. Reforming the wannabe reformers: Why education reforms almost always end up making things worse. Phi Delta Kappan, 77, 656663. Poulou, M.,  Norwich, B. 2000. Teachers casual attributions, cognitive, emotional and behavioral responses to students with emotional and behavior difculties. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 70, 559581. Ringeisen, H., Henderson, K.,  Hoagwood, K. 2003. Context matters: Schools and the research to practice gap in childrens mental health. School Psychology Review, 32, 153168. Ross, L. 1977. The intuitive psychologist and his shortcomings: Distortions in the attribution process. In L. Berkowitz Ed., Advances in experimental social psychology pp. 173220. New York, NY: Academic Press. Sanders, M. R. 2008. Triple-P Positive Parenting Program as a public health approach to strengthening parenting. Journal of Family Psychology, 22, 506517. Sanders, M. R., Markie-Dadds, C., Tully, L. A.,  Bor, W. 2000. The triple P  Positive Parenting Program: A comparison of enhanced, standard, and self-directed behavioral family intervention for parents of children with early onset conduct problems. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 624640. Sanders, M. R.,  McFarland, M. 2000. Treatment of depressed mothers with disruptive children: A controlled evaluation of cognitive behavioral family intervention. Behavior Therapy, 31, 89112. ANDREW L. WILEY ET AL. 298

Sanders, M. R.,  Pidgeon, A. M. 2005. Practitioners manual for Pathways Triple P. Brisbane, Queensland, Australia: Triple P International. Sanders, M. R., Pidgeon, A. M., Gravestock, F., Connors, M. D., Brown, S.,  Young, R. W. 2004. Do parental attributional retraining and anger management enhance the effects of the Triple P  Positive Parenting Program with parents at risk of child maltreatment? Behavior Therapy, 35, 513535. Schlenker, B. R., Pontari, B. A.,  Christopher, A. N. 2001. Excuses and character: Personal and social implications of excuses. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 5, 1532. Schmidt, G.,  Weiner, B. 1988. An attribution-affect-action theory of behavior: Replications of judgments of help giving. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 14, 610621. Scott, T. M. 2012. Universal systems for preventing behavior problems. In B. G. Cook, M. Tankersley,  T. J. Landrum Eds., Classroom behavior, contexts, and interventions Advances in learning and behavioral disabilities, Volume 25. Bingley, UK: Emerald Publishing Group. Scott, S.,  Dadds, M. R. 2009. Practitioner review: When parent training doesnt work: Theory-driven clinical strategies. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 50, 14411450. Seligman, M. E. P. 1991. Learned optimism. New York, NY: Knopf. Seng, A. C.,  Prinz, R. J. 2008. Parents who abuse: What are they thinking? Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 11, 163175. Simonsen, B., Fairbanks, S., Briesch, A., Myers, D.,  Sugai, G. 2008. Evidence-based practices in classroom management: Considerations for research to practice. Education and Treatment of Children, 31, 351380. Skitka, L. J. 1999. Ideological and attributional boundaries on public compassion: Reactions to individuals and communities affected by natural disaster. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 793808. Slep, A. M. S.,  OLeary, S. G. 1998. The effects of maternal attributions on parenting: An experimental analysis. Journal of Family Psychology, 12, 234243. Slep, A.,  OLeary, S. 2007. Multivariate models of mothers and fathers aggression toward their children. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 75, 739751. Smith, A. M.,  OLeary, S. G. 1995. Attributions and arousal as predictors of maternal discipline. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 19, 459471. Snarr, J. D., Slep, A. M. S.,  Grande, V. P. 2009. Validation of a new self-report measure of parental attributions. Psychological Assessment, 21, 390401. Snyder, C. R.,  Higgins, R. L. 1988. Excuses: Their effective role in the negotiation of reality. Psychological Bulletin, 104, 2335. Soodak, L. C.,  Podell, D. M. 1994. Teachers thinking about difcult-to-teach students. Journal of Educational Research, 88, 4451. Sugai, G.,  Horner, R. H. 2006. A promising approach for expanding and sustaining schoolwide positive behavior support. School Psychology Review, 35, 245259. Sugai, G.,  Horner, R. H. 2009. Responsiveness-to-intervention and school-wide positive behavior supports: Integration of multi-tiered system approaches. Exceptionality, 17, 223237. Walker, H. M., Ramsey, E.,  Gresham, F. M. 2004. Antisocial behavior in school: Strategies and best practices 2nd ed. Pacic Grove, CA: Brooks-Cole. Teacher Attributions for Problem Behavior 299

Walker, H. M., Zeller, R. W., Close, D. W., Webber, J.,  Gresham, F. 1999. The present unwrapped: Change and challenge in the eld of behavioral disorders. Behavioral Disorders, 24, 293304. Weiner, B. 1980. A cognitive attribution-emotion-action model of motivated behavior: An analysis of judgments of help-giving. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 186200. Weiner, B. 1993. On sin versus sickness: A theory of perceived responsibility and social motivation. American Psychologist, 48, 957965. Weiner, B. 2006. Social motivation, justice, and the moral emotions. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Weiner, B., Osborne, D.,  Rudolph, U. 2011. An attributional analysis of reactions to poverty: The political ideology of the giver and the perceived morality of the receiver. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 15, 199213. Wiggins, T., Sofronoff, K.,  Sanders, M. 2009. Pathways Triple P  Positive Parenting Program: Effects on parent-child relationships and child behavior problems. Family Process, 48, 517530. Wiley, A.,  Siperstein, G. 2011. Seeing red, feeling blue: The impact of state political leaning on state identication rates for emotional disturbance. Behavioral Disorders, 36, 195207. Wilson, C., Gardner, F., Burton, J.,  Leung, S. 2006. Maternal attributions and young childrens conduct problems: A longitudinal study. Infant and Child Development, 15, 109121. Zucker, G. S.,  Weiner, B. 1993. Conservatism and perceptions of poverty: An attributional analysis. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 23, 925943. Zuckerman, M. 1979. Attribution of success and failure revisited, or: The motivation bias is alive and well in attribution theory. Journal of Personality, 47, 245287. ANDREW L. WILEY ET AL. 300

TREATMENT INTEGRITY IN INTERVENTION RESEARCH: MODELS, MEASURES, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS Carl J. Liaupsin, Jolenea B. Ferro and John Umbreit ABSTRACT Treatment integrity TI; also known as delity of implementation, treatment delity, and procedural reliability refers to the degree to which an intervention is implemented as intended. TI data provides evidence of the internal validity of a study; without TI data, one cannot attribute observed effects to an intervention or distinguish whether interventions that fail do so because of problems with the intervention, its delivery, or both. Unfortunately, the eld of intervention research has seen limited progress in the assessment and reporting of TI over time. This chapter describes the development of models of TI across elds, options for measuring TI, and important issues yet to be resolved. Classroom Behavior, Contexts, and Interventions Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, Volume 25, 301322 Copyright r 2012 by Emerald Group Publishing Limited All rights of reproduction in any form reserved ISSN: 0735-004Xdoi:10.1108S0735-004X20120000025015 301

Treatment integrity TI is one of several terms used to refer to the degree to which an intervention is implemented as intended cf., Gresham, 1989. Among the other terms used, the most common are delity of implementation e.g., Horner et al., 2005, treatment delity e.g., Conroy, Dunlap, Clarke,  Alter, 2005, and procedural reliability e.g., Billingsley, White,  Munson, 1980. From a research perspective, the lack of TI data presents a major threat to internal validity. Without TI data, one cannot attribute observed effects to an intervention. From a practical perspective, the lack of TI data makes it impossible to attribute behavioral improvements to an intervention or to distinguish whether interventions that fail do so because of problems with the intervention, its delivery, or both. The concept of TI was rst introduced more than 30 years ago by Billingsley et al. 1980. At that time, behavioral researchers were routinely expected to report reliability i.e., interobserver agreement IOA data on the dependent variable  students responses to intervention. In their seminal piece, Billingsley et al. argued that it was equally important to report reliability data on the extent to which specied procedures were implemented, a process they termed procedural reliability. The authors also presented an example of the process in instructional research, along with recommendations that such data should be tailored to the particular study, its purpose, the context, and the nature of the procedures under study. Soon after, Peterson, Homer, and Wonderlich 1982 specically tied TI to measurement of the independent variable and presented the rst systematic review of the literature indicating that few researchers reported TI data. Their examination of all issues of the Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis published from 1968 to 1980 revealed that an average of only 16 of the articles included data on TI. A surprising nding was that approximately 20 of the articles also failed to present operational denitions of the independent variable. In the ensuing years, a number of similar reviews have appeared in the literature cf., Sanetti, Dobey,  Gritter, 2012. These have focused on TI in a variety of elds ranging from applied behavior analysis, schoolbased intervention, and positive behavioral intervention, to learning disabilities, autism and alternative communication, anger management, psychotherapy, and prevention science Dane  Schneider, 1998; Gansle, 2005; Gresham, Gansle, Noell,  Cohen, 1993; Gresham, MacMillan, BeebeFrankenberger,  Bocian, 2000; McIntyre, Gresham, DiGennaro,  Reed, 2007; Perepletchikova, Treat,  Kazdin, 2007; Sanetti et al., 2012; Snell, Chen,  Hoover, 2006; Wheeler, Baggett, Fox,  Blevins, 2006. Among CARL J. LIAUPSIN ET AL. 302

these reviews, the most positive nding Sanetti et al., 2012 was that nearly half of published reports provided TI data; the most negative nding Perepletchikova et al., 2007 identied TI data in only 3.5 of published reports. Most reviews identied TI in less than 30 of the reports. When multiyear comparisons were possible, they revealed no trend or only a slightly increasing trend toward reporting TI. Despite slow, moderate progress in assessing and reporting TI in intervention research, the eld has progressed in important ways through the development of different models of TI, different options for measuring TI, and the identication of important issues the eld needs to resolve. CONCEPTUALIZATIONS OF TI In a broad sense, the denition of TI remains as it was when Billingsley et al. 1980 dened procedural reliability as the degree to which the intervention has been implemented as intended. However, in the past 15 years, researchers, mostly outside of the eld of special education, have been reconsidering the concept of TI and its application across research and practice. Reconceptualization of TI as a multidimensional construct Schulte, Easton,  Parker, 2009 appears to have been spurred by a number of factors, including reaction to the documented lack of TI data in published research, reconsideration of the consultation process, a focus on bringing research to practice, and the need to disseminate large-scale procedures and processes with delity. Among the social sciences, researchers in the eld of psychotherapy are widely credited with initially broadening the conceptualization of TI in the early 1990s, followed by the proposal of alternate TI models in the growing eld of prevention science Schulte et al., 2009. In all, researchers across elds have identied at least 20 different dimensions of TI HagermoserSanetti, Gritter,  Dobey, 2009. The eld of special education should be aware of these variations in TI across elds, research designs, and the research to practice sequence. This section describes some of the more common dimensions of TI across elds. Adherence, Competence, Differentiation, and Dosage Adherence Adherence typically is dened as the degree to which an intervention is implemented as planned Gresham, 2009. This is the same concept initially Treatment Integrity 303

suggested by Billingsley et al. 1980, Peterson et al. 1982, and others. Some have argued that researchers in the area of behavioral consultation and cognitive behavioral therapy have too long maintained a myopic focus on TI as adherence Gresham 2005; Sanetti  Kratochwill, 2008; Schulte et al., 2009. However, adherence can be considered the most basic and critical of multidimensional conceptualizations of TI Hagermoser-Sanetti et al., 2009. Practices in various elds have led to differing conceptualizations of adherence. The term is most closely associated with randomized controlled trial RCT research in the eld of pharmacology. In this work, adherence refers to the degree to which patients actually follow treatment protocols Barber, Trifeman,  Marmar, 2007. In elds such as psychotherapy and substance abuse counseling, adherence often refers to the degree to which a service provider conducts treatment in accordance with a therapy manual Nezu  Nezu, 2005. Examples in the eld of counseling offer yet other conceptualizations of adherence. For instance, Toffalo 2000 followed 28 youth receiving wraparound services and measured TI as adherence to the service hours prescribed i.e., percentage of service hours prescribed versus service hours received. Competence Practices that are common in different elds may drive scholars to dene new dimensions of TI. It is not surprising, then, that the TI dimension of competence was developed in a eld in which therapists play a central role  psychotherapy. Waltz, Addis, Koerner, and Jacobsen 1993 were among the earliest psychotherapy researchers to promote the importance of measuring both adherence and competence, which has become the most common conceptualization of TI across elds. They dened competence as the skill level of the therapist in delivering the treatment p. 620. Waltz et al. 1993 further claried that competence should not refer to a static feature or skill set of a therapist, but should be completely context dependent. The authors also described a broad range of contextual variables that might affect the quality with which a therapist delivered treatment, such as the degree of client impairment, stage of therapy, client life stresses, and previous client progress. More recently, Perepletchikova et al. 2007 suggested that the contextual nature of competence should not be assumed based on training or experience and necessitates direct measurement during intervention sessions. As aptly put by Nezu and Nezu 2005, the intervention does not equal the interventionist p. 80. CARL J. LIAUPSIN ET AL. 304

Differentiation TI has also been conceptualized as differentiation, the degree to which an intervention is distinct from other or ongoing treatments. Differentiation is most commonly a feature of TI in research on psychotherapy and cognitive behavioral therapy McLeod, Southam-Gerow,  Weisz, 2009. Differentiation has also been suggested as a critical component to measure in RCT research Perepletchikova, 2009. However, calls for the use of differentiation as a component of TI can also be found in school-based intervention research Gresham, 1989, 2005; Sanetti  Kratochwill, 2009 and when evaluating two or more programs Power et al., 2005. Differentiation may be particularly important when evaluating the effects of similar treatments or the addition of specic elements that distinguish one treatment from another. For example, in a literature review of TI in posttraumatic stress disorder research, Barber et al. 2007 dened TI as the degree to which treatment is implemented in accordance with a treatment manual by trained therapists and how the treatment is differentiated from other treatments p. 793. Note that this formulation of TI includes measures of both adherence i.e., intervention delivery and differentiation i.e., evidence that the intervention conditions actually differed from baseline. In a review of TI in psychotherapy research, Perepletchikova et al. 2007 found that differentiation was not commonly measured, even in studies that compared multiple treatments. The authors warned against assuming that proper measurement of adherence and competence would guarantee that treatments had been differentiated. In fact, in response to the longstanding conclusion that all psychotherapy interventions produce equivocal results, researchers in psychotherapy have recently implicated failures to properly measure differentiation in nearly all previous psychotherapy research as a major confounding factor Bahr  Beck, 2009. Dosage and Exposure The trio of adherence, competence, and differentiation is not only used in various combinations, but is often the basis for models that include yet other dimensions of TI. For example, dosage and exposure are similar terms that are becoming more common in the literature to describe elements of TI. In the social science intervention literature, dosage typically refers to a measure of the frequency, intensity, or duration of services provided to a client Irvin, McBee, Boyd, Hume,  Odom, 2012. Jones, Clarke, and Power 2008 used the term dosage in a multidimensional conceptualization of TI that includes, among other elements, adherence, competence, and differentiation. Dane and Schneider 1998 included the term exposure in a Treatment Integrity 305

manner analogous to the term dosage in a comprehensive model of TI within the eld of psychotherapy. These terms are not only described in conceptual works but can be found in descriptive and experimental studies in the eld of learning and behavior problems. For instance, Hamre et al. 2011 used the term dosage to describe how the number of course sections and homework assignments completed by preschool teachers affected their beliefs, knowledge, and practices regarding childteacher interactions. TI and Behavioral Consultation The eld of learning and behavior problems shares a good deal of common ground with the eld of school psychology. One challenge common across disciplines is the need to change the behavior of the teachers and staff who are ultimately responsible for the outcomes of children and youth. The eld of school psychology has embraced this challenge, spawning an important and vital literature on consultative models Sanetti  Kratochwill, 2008. The consultative model differs from one-to-one psychotherapy by separating the therapist from direct involvement with the student. In the most basic format, consultative models consist of two phases or processes: rst, a consultative or collaborative process; and second, a treatment or intervention process. During the consultation phase, the school psychologist or therapist interacts with a teacher or staff person to develop the knowledge, skills, andor supports needed to meet the treatment goals of the student. Then, during the implementation or intervention phase, the teacher or staff person uses knowledge, skills, andor supports developed during this interaction to meet the treatment goals of the child. For researchers seeking to address TI, the consultative model creates a challenge that has only recently been addressed in the literature. Specically, each phase of the consultative model can be conceptualized as an experiment with its own set of independent and dependent variables. Noell 2008 described a two-phase model of TI targeted at measuring the independent variables in the consultation and intervention phases. The degree to which the consultant carries out the consultation model is referred to as consultation procedural integrity. The degree to which the teacher carries out the treatment plan is referred to as treatment plan implementation. Kelleher, Riley-Tillman, and Power 2008 referenced the use of this two-phase model in a study that investigated the effect of two consultation processes expert-driven consultation and collaborative consultation on practitioner TI. CARL J. LIAUPSIN ET AL. 306

TI in Large-Scale Dissemination The eld of special education has always attended to using knowledge gained through research to benet broader populations of students with disabilities. However, an even greater focus has been brought to bear on the broad dissemination of research-based practices across the last decade. Federal legislative and research funding efforts reect this emphasis. Scientically based research and scientically based academic and behavioral interventions are terms that have been included in federal laws such as No Child Left Behind currently ESEA and the reauthorization of IDEA 2004. In 2002, the Institute of Education Sciences IES was established, among other reasons, to promote the systematic progression of educational research from basic translational research to broad dissemination of practice. The major funding source for special education research, IES, now requires researchers to address specic research goals when applying for funding. These research goals are funding categories that approximate the research to practice spectrum i.e., Exploration, Development and Innovation, Efcacy and Replication, Scale-Up Evaluation, and Measurement. However, the eld of special education has been as ineffective in providing TI data in dissemination studies as it has been in research. Despite the continuing focus on dissemination of research-based practices, the eld has a history of inability to move from research to disseminated practice Tankersley, Landrum,  Cook, 2004. Various barriers to implementing research-based practices on a large scale and in naturalistic settings have been debated in special education e.g., Malouf  Schiller, 1995 as well as in other elds such as community health science e.g., Bauman, Stein,  Ireys, 1991. To address the lack of TI called implementation delity by these authors in large-scale projects, Fixsen, Naoom, Blase, Friedman, and Wallace 2005 conducted a comprehensive review of research ndings from studies on implementation of practices and programs. The literature for this review came from 743 studies across a broad range of elds, including agriculture, business, child welfare, mental health, juvenile justice, pharmacology, nursing, and social services. Four broad ndings emerged from their review. First, information dissemination and training are not effective implementation practices. Second, successful implementation efforts involve a longterm multilevel approach. Third, some evidence points to the importance of organizational and system inuences. Fourth, very little is known about interaction effects among various implementation factors. Treatment Integrity 307

Based on these and other ndings, Fixsen et al. 2005 developed a model for implementing large-scale projects with delity. The model denes stages of implementation exploration and adoption, program installation, initial implementation, full operation, innovation, and sustainability, core implementation components training, coaching, and performance measurement, organizational components staff selection, program evaluation, and administrative supports, and external inuences social, economic, and political inuences. Two large-scale programs familiar to the eld of special education, RtI and school-wide PBIS, have both explicitly incorporated elements of this model. Selection of a TI Model This brief overview of conceptualizations of TI leads to at least one general conclusion  it is unlikely that a single denition of TI will arise from ongoing research. Although the original denition has been characterized as insufciently narrow by scholars in several elds, it is also unrealistic that one conceptualization of TI could be acceptable across those elds. The various conceptualizations that have emerged over the last two decades appear inextricably tied to a range of specic needs. Although it may be useful to loosely adhere to a specic model of TI, researchers should consider using an eclectic approach when designing TI methods and measures, taking advantage of the range of research that has been conducted. Schulte et al. 2009 arrived at the same conclusion and suggested that the model of TI might be specic to the intervention elements and the stage within the research-to-practice sequence. For instance, in a review of TI in the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder, Barber et al. 2007 concluded that researchers should consider how their measures of adherence and competence relate to the specic purposes of their study. Similarly, Arkoosh et al. 2007 measured three aspects of TI in a study on the reduction of problem behavior. A broad approach to assessing integrity may also generate a better understanding of the subject being studied. For instance, Toffalo 2000 followed 28 children who received wraparound services and measured TI as service hours received versus service hours prescribed. When outcomes improved, but a regression analysis failed to show a connection between levels of TI and outcomes, the author suggested that treatment hours may not have been the most sensitive measure of TI and that future researchers should consider other metrics for measuring TI for wraparound services. CARL J. LIAUPSIN ET AL. 308

METHODS OF MEASURING TI Sanetti and Kratochwill 2008 have provided a useful way of categorizing the different methods that can be used to assess TI. The three broad categories are permanent products, direct observation, and self-report andor interview. Permanent Products When an intervention produces permanent products  written papers, data sheets, portfolios, tokens in a jar, and the like  it may be possible to use these products to at least partially assess TI Lane, Bocian, MacMillan,  Gresham, 2004. Because they are already available, permanent products require little additional work and involve minimal reactivity. Although they may not be sufcient as the sole measure of TI, both Lane et al. 2004 and Noell 2008 have concluded permanent products have provided useful information in several applied studies and should be considered when their use ts the methods and purposes of a particular study. Direct Observation Several different measures may be used when directly observing the delivery of an intervention. The most common among these are checklists with or without embedded ratings, response-by-response recording, and wholeinterval measurement. Checklists Implementation checklists estimate TI by generating a percentage of an intervention that is delivered. Using this method involves rst operationally dening the components of an intervention, recording their occurrence or nonoccurrence usually immediately after an intervention concludes, and then calculating the percentage of checklist items that were implemented. Some intervention components may be needed repeatedly, but only implemented occasionally. For instance, a teacher may call on Javier on three of the six times that he raises his hand, instead of every time, as the intervention requires. Simply indicting that the intervention component was implemented would be misleading. To handle situations like these, some researchers use a Likert-type scale to indicate the level or quality of Treatment Integrity 309

implementation of certain checklist items Lane et al., 2004. Using this method, researchers operationally dene levels of implementation and then assign point values to each level, for example, rarely or never 0, inconsistently 1, or consistently 2. The researcher then scores the appropriate descriptor for each item. Although checklists involve direct observation of an intervention and are relatively easy to use, they usually are completed after the intervention and may incorporate multiple ratings. For this reason, checklists actually provide TI measures based on direct observation, but are not direct observations. Response-by-response recording Perhaps the purest measure of TI is direct observation and recording of each response made by the interventionist. Using this approach, researchers observe an implementers behavior and record its frequency or duration in the same manner they would observe and record the responses of the student who is receiving the intervention. Billingsley et al. 1980 described a direct, response-by-response method of assessing TI in research on instruction. First, the researchers operationally dened the instructional procedures. Then, as instruction was delivered, an independent observer scored each instructional sequence, noting whether the teacher followed the specied procedures for setting up the instructional situation, initiating each trial, and responding to correct or incorrect responses by the student. TI was calculated as the percentage of teacher behaviors that corresponded to the designated procedures. Although labor intensive, response-by-response recording provides precise data on the degree to which the intervention is delivered as intended. Whole-Interval Measurement Recently, some researchers have used a whole-interval measure of TI. In this approach, an intervention session is divided into intervals and the delivery of the intervention is then scored interval-by-interval, just as one might score the on-task behavior of a student. At the end of each interval, the observer scores whether all of the intervention components required during the interval were correctly implemented throughout the entire interval. TI is then calculated as the percentage of intervals correctly implemented. Wood, Umbreit, Liaupsin, and Gresham 2007 used this method to assess the TI of a function-based intervention in a classroom setting. Wholeinterval data made it possible to monitor TI session-by-session and intervalby-interval. Session-by-session analysis revealed inconsistent delivery by the CARL J. LIAUPSIN ET AL. 310

teacher with little improvement by the student. However, the interval-byinterval analysis revealed that the students on-task behavior occurred throughout 91 of the intervals when the intervention was implemented correctly, compared to only 9 when it was implemented incorrectly. Using the whole-interval method, TI data are collected simultaneously with data on student behavior. Because some procedures may be required during some intervals but not others e.g., praise only after every 2 minutes on task, use of the method requires thorough knowledge of the intervention procedures and the criteria for their use. Nevertheless, several researchers e.g., Nahgahgwon, Umbreit, Liaupsin,  Turton, 2010; Turton, Umbreit,  Mathur, 2011; Wood, Ferro, Umbreit,  Liaupsin, 2011; Wood et al., 2007 who have used the whole-interval method to assess TI also reported IOA for their TI data. In all cases, IOA for TI exceeded 90, indicating that multiple independent observers could use the method reliably. Self-Reports and Interviews One popular method for assessing TI is the self-report, in which an interventionist evaluates his or her delivery of an intervention, usually right after the intervention session ends. The method requires operational denitions of each intervention component and criteria for rating each item. Although convenient, self-report TI is vulnerable to inaccuracy and reactivity. For example, a study by Wickstrom, Jones, LaFleur, and Witt 1998 revealed that teachers who self-reported TI at 54 were actually implementing at 4 on objective, response-by-response measures of TI. Interviews offer another viable method for collecting TI data. Although potentially convenient, interviews can also be labor intensive. Using this method, researchers operationally dene the intervention components and then conduct interviews with the interventionist, the intervention recipient, or both. For example, Romer and Umbreit 1998 used interviews to examine the social validity of family-centered service coordination provided to families with young children with disabilities. Each month, a service coordinator was supposed to contact the family, ask certain questions, and provide follow-up with requests for service. At the end of each month, the researchers interviewed each family to gather data on TI whether the service coordinator followed the required procedures and their satisfaction with the service coordination provided. In any study, the methods used to assess TI should be tailored to the particular study, its purpose, the context, and the nature of the procedures Treatment Integrity 311

under study. Permanent products, direct observation, self-reports, and interviews offer different options for achieving this goal. However, to date, there is little research that documents the psychometric adequacy of any of these approaches to assessing TI Sheridan, Swanger-Gagne , Welch, Kwon,  Garbacz, 2009. PERSISTENT ISSUES IN TI Issues of Denition In any discussion of ongoing issues in TI, the rst must be the differences in the conceptualizations of its measurable dimensions across disciplines. From its simple beginnings Billingsley et al., 1980; Peterson et al., 1982, the conceptualization of TI has developed into a complex construct with multiple dimensions that vary depending on the discipline and context in which it is used Gresham, 1989; McLeod et al., 2009; Sanetti  Kratochwill, 2009. The question remains, then, what is TI? Research and theoretical conceptualizations have provided us with a variety of identiers e.g., TI, procedural reliability, treatment compliance that may have slightly different meanings. For example, it has been described as a measure of the accurate application of the independent variable Gresham, 1989, 2009, the extent to which a treatment or intervention is implemented as intended Sanetti  Kratochwill, 2009, and a measure of patient adherence to a prescribed treatment Barber et al., 2007. The dimensions of TI are said to include adherence, effortdosage, competence, differentiation, and participant responsiveness depending on the discipline, area of research, or evidence-based practice. Schulte et al. 2009 proposed TI measures that exceeded the dimensions of implementation e.g., adherence to include intended outcome e.g., participants receipt of service and enactment of learned procedures. The additional complexity generated by tiers of services, as described in consultation models Perepletchikova  Kazdin, 2005; Sheridan et al., 2009, only compounds the question. Although it seems clear that accuracy of implementation adherence should always be measured in research and practice, more complex interventions require additional measures such as competence or differentiation. However, there is a lack of guidelines to identify when an intervention requires additional measures of TI. For example, when a behavioral CARL J. LIAUPSIN ET AL. 312

intervention is implemented, should researchers be required to assess TI on the baseline condition to ensure that it is really different from the intervention condition? Should the same efforts at differentiation be required in school or clinical practice? In the assessment of an RtI program, is it necessary to measure the competence of each person involved in its implementation? How should TI measurement be matched to the characteristics of a study as suggested by Gersten et al. 2005 or take outcomes into account as suggested by Lane, Kalberg, Bruhn, Mahoney, and Driscoll 2008? How should TI measurement be adjusted based on the research to practice sequence as suggested by Malouf and Schiller 1995? TI practices must be identied and claried in sufcient detail to allow replication by others Greenwood, 2009; McKenna, Roseneld,  Gravois, 2009; Schulte et al., 2009. However, only a few programs have developed and explored the characteristics of standardized measures of TI e.g., SET Vincent, Spaulding,  Tobin, 2010, and the Treatment Integrity Program Protocol Sanetti  Kratochwill, 2009, 2011. Perepletchikova, Chereji, Hilt, and Kazdin 2009 have also attempted to provide a more detailed guideline with a summary of a list of available strategies for psychotherapy. Protocols, checklists, and standardized measures provide some guidance but do not account for the many cases in which treatment is so individualized as to preclude a standard measure. Measurement Issues Measurement issues include a lack of clear guidance on the most appropriate method for measuring TI e.g., permanent product, observation, or self-report, the frequency with which data should be collected, the criterion for accuracy that should be used e.g., percentage of steps correctly implemented, or the reliability of TI data. First, each of the measurement methods has been described in the previous section as having advantages and disadvantages in their cost, accuracy, and thoroughness. Given the current state of the research, their appropriateness can only be assessed by looking at the purposeuse of the TI data e.g., summative or formative and the context in which they are collected e.g., research, program implementation, or therapeutic evaluation. Second, the frequency and level of accuracy of TI data collection seem to be a matter of convention rather than research. Most studies in which TI is included rely on an accuracy criterion of 80 and collect TI data weekly or monthly, depending on the context of the intervention or program Treatment Integrity 313

implementation Noell, Witt, Gilbertson, Ranier,  Freeland, 1997. Gresham 2009 advises that there is no reliable database to use as a guide in deciding the accuracy criterion needed to ensure that the intervention has been sufciently well implemented. He further suggests that the level of TI required might vary depending on the question that is being answered. Perepletchikova and Kazdin 2005 note that low levels of TI in the delivery of treatment protocols may still provide good outcomes because they include essential features of an intervention and adjustments that are more effective than the original. A few studies have directly addressed the question of accuracy and frequency. In a series of experiments, researchers demonstrated that performance feedback improved TI and also resulted in improved student outcomes DiGennaro, Martens,  Kleinman, 2007; Noell et al., 2005. Sanetti and Kratochwill 2009, 2011 improved teachers self-report of TI by increasing the frequency with which they reported from weekly to daily and requiring a more specic written report that used the Treatment Integrity Planning Protocol TIPP in place of a verbal report that required only a general estimate of implementation. Sanetti and Kratochwill 2009 also suggested exibility in the level of TI required, so that high stake decisions, such as special education placement, should include more frequent and comprehensive TI data than low stake decisions. However, Gresham 2009 proposed four possible explanations of the relationship between TI and outcomes. One was that although low TI reected poor implementation of the identied intervention, it did not necessarily mean a poorer treatment, only a different treatment. Until guidelines are available, it seems safe to maintain a minimum criterion of 80 accuracy for TI and at least weekly collection of data. More frequent data collection and higher accuracy could be required based on the outcomes. A third issue is that there has been little discussion of the need for IOA data for TI measures, though we require IOA on the outcome measure to ensure that results are reliable. TI IOA data collection could occur at the same time as outcome data IOA are collected, but would undoubtedly lead to even further cost of time, personnel, and logistical planning. Barriers to Including TI Regardless of the denition or the dimensions identied, assessing TI is acknowledged to be a necessary component of intervention research Gresham, 2009, psychotherapy research and program implementation CARL J. LIAUPSIN ET AL. 314

Perepletchikova et al., 2007, school psychology Noell et al., 2005, and dissemination of evidence-based practice Greenwood, 2009. However, as noted previously, the most generous review of TI literature in the last ve years showed that less than 50 of studies included TI measures, while the more stringent result showed that only 3.5 of studies included TI. Our limited understanding and knowledge of measurement appears to be one barrier to implementing TI in research and practice. Surveys of school psychologists Cochrane  Laux, 2007 and psychotherapists Perepletchikova et al., 2009 indicate that a lack of general knowledge about TI or understanding of how to measure it makes it difcult for researchers and practitioners alike to identify the appropriate procedures to be used in the context of a specic intervention or program implementation. Researchers in both studies pointed out that guidelines have been provided in the literature, but fail to mention that they sometimes only partially cover the issues, do not provide practical tips for application, or differ according to the theoretical model. Other barriers to collecting TI data are not as clear, but seem to include a combination of time, cost, labor considerations, and a general lack of requirement for TI by journal editors. Even in the simplest cases in which TI is collected e.g., only adherence data, costs may include additional people to collect data, training those people, and coding and analyzing data Cochrane  Laux, 2007; Perepletchikova et al., 2009. In addition, school psychologists completing the Cochrane and Laux survey indicated that teachers and school administrators did not understand the need to collect TI data and tended to veto their requests. As measures of TI become more complex, costs increase Schulte et al., 2009. Additional costs may include expert therapists to assess competence Barber et al., 2007; the cost of developing appropriate protocols, videotaping treatment sessions, and developing and validating assessment inventories Perepletchikova et al., 2009. Although researchers continue to clarify the lack of TI in intervention literature and rene measurement, the barriers must be more clearly addressed so that scholars will be persuaded to include TI in their research and program analysis. Some researchers, professional groups, and organizations have provided guidance to researchers on the appropriate inclusion of TI in research by developing guidelines for research and standards for evidence e.g., Flay et al., 2005; Kratochwill et al., 2010; Mayo-Wilson, 2007; Mowbray, Holter, Teague,  Bybee, 2003. Further advances might also be made if publication criteria were more direct in requiring the inclusion of TI in submitted manuscripts. Funding sources Treatment Integrity 315

might also encourage more appropriate outcomes in research by increasing emphasis on TI in funding applications. Improving Implementation Much of our previous discussion has focused on TI as a summative process; information is used to evaluate the extent to which the intervention was implemented. In fact, only a limited focus on TI as a formative process can be found in the literature on research and practice Sanetti  Kratochwill, 2011. However, any discussion of TI must also address the issue of what to do when there is a failure to accurately and consistently implement an intervention or program protocol. Some school-based consultation studies used TI data to provide formative feedback and training to improve implementation Noell et al., 1997; Sanetti, Luiselli,  Handler, 2007; Witt, Noell, LaFleur,  Mortenson, 1997. However, Power et al. 2005 suggested a different approach that was more collaborative in nature, using TI data to identify and address the reasons for poorly implemented interventions and to revise the procedures accordingly. Another method would be to proactively identify and address factors that have the potential to affect TI. A few researchers have conceptualized these factors to include pragmatic issues such as time required to implement, number of individuals needed, and strain on system-level resources Chafouleas, Briesch, Riley-Tillman,  McCoach, 2009; Gresham et al., 2000; Perepletchikova  Kazdin, 2005; intervention issues such as theoretical orientation of the intervention Witt, 1986 and intervention difculty Chafouleas et al., 2009; Gresham et al., 2000; Perepletchikova  Kazdin, 2005; and participant-level issues such as treatment acceptability Chafouleas et al., 2009; Reimers  Wacker, 1988 and perceived severity of problem behavior Lane  Beebe-Frankenberger, 2004. Assessment of such factors prior to implementation could provide the information needed to address and resolve issues before they affect implementation. FUTURE RESEARCH Researchers and practitioners alike would benet from a clearer understanding of parameters for measuring TI in the most effective and efcient manner possible. Research that provided more specic guidelines or CARL J. LIAUPSIN ET AL. 316

decision-rules would help identify both the necessary and sufcient dimensions of TI. Although conceptualizations of TI within specic disciplines include suggested guidelines, the survey responses described earlier indicate that school psychologists Cochrane  Laux, 2007 and psychotherapists Perepletchikova et al., 2009 do not appear to nd the guidelines clear enough to improve their use of TI. In addition, the guidelines do not provide decision-rules that would help users match the TI data they collect to the characteristics of the study Gersten et al., 2005 or identify the appropriate dimensions of TI based on the category of outcome the study or program will provide Lane et al., 2008. Standardized measures provide some guidance but address only a small portion of the research and practice that should include TI data. TI measurement issues would also benet from additional research. Gresham 2009 suggested research to develop treatment integrity effect norms. These, or a similar data-based line of research, would establish the parameters of TI for specic interventions including quantifying the accuracy levels, frequency of data collection, and measurement method that would be most efcacious for specic interventions Mowbray et al., 2003. Finally, TI could be improved by research that addressed both the barriers that discourage its use e.g., cost, personnel and those factors in organizations that result in poor TI. Although some research has demonstrated that performance feedback and improved treatment acceptability ratings improve accurate implementation, more research should also provide guidelines for practical applications. In addition, few studies have attempted to proactively address issues that lead to poor implementation. As the use of evidence-based practice expands, more scrutiny will be focused on documentation of the efcacy of these practices and on the schools and other organizations delivering evidence-based services. TI data can provide the necessary information to demonstrate that programs are being implemented effectively and accurately. It behooves those in the eld to provide practical and detailed guidance for the measurement and use of this tool. REFERENCES Arkoosh, M., Derby, K., Wacker, D. P., Berg, W., McLaughlin, T. F.,  Barretto, A. 2007. A descriptive evaluation of long-term treatment integrity. Behavior Modication, 316, 880895. Bahr, S. S.,  Beck, A. T. 2009. Treatment integrity of studies that compare short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy with cognitive-behavior therapy. Clinical Psychology: Science  Practice, 16, 370378. Treatment Integrity 317

Barber, J. P., Trifeman, E.,  Marmar, C. 2007. Considerations in treatment integrity: Implications and recommendations for PTSD research. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 205, 793805. Bauman, L. J., Stein, R. E.,  Ireys, H. T. 1991. Reinventing delity: The transfer of social technology among settings. American Journal of Community Psychology, 194, 619639. Billingsley, F. F., White, O. R.,  Munson, R. 1980. Procedural reliability: A rationale and an example. Behavioral Assessment, 2, 229241. Chafouleas, S., Briesch, A., Riley-Tillman, T.,  McCoach, D. 2009. Moving beyond assessment of treatment acceptability: An examination of the factor structure of the Usage Rating Prole-Intervention URPI. School Psychology Quarterly, 241, 3647. Cochrane, W. S.,  Laux, J. M. 2007. Investigating school psychologists perceptions of treatment integrity in school-based interventions for children with academic and behavior concerns. Preventing School Failure, 514, 2934. Conroy, M. A., Dunlap, G., Clarke, S.,  Alter, P. J. 2005. A descriptive analysis of positive behavioral intervention research with younger children with challenging behavior. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, 25, 157166. Dane, A. V.,  Schneider, B. H. 1998. Program integrity in primary and early secondary prevention: Are implementation effects out of control? Clinical Psychology Review, 18, 2345. DiGennaro, F. D., Martens, B. K.,  Kleinman, A. E. 2007. A comparison of performance feedback procedures on teachers treatment implementation integrity and students inappropriate behavior in special education classrooms. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 403, 447461. Fixsen, D. L., Naoom, S. F., Blase, K. A., Friedman, R. M.,  Wallace, F. 2005. Implementation research: A synthesis of the literature. Tampa, FL: University of South Florida, Louis de la Parte Florida Mental Health Institute, The National Implementation Research Network. Flay, B. R., Biglan, A., Boruch, R. F., Castro, F. G., Gottfredson, D., Kellam, S., y Ji, P. 2005. Standards of evidence: Criteria for efcacy, effectiveness and dissemination. Prevention Science, 6, 151175. Gansle, K. A. 2005. The effectiveness of school-based anger interventions and programs: A meta-analysis. Journal of School Psychology, 43, 321341. Gersten, R., Fuchs, L. S., Compton, D., Coyne, M., Greenwood, C.,  Innocenti, M. S. 2005. Quality indicators for group experimental and quasi-experimental research in special education. Exceptional Children, 712, 149164. Greenwood, C. R. 2009. Treatment integrity: Revisiting some big ideas. School Psychology Review, 384, 547553. Gresham, F. M. 1989. Assessment of treatment integrity in school consultation and prereferral intervention. School Psychology Review, 18, 3750. Gresham, F. M. 2005. Methodological issues in evaluating cognitive-behavioral treatments for students with behavioral disorders. Behavioral Disorders, 303, 213225. Gresham, F. M. 2009. Evolution of the treatment integrity concept: Current status and future directions. School Psychology Review, 384, 533540. Gresham, F. M., Gansle, K. A., Noell, G., II.,  Cohen, S. 1993. Treatment integrity in applied behavior analysis with children. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 26, 257263. CARL J. LIAUPSIN ET AL. 318

Gresham, F. M., MacMillan, D. L., Beebe-Frankenberger, M. E.,  Bocian, K. M. 2000. Treatment integrity in learning disabilities intervention research: Do we really know how treatments are implemented? Learning Disabilities Research  Practice, 154, 198205. Hagermoser-Sanetti, L. M. H., Gritter, K. L.,  Dobey, L. 2009. Treatment integrity of interventions with children in the school psychology literature from 1995 to 2008. School Psychology Review, 40, 7284. Hamre, B., Henry, A., Locasale-Crouch, J., Downer, J., Pianta, R., Burchinal, P., y Scott-Little, C. March, 2011. Implementation delity and teachers engagement in a course on effective teacher-child interactions: Effects on teacher beliefs, knowledge and practice. Unpublished paper. Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness, Washington, DC. Horner, R. H., Carr, E. G., Halle, J., McGee, G., Odom, S. L.,  Wolery, M. 2005. The use of single-subject research to identify evidence-based practices in special education. Exceptional Children, 71, 165179. Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004, 20 U.S.C. y 1415 k d ii. Irvin, D. W., McBee, M., Boyd, B. A., Hume, K.,  Odom, S. L. 2012. Child and family factors associated with the use of services for preschoolers with autism spectrum disorder. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders, 61, 565572. Jones, H. A., Clarke, A. T.,  Power, T. J. 2008. Expanding the concept of intervention integrity: A multidimensional model of participant engagement. Balance, Newsletter of Division 53 Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology of the American Psychological Association, 231, 45. Kelleher, C., Riley-Tillman, T.,  Power, T. J. 2008. An initial comparison of collaborative and expert-driven consultation on treatment integrity. Journal of Educational  Psychological Consultation, 184, 294324. Kratochwill, T. R., Hitchcock, J., Horner, R. H., Levin, J. R., Odom, S. L., Rindskopf, D. M., Shadish, W. R. 2010. Single-case designs technical documentation. Retrieved from http:ies.ed.govnceewwcpdfwwcscd.pdf Lane, K.,  Beebe-Frankenberger, M. 2004. School-based interventions: The tools you need to succeed. Boston, MA: Allyn  Bacon. Lane, K., Kalberg, J., Bruhn, A., Mahoney, M. E.,  Driscoll, S. A. 2008. Primary prevention programs at the elementary level: Issues of treatment integrity, systematic screening, and reinforcement. Education and Treatment of Children, 314, 465494. Lane, K. L., Bocian, K. M., MacMillan, D. L.,  Gresham, F. M. 2004. Treatment integrity: An essential  but often forgotten  component of school-based interventions. Preventing School Failure, 48, 3643. Malouf, D. B.,  Schiller, E. P. 1995. Practice and research in special education. Exceptional Children, 615, 414424. Mayo-Wilson, E. 2007. Reporting Implementation in Randomized Trials: Proposed additions to the CONSORT statement. The American Journal of Public Health, 974, 630633. McIntyre, L. L., Gresham, F. M., DiGennaro, F. D.,  Reed, D. D. 2007. Treatment integrity of school-based interventions with children in Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis studies from 1991 to 2005. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 40, 659672. McKenna, S., Roseneld, S.,  Gravois, T. 2009. Measuring the behavioral indicators of instructional consultation: A preliminary validity study. School Psychology Review, 38, 496509. Treatment Integrity 319

McLeod, B. D., Southam-Gerow, M. A.,  Weisz, J. R. 2009. Conceptual and methodological issues in treatment integrity measurement. School Psychology Review, 384, 541546. Mowbray, C. T., Holter, M. C., Teague, G. B.,  Bybee, D. 2003. Fidelity criteria: Development, measurement, and validation. American Journal of Evaluation, 24, 315340. Nahgahgwon, K. N., Umbreit, J., Liaupsin, C. J.,  Turton, A. M. 2010. Function-based planning for young children at risk for emotional and behavioral disorders. Education and Treatment of Children, 33, 537559. Nezu, A. M.,  Nezu, C. 2005. Comments on Evidence-based behavioral medicine: What is it and how do we achieve it? The interventionist does not always equal the intervention  The role of therapist competence. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 291, 80. Noell, G., Witt, J., Gilbertson, D., Ranier, D.,  Freeland, J. 1997. Increasing teacher intervention implementation in general education settings through consultation and performance feedback. School Psychology Quarterly, 121, 7788. Noell, G., Witt, J., Slider, N., Connell, J., Gatti, S., Williams, K., y Duhon, G. 2005. Treatment implementation following behavioral consultation in schools: A comparison of three follow-up strategies. School Psychology Review, 341, 87106. Noell, G. H. 2008. Research examining the relationship among consultation process, treatment integrity, and outcomes. In W. P. Erchul  S. M. Sheridan Eds., Handbook of research in school consultation: Empirical foundations for the eld pp. 315334. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Perepletchikova, F. 2009. Treatment integrity and differential treatment effects. Clinical Psychology: Science  Practice, 163, 379382. Perepletchikova, F., Chereji, E., Hilt, L.,  Kazdin, A. E. 2009. Barriers to implementing treatment integrity procedures: Survey of treatment outcome researchers. Journal of Counseling and Clinical Psychology, 772, 212218. Perepletchikova, F.,  Kazdin, A. E. 2005. Treatment integrity and therapeutic change: Issues and research recommendations. Clinical Psychology: Science  Practice, 124, 365383. Perepletchikova, F., Treat, T.,  Kazdin, A. E. 2007. Treatment integrity in psychotherapy research: Analysis of the studies and examination of the associated factors. Journal of Consulting  Clinical Psychology, 75, 829841. Peterson, L., Homer, A. L.,  Wonderlich, S. A. 1982. The integrity of independent variables in behavior analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 15, 477492. Power, T., Blom-Hoffman, J., Clarke, A., Riley-Tillman, T., Kelleher, C.,  Manz, P. 2005. Reconceptualizing intervention integrity: A partnership-based framework for linking research with practice. Psychology in the Schools, 425, 495507. Reimers, T.,  Wacker, D. 1988. Parents ratings of the acceptability of behavioral treatment recommendations made in an outpatient clinic: A preliminary analysis of the inuence of treatment effectiveness. Behavioral Disorders, 14, 715. Romer, E.,  Umbreit, J. 1998. The effects of family-centered service coordination: A social validity study. Journal of Early Intervention, 21, 95110. Sanetti, L., Luiselli, J. K.,  Handler, M. W. 2007. Effects of verbal and graphic performance feedback on behavior support plan implementation in a public elementary school. Behavior Modication, 314, 454465. Sanetti, L. M., Dobey, L. M.,  Gritter, K. L. 2012. Treatment integrity of interventions with children in the Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions from 1999 to 2009. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 14, 2946. CARL J. LIAUPSIN ET AL. 320

Sanetti, L. M.,  Kratochwill, T. R. 2008. Treatment integrity in behavioral consultation: Measurement, promotion, and outcomes. International Journal of Behavioral Consultation and Therapy, 4, 95114. Sanetti, L. M.,  Kratochwill, T. R. 2009. Treatment integrity assessment in the schools: An evaluation of the Treatment Integrity Planning Protocol TIPP. School Psychology Quarterly, 24, 2435. Sanetti, L. M.,  Kratochwill, T. R. 2011. An evaluation of the treatment integrity planning protocol and two schedules of treatment integrity self-report: Impact on implementation and report accuracy. Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation, 214, 284308. Schulte, A. C., Easton, J. E.,  Parker, J. 2009. Advances in treatment integrity research: Multidisciplinary perspectives on the conceptualization, measurement, and enhancement of treatment integrity. School Psychology Review, 384, 460475. Sheridan, S. M., Swanger-Gagne , M., Welch, G. W., Kwon, K.,  Garbacz, S. 2009. Fidelity measurement in consultation: Psychometric issues and preliminary examination. School Psychology Review, 384, 476495. Snell, M. E., Chen, L. Y.,  Hoover, K. 2006. Teaching augmentative and alternative communication to students with severe disabilities: A review of intervention research 1997-2003. Research and Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 31, 203214. Tankersley, M., Landrum, T. J.,  Cook, B. G. 2004. How research informs practice in the eld of emotional and behavioral disorders. In R. B. Rutherford, M. M. Quinn  S. R. Mathur Eds., Handbook of research in behavioral disorders pp. 98113. New York, NY: Guilford. Toffalo, D. 2000. An investigation of treatment integrity and outcomes in wraparound services. Journal of Child  Family Studies, 93, 351361. Turton, A. M., Umbreit, J.,  Mathur, S. R. 2011. Systematic function-based intervention for EBD adolescents in an alternative setting: Broadening the context. Behavioral Disorders, 36, 117128. Vincent, C., Spaulding, S.,  Tobin, T. J. 2010. A reexamination of the psychometric properties of the school-wide evaluation tool SET. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 123, 161179. Waltz, J., Addis, M. E., Koerner, K.,  Jacobsen, N. S. 1993. Testing the integrity of a psychotherapy protocol: Assessment of adherence and competence. Journal of Consulting  Clinical Psychology, 614, 620. Wheeler, J. L., Baggett, B. A., Fox, J.,  Blevins, L. 2006. Treatment integrity: A review of intervention studies conducted with children with autism. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities, 21, 4554. Wickstrom, K. F., Jones, K. M., LaFleur, L. H.,  Witt, J. C. 1998. An analysis of treatment integrity in school-based behavioral consultation. School Psychology Quarterly, 13, 141154. Witt, J. 1986. Teachers resistance to the use of school-based interventions. Journal of School Psychology, 241, 3744. Witt, J. C., Noell, G. H., LaFleur, L. H.,  Mortenson, B. P. 1997. Teacher use of interventions in general education settings: Measurement and analysis of the independent variable. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 30, 693696. Treatment Integrity 321

Wood, B. K., Ferro, J. B., Umbreit, J.,  Liaupsin, C. J. 2011. Addressing the challenging behavior of young children through systematic function-based intervention. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, 30, 221232. Wood, B. K., Umbreit, J., Liaupsin, C. J.,  Gresham, F. M. 2007. A treatment integrity analysis of function-based intervention. Education and Treatment of Children, 29, 549571. CARL J. LIAUPSIN ET AL. 322