CONNECTING IN THE ONLINE CLASSROOM

This page intentionally left blank 

connecting  in the online  classroom building rapport   between   teachers  students REBECCA A. GLAZIER  johns hopkins university press  Baltimore
Johns Hopkins University Press All rights reserved. Published 2021 Printed in the United States of America on acidfree paper 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Johns Hopkins University Press 2715 North Charles Street Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363 www .press.jhu .edu Library of Congress Catalogingin-Publication Data Names: Glazier, Rebecca A., 1982 author. Title: Connecting in the online classroom : building rapport between teachers and  students  Rebecca A. Glazier. Description: Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press, 2021.  Includes  bibliographical references and index. Identifiers: LCCN 2021011259  ISBN 9781421442655 paperback  ISBN  9781421442662 ebook Subjects: LCSH: Webbased instruction.  Education, HigherComputerassisted  instruction.  Teacherstudent relationships. Classification: LCC LB1044.87 .G57 2021  DDC 371.33 44678dc23 LC record available at https: lccn.loc .gov 2021011259 A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library. Special discounts are available for bulk purchases of this book. For more information, please contact Special Sales at specialsalesjh .edu.

For my parents

This page intentionally left blank 

CONTENTS Acknowledgments ix

Introduction 1 part i the problem 11 1  The Promise and the Peril of Online Higher Education 13 2  The Digital Divide 31 part ii the solution 57 3  Relationships Matter 59 4  Strategies for Building Rapport 82 5  Students on the Margins 120 part iii What it Will take 147 6  The Tradeoffs 149 7  Building a Support Network 167 Appendix A. PreSemester Survey 199 Appendix B. Rapport Emails 200 References 207 Index 245

This page intentionally left blank 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The heart of rapport is human connection. So, the acknowledgments  section of a book about rapport seems an especially fitting place to  express my gratitude for the incredible circle of supportive people in  my life. Being connected with all of you is a blessing. At the top of that list are my parents, whose unconditional love  has been a shining beacon in my life. Neither of them was able to finish their college degree, but from my very earliest memories they have  always taught me to love learning and they have always believed in  me. Anyone should be so lucky as to have a mom like mine. She sends  me a text message of love and support every night and, as I was in  the home stretch of finishing this book, she started sending one every  morning, too. My dad is one of the most brilliant people I know and  he was often on my heart as I was writing. My parents have not had  easy lives and I cant help but wonder, if college would have been a  little more accessible 40 years ago, how things might have been different. My parents have given me everything that matters and I love  them more than words can say. I also want to acknowledge my wild and wonderful son, Wilk, who  turned 8 while I was writing this book. I didnt expect to finish a book  during a homeschooling spring and a pandemic summer of adventure  together, but every 5:00 a.m. writing morning and afternoon creek  exploration was worth it. Wilk is such a sweet, happy boy. He is the  light of my life, and I love him an infinite amount. I consider myself a  person of faith and spending time with Wilk, spending time outdoors,  and spending time in prayer kept me centered and connected when  things got challenging. I am thankful for my church home in Little  Rock and for the many prayers I know were offered on my behalf. When it comes to people who have read, edited, provided feedback 

x   ACkNOwLEdGMENTS on, and listened to me talk about this book, I owe my hugest debt of  gratitude to my colleague, best friend, godmother to my only child,  and allaround the best human I know, Amber Boydstun. From the  first time I pitched the idea of writing a book on online teaching to  Amber and her mom, Faye, on a drive into San Francisco in 2019 until  the very final draft, Amber has been brilliant, insightful, patient, kind,  and simply the best. Beyond that, she is the greatest friend a person  could have. My life is orders of magnitude better for having her in it.  I am forever grateful to have her as my person. To my partner in conducting a number of the research studies discussed in the book, and my dear friend, Heidi Skurat Harris, I also  owe a great deal of thanks. Heidi is a great collaborator and fantastic qualitative researchershe has a much higher tolerance for wading through openended student comments about their worst online  classes. I am grateful for her partnership and for the fact that she is  always up for chocolate crme brle. Heidi is part of a wonderful  group of women, the Professor Moms, who get together once a month  for dinner, conversation, and emotional support and for whom I am  very grateful. I am incredibly thankful to be surrounded by such a kind and  supportive community. I have a wonderful family, including three  younger brothers: Mo, Calvin, and Zack. Calvin earned his undergraduate degree entirely online while working fulltime; Zack had to  grit his teeth through classes the Air Force moved online because of  the pandemic in the summer of 2020. They were often on my mind  while I was writing. Thank you to my Glazier family, especially Gary  and JoDy, whose love never wavers, and who would find time on their  visits to take Wilk on adventures so I could write for a few hours.  Ive had my book club cheering me on, thoughtful neighbors sending  me encouraging text messages, and a circle of friends I could call on  at a moments notice. Liz Holman, Maria Mae Tobler, Sayra Crandall, Yvonne WiebelhausBrahm, Jessica Feezell, and Jennifer Kines  have come through for me so many times. I am especially grateful for  Ceanne Warner, the sister of my soul, whose kindness and early morning hikes kept me spiritually grounded and always made me feel loved.

Acknowledgments   xi When I was finishing my dissertation and searching for a job as a  professor, I interviewed at an institution where I was told that I should  stop doing pedagogical research because it wouldnt count toward  tenure. I am grateful I landed at a university and a department that  values teaching. Because of that support, I have been able to publish  both in my field of political science and in the scholarship of teaching and learning. Much of the research in this book was funded by  internal grants from the University of Arkansas at Little Rock. Two  of my colleagues and close friends in the School of Public Affairs, Joe  Giammo and Eric WiebelhausBrahm, read drafts of the book and  provided very helpful comments. Eric was kind enough to read the  entire thing while on sabbatical and stop me from submitting a manuscript with far too many instances of the word literally. These are  colleagues to hold on to. Johns Hopkins University Press thankfully had six anonymous  external reviewers take a look at the manuscript, and their comments  greatly improved the final product. I am also grateful to my colleagues  and friends who agreed to read chapterson very short notice,  during a pandemic. A huge thankyou to Shawna Brandle, Charity  Butcher, IChant Chiang, April ChathamCarpenter, Terry Gilmour,  Eric Loepp, Michael Rogers figure 3.1 was his idea!, and Rene Van  Vechten. Thank you also to my wonderful colleagues in the American Political Science Associations Political Science Education Section,  especially Kerstin Hamman and Victor Asal, who are dear friends and  mentors. I am lucky to have such a thoughtful community of scholars to call home. Kerstin was kind enough to connect me with Patsy  Moskal at the University of Central Florida, who was such a great  resource for the case study in chapter 7. I am also grateful to Michelle  PacanskyBrock for her very helpful feedback and for connecting me  with Tracy Schaelen at Southwestern College and Mike Smedshammer at Modesto Junior College, who were both such huge helps for  the case studies on those institutions in chapter 7. I am also grateful  to Jim Lang for his feedback and encouragement when this project  was in an early stage. I am also thankful to work with a really great team at Johns HopxII   ACkNOwLEdGMENTS kins, including my smart and thoughtful editor, Greg Britton. Thanks  also to Juliana McCarthy, Adriahna Conway, Kathryn Marguy, and  Hilary Jacqmin. Mike Baker is an incredible copy editor. And I have  to give a huge shout out to Martha Sewall in the design department,  who humored my request to hide a coded message for my son in the  background math of the cover art for the book. What a great press! Finally, thank you to my students. You inspire me every day. You  are working so hard to build something better for yourselves and for  the people you love. I am proud to be your professor and I hope you  always know that I am on your side.

Introduction T eaching online can be hard. I miss seeing my students faces when  I teach online. I miss walking around the room, the giveandtake  of discussion, the random current events tangents we sometimes go  off on, and the simulations that get students out of their chairs and  interacting with each other. But teaching online can also be incredibly rewarding. Given the time to think, students make really insightful discussion posts; asynchronous online simulations push students,  and me, outside our comfort zones; and some of my most meaningful teaching interactions have occurred with students in my online  classes. When online classes are working wellthe students are engaged,  the professor is responsive, and the technology runs smoothlythey  can represent a great resource for higher education. Online classes  can expand access and improve equity. They make it possible for students to attend college when it otherwise wouldnt be an option due to   A note about language here. I use the terms college, university, and higher education interchangeably, although university typically refers to an institution of higher education that offers graduate degrees and college refers to an institution that offers exclusively  undergraduate or associate degrees.
CONNECTING IN THE ONLINE CLASSROOM the constraints of time, distance, or resources. But all too often, online  classes dont work so wellstudents are checked out, professors are  absent, and technology falls short. In the end, repeated studies show  that students fail and drop out of online classes at significantly higher  rates than faceto-face classes e.g., Xu and Jaggars 2014, 2011b;  Glazier 2016. Even when statistical studies account for demographic  and academic variables, there remains a persistent gap in retention  between online and faceto-face classes Jaggars 2013; Willging and  Johnson 2009. Things have gotten so bad, we are facing an online  retention crisis. Take the case of one student, who described their experience returning to college after being away for a few years: I have so much respect  for people that juggle work, home life, raising children, and returning to complete a degree because it is a struggle but a blessing! You  can hear this students optimism coming through as they attempt to  put a positive spin on what is obviously a trying first semester back at  college. Knowing the potentially overwhelming challenges facing this  student, engage in a short thought experiment with me. First, imagine  that this student returned to inperson classes where they connected  with faculty members, found an active support system at the university, and made friends with their fellow students. How likely are they  to be successful, despite all of their challenges? Now, imagine that  same student returning to online classes where the faculty members  are distant, there is no mention of university support systems, and  they have little interaction with their fellow students. How likely is it  that this students challenges will overwhelm them in their first semester back? Given the stark differences between these two hypothetical   Another note about language: I use the terms faculty, professor, and instructor interchangeably. Instructor is the most inclusive term, and includes anyone who is teaching a  college course, but is the least used in common conversation. Professor and faculty both  refer to those who teach at universities, but there are hierarchical structures in university  systems that mean that part-time teachers or those not on the tenure-track may not officially be titled faculty. It is not my intent to exclude adjunct faculty from any categories  here, so again when I use any of these terms I mean to include anyone who teaches a college course.

Introduction   3 college experienceswhich are very much the reality for many studentsits no wonder that there is a gap between online and faceto-face retention rates. This problem is a crisis because the students who would be succeeding in faceto-face classes are failing and withdrawing from online  classes. Often, these are the very same disadvantaged students that  online classes are intended to helplowerincome students, working  parents, students of color, and firstgeneration college students. This  book is about what we can do to reverse the online retention crisis.  The key lies in bridging the distance inherent in online classes that  make students feel like they are out in the cold. To do that, we have  to build rapport with our studentsto make real human connections  with them. Doing so would improve both the teaching and the learning experience in online classes. The case I make for building rapport in online classes is not based  on my personal experience alone. It is built on extensive academic  research, original experimental studies, and surveys of online students. Throughout the book, I use quotes from real students, just as  I did with the case of the returning student above, often drawn from  research studies I have conducted with colleagues. We have surveyed  thousands of students over the years, including through the Best Worst  Study, the Minimum Rapport Experiment, and the Rapport Impact  Study, projects on which I collaborated with Dr. Heidi Skurat Harris,  an expert in online writing instruction, and the results of which I will  discuss in later chapters. I have included students words just as they  wrote them, and they add a depth of understanding to the retention  crisis revealed by the data. What the evidence shows is that building  rapport helps students succeed. For individual instructors and institutions looking for datadriven solutions to improve online student success, building rapport is a lowcost option they can implement right  away. Online higher education has great potential to expand access to  college to help disadvantaged student populations. But to meet that  promise, we have to connect with our students and close the online  retention gap.
CONNECTING IN THE ONLINE CLASSROOM Why Connecting with Online Students Matters Online courses are solidly in the mainstream of higher education. Even  before 2020, when the COVID-19 pandemic unexpectedly shifted universities to a much greater reliance on online education, the integration of online courses was already well underway. Instead of students  taking their course load either entirely online or entirely faceto-face,  students often take courses from a mix of modalities Botsch and  Botsch 2012; Glazier et al. 2019a. In 2016, for example, about a  third of all college students chose to take at least one online class Seaman, Allen, and Seaman 2018. A student living on campus may take  an online class to fit in practice with the volleyball team, whereas a  student living off campus and taking most of their classes online may  commute in for the last senior seminar they need to graduate. In fact,  for most students, distance education through online courses isnt  very distant at all; about half of all students who take online classes  also take classes on campus Seaman, Allen, and Seaman 2018. When we talk about online classes today, that category includes  asynchronous classes, where students work completely virtually and  at their own pace; synchronous classes, where students often log in  to attend video lectures or discussions at a particular time; hybrid  classes, where students sometimes attend in person, but at other times  complete coursework online; and hyflex classes, where students can  choose the modality of instruction that works best for them in any  given week. This variety of options and increased flexibility means  more students are taking online classes and attending college than  ever before. Students taking online classes represent a key part of the collegeattending population, but they are often treated as secondclass students. Because they may not be physically present on campus as  much, they may not know about or access campus support services.  Although decades of research tells us that positive student relationships with faculty members are one of the strongest predictors of college success e.g., Kezar and Maxey 2014a, few online classes involve  anything more than limited interactions between faculty and students 

Introduction   5 Cox 2006; Jaggars and Xu 2016. Without opportunities to connect  across the digital divide, students in online classes are missing out on  what could be a much more engaging and fulfilling learning experience Felten and Lambert 2020. For decades, colleges and universities have been increasing enrollment in their online programs while high retention gaps between online  and faceto-face classes have persisted. We should not simply accept  as given that many more online students will fail and drop out than  faceto-face students. The online retention crisis has disastrous consequences for university graduation rates and budgets, as well as tragic  consequences for students whose lives are marred by dashed dreams  and burdened by student debt. But it doesnt have to be this way. A Solution: Human Connection through Building Rapport How can we correct the online retention gap that is so prevalent in  academia and revive the promise of online higher education? One  key lies in addressing the fundamental difference between online and  faceto-face classes: the distance between the instructor and the students. Although low retention can be a thorny problem, the data I  present in this book show that, if instructors can bridge that distance  by building positive relationships, or rapport, with their students, the  retention gap between online and faceto-face classes can be completely eliminated. Numerous studies examining online student retention have consistently identified this lack of connection between students and instructors as a key factor leading to student withdrawal  from online courses e.g., Bowers and Kumar 2015; Eom, Wen, and  Ashill 2006; Morris 2010; Willging and Johnson 2009. The students  who are more likely to stay enrolled and ultimately succeed are the  students who have positive interactions with faculty members. Study after study shows that these positive interactions improve  the quality of student learning and their educational experience overall Chickering and Gamson 1987; Kezar and Maxey 2014a; Kuh  1995; Kuh et al. 2006; Light 2004. To put it simply, teaching is and has always beenabout making authentic connections with stu6   CONNECTING IN THE ONLINE CLASSROOM dents McCabe and GonzalezFlores 2017, 1. This fundamental  truth doesnt change if the classroom happens to move online. Teaching, and student retention, is best accomplished in online classrooms  where faculty build rapport with their students and students feel genuinely cared about Jaggars and Xu 2016. We all know this intuitively,  which is why the thought experiment with the returning student had  such an obvious answer: get that student some connection and they  will be much more successful! As the rest of the book establishes, we  dont just have to rely on intuitionresearch, data, and experimental  studies all demonstrate that building rapport with students improves  retention and success. Facultystudent interaction is particularly important for retaining firstgeneration students and students of color Kezar and Maxey  2014a. In fact, research indicates that the positive effects of facultystudent interaction are particularly strong for firstgeneration college students, but for students of color, they can be decisive Allen  1992; Lundberg and Schreiner 2004: even when other variables are  accounted for statistically, the strongest factor for students of color is  a positive relationship with a professor Kezar and Maxey 2014a, 31  32. Wood, Harris III, and White 2015 looked at successful teaching  practices for working with men of color in community colleges and  found that personal relationships based in trust and authentic care  were so important that they consider them a necessary precondition  for effective teaching. Yet, the very nature of online education means that faculty have  fewer opportunities to interact with students in both casual and meaningful ways King and Alperstein 2014. There are no direct online  equivalents to conversations about current events after class that may  turn into talks about career goals or the best graduate school. For  students who are entirely online, there are no chance encounters at  a speaker series, in line for coffee, or walking across the quad. There  are no opportunities to have your professor recognize you outside the  context of the classroom, ask how you are doing, and invite you to  apply for the research assistantship they have opening next fall. These  moments of human connection may seem trivial, but both qualitative 

Introduction   7 and quantitative data demonstrate that they can have a significant  impact on student success and retention in college. The lack of personal, faceto-face interaction is one of the major  challenges of building rapport with students in online classes. Instead  of just shrugging our shoulders and thinking that it is too bad that  online students will miss out on these moments of connection, faculty  can be more thoughtful and creative in engaging with our online students and in generating moments of genuine human connection with  them. This is rapport building: connecting with students on a human  level to support their learning, so that students feel that their success  matters to their instructor. This book shows you how to do it and how  significant its impact is on students. What to Expect from the Rest of This Book The goal of this book is to help faculty members, administrators, policy makers, and others identify a clear path, grounded in research and  data, that will improve online retention rates and student success at  the institutions of higher education they care about. In the coming  chapters, I walk through what we know about online retention and  present specific strategies that can be adapted to individual teaching  styles in order to build rapport with students and help them succeed. In part I of the book, I discuss the online retention crisis that is currently facing colleges and universities. In chapter 1, I lay out the current state of online higher education and how it provides both promise and peril for students and for universities. Students are promised  expanded access but may find succeeding in an online environment  difficult. Universities are promised new student populations but may  find that they have a hard time retaining and graduating them. In chapter 2, I discuss the reasons why online students are more likely to drop  out and the efforts that are currently underway to address the crisis of  online retention. A major problem with the efforts at most institutions  is that they are deeply invested in technological solutionsautomatic  early alert systems, data collection on student participation, training  on navigating Learning Management Systems like Canvas and Black8   CONNECTING IN THE ONLINE CLASSROOM board, and other EdTech fixes. While these efforts may be helpful  for some students, they do not address a key component that online  classes are often lacking: a connection between the instructor and the  student. I highlight those interventions that are working and identify  the human element at the heart of those successes. In part II of the book, I present a solution to the online retention  crisis: making real human connections between faculty and students,  or what I call rapport building. In chapter 3, I discuss the importance  of building rapport between faculty members and students and the  impact it can have on student success. For generations, we have known  the difference that a great teacher can make in faceto-face classrooms.  This chapter takes that concept into the online realm, reviewing the  literature on instructor presence in faceto-face and online classes, and  making connections between rapport and success. In this chapter, I  also present results from the Rapport Teaching Experiment, a study  conducted in my own online classes, to demonstrate the efficacy of  teaching with rapport. This multiyear teaching experiment involving  hundreds of students resulted in a 13 increase in retention for those  students taught with rapportbuilding techniques, completely eliminating the retention gap in my online Introduction to Political Science classes. Chapter 4 provides specific strategies for building positive instructorstudent relationships in online classes. Instructors who already believe  it is important to connect with their online students, but may not know  exactly how to do that, can skip right to this chapter for a wealth  of specific strategies for building rapport. The rapportbuilding techniques are organized into three general categories: humanizing the  instructor, providing personalized feedback, and reaching out to students. Each category contains multiple strategies, which are adaptable  to each instructors specific teaching style and level of commitment to  rapport building. Faculty can start small and build on the ideas shared  in this chapter. It may spur new ideas as instructors read and think  about how they teach their own classes and ways that they can do so  to better connect with students. Chapter 5 looks closely at students on the margins. These are stuIntroduction   9 dents for whom success is precariousexactly the kinds of students  that expanding access to higher education is supposed to help. Students of color, firstgeneration students, and lowerincome students  may be more likely to take online classes and are more likely to struggle in them. What can we do for these students? Using original survey  data and student demographic data from the Rapport Impact Study, I  demonstrate that rapport building is particularly helpful in retaining  these students on the margins. I also talk about how central empathy  is to my teaching approach and how feeling cared about can make a  huge difference for our students. Building rapport is a commitment. Part III of the book looks at  what it will take to change the way we teach online to more authentically connect with students. Chapter 6 looks at the tradeoffs from a  faculty perspective, including addressing the difficult balance between  supporting studentsespecially those who are firstgeneration, underserved, or who have many other demands on their time, as students  in online classes often doand helping students develop responsibility. Striking this balance is personal and will vary from one instructor  to another. This chapter helps instructors think through how to reach  that balance in their own teaching and provides evidence from the  Minimum Rapport Experiment to demonstrate just how little rapport  building it takes to have an effect on student retention. Whereas most of the rapportbuilding strategies in this book focus  on the role of instructors in improving student success, chapter 7  brings in concrete strategies for administrators, parents, mentors, and  students, to support the success of online students through a holistic approach. The online instructor is on the front lines of the retention battle, but the problem of online student retention is a large and  persistent one. It is not one that can be solved by faculty alone. Case  studies of institutions that are successfully closing the retention gap  by building rapport provide potential models to follow in this final  chapter.
CONNECTING IN THE ONLINE CLASSROOM Conclusion Higher education is facing an online retention crisis. It is already  harming our students and our universities, with the potential to get  much worse. But it is a crisis we know how to address. The data and  research presented in this book clearly demonstrate that building rapport with students in online classes can significantly improve retention and success. It will take administrators investing more in online  classes and faculty. It will take faculty dedicating more time to our  online students. But the payoff is significant. There are specific things  that instructors can do in our classes starting today to connect with  online students and lead to measurably better retention rates. This is a  problem we can solve. When we build rapport with our students and  connect with them on a human level, it improves both the teaching  and the learning experience. Online higher education has great potential to help expand access and improve equity. But to meet that potential, we have to address the online retention crisis. Our students are  counting on us, and the longterm financial stability of higher education might depend on it.

PART I THE PROBLEM Higher education is facing an online retention crisis My reason for taking online classes was because of my job and the hours I  needed to work . . . The instructor was not interested in working with my  situation . . . That class was my only option and so I was set up for failure. Online student at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock

This page intentionally left blank 

 ONE  The Promise and the Peril   of Online Higher Education I teach at an urbanserving university in Little Rock, the capital city  of Arkansas, a state in the southern United States. Arkansas is in  the bottom quartile for educational attainment for the 25to 44-yearold age cohort. For this critical category of early to midcareer adults  who represent the heart of a states workforce, only 25.7 of them  hold a bachelors degree in Arkansas, compared to 36.4 in the  United States as a whole, and 52.4 in Massachusetts, the state with  the highest average educational attainment National Science Board  2020. Lower levels of education attainment are bad for the people of  Arkansas, and for the state as a whole, because they slow economic  growth, make companies less likely to build here, and make stable  employment more difficult to find Sweeney 2015. How can communities who find themselves in this situation improve educational  attainment? Enter online higher education. For colleges and universities in Arkansas and around the world,  online classes can be a valuable resource for expanding access to students who otherwise wouldnt be able to attend. In the first half of  this chapter, I present data in support of that promise for both students and institutions. Online classes can help increase access for students, increase enrollment for universities, and increase educational 
THE PROBLEM attainment for communities. This golden promise is one reason that  so many have embraced online higher education. In the second half of the chapter, however, I demonstrate the peril  that is lurking in the current online higher education environment:  low retention rates. Tragically, the golden promise of online higher  education is a false one. Even as enrollment in online classes continues to climb, many more students are failing and dropping out of  online classes, compared to faceto-face classes e.g., Glazier 2016;  Xu and Jaggars 2014, 2011b. Instead of the expanding availability  of online classes leading to more students from disadvantaged populations earning college degrees, research indicates taking more online  classes actually leads to lower persistence in a given field and a lower  likelihood of graduating HuntingtonKlein, Cowan, and Goldhaber  2017. This reality has created an online retention crisis that higher  education must address if we have any hope of recapturing the promise of online education to improve the situations of our students, our  universities, and our communities. The Promise of Online Higher Education The online modality has introduced a level of flexibility and affordability to higher education that has greatly expanded student access.  Lowerincome students, nontraditional students, and students of  color are all accessing college in greater numbers, in part due to the  increased availability of online classes Jaggars and Bailey 2010; Parsad, Lewis, and Tice 2008. This is the great promise of online higher  educationto expand access to underserved populations. Affordability for LowerIncome Students Financial considerations are a major reason students are drawn to  online classes. Much of the growth in higher education over the past  20 years has come from lowerincome students who were previously  unable to access a college education Fry and Cilluffo 2019. In recent  years, lowerincome students have begun to enroll in college at numThe Promise and the Peril of Online Higher Education   15 bers approaching those of middleincome students. Whereas in 1990,  44 of lowerincome students and 56 of middleincome students  enrolled in college; by 2015, the numbers were statistically indistinguishable at about 64 each Fry and Cilluffo 2019. As lowerincome students enter the world of higher education, they  often find that online classes are a more affordable and accessible  alternative to the traditional college classroom, even if they would  prefer to take classes in person. Lowerincome students often select  institutions where they can take lessexpensive online classes, like  community colleges or forprofit colleges, where the percentage of students in poverty has doubled over the past 20 years Fry and Cilluffo  2019, even though the financial model of forprofit colleges often  leaves students worse off than when they started Cottom 2017; US  Department of Education 2017. The increase in lowerincome students attending college is encouraging, but these numbers dont tell the stories of the students struggling financially to make it through. These are the stories we heard  when Skurat Harris and I surveyed students about online classes, like  the student who felt online classes were their only option because of  the price of gas: If I had gas to get back and forth Id take it in classroom, but I wish I could live on campus cuz it would be easier to get  involved. Attending college at all may be financially intimidating to students  from lowerincome backgrounds because, to put it very simply, college costs a lot. In 2019, the cost of in-state tuition, fees, and room  and board at a public university averaged 21,950 a year. If you are  attending an outof-state college, you can up that price to 38,330  a year. And if you want to attend a private, fouryear institution, it  is going to cost nearly 50,000 a year specifically, 49,870 College Board 2019. As a reality check, the most recent available data   Over time, high-income students remain consistently about 20 percentage points  above middle-income students in terms of college enrollment, but the gains for lowerincome students are promising.
THE PROBLEM in the United States from 2018, puts the median household income at  61,937 Guzman 2019. To put into perspective just how much the cost of college has  increased over the past generation, in 2000, the average cost of a year  of college, including room and board, at a public fouryear institution was 8,653 Snyder, de Brey, and Dillow 2019 and the median  income was 42,148 DeNavasWalt, Cleveland, and Roemer 2001.  So, it cost about 20 of median income to attend a state college in  2000, but it will cost between 35 and 61 of the median income  today. The rising costs of college have far outpaced inflation, which  averaged about 2 a year since 2000, whereas in-state tuition and  fees increased 221 from 2000 to 2020 Boyington and Kerr 2019. And if you felt overwhelmed reading through those statistics on the  cost of college, imagine being a firstgeneration college student going  over them with your workingclass parent or parents. Its no wonder  that, when potential students consider the high cost of tuition and  fees, plus the expense of living on campus, many are deciding that they  would prefer to live at home or to take courses entirely online in order  to reduce college expenses and be able to work more hours King and  Alperstein 2014, 10. Attending college in the current fiscal environment almost always means that students will need to both work and  take out loans GoldrickRab 2016. Lowerincome students are the most sensitive to the costs of attending faceto-face classes Osei 2019. At my own university, the University of Arkansas at Little Rock, completely online students pay  lower fees, resulting in an annual cost savings of 4,166, or about  34 What It Costs 2020. Using data from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System IPEDS, Deming et al. 2015 find  that those institutions that have more online students tend to charge  lower tuition, providing some evidence that online higher education   Lower tuition costs are not necessarily the norm in online higher education; in fact,  74 of institutions report charging the same for online and face-to-face classes Craig  2019. A study from the North Carolina General Assembly found that the cost of developing an online class is actually slightly 6 higher than a face-to-face class but that the  cost of delivery is the same North Carolina General Assembly 2010.

The Promise and the Peril of Online Higher Education   17 can bend the cost curve for students. When lowerincome students  are considering the costs of college, they are thinking of far more than  just tuition. There are other costs associated with attending classes on  campus Hurt 2008. Students at California State University Channel  Islands, for instance, specifically mention how taking online classes  can help with hidden costs, like gas and parking Hannans, Leafstedt,  and PacanskyBrock 2017. As one online student with young kids at  home said about his reasons for choosing online classes, For my wife  and me, it was the fact that we wouldnt have to put the kids into day  care Schaarsmith 2012. One of the great promises of online education is expanding access for these students. Online classes make college affordable when it otherwise would not be. Flexibility for Nontraditional Students The flexibility that online courses provide is another part of their  allurethey hold out the possibility of making a college education  accessible to populations that otherwise wouldnt be able to reach  it. A working father can take one or two online classes at a time and  finish his degree over the course of six to eight years. Without set  meeting times, a firstgeneration college student taking online classes  and working to help her family make ends meet can be available for  the sometimes unpredictable hours that retail or food service industries require, while still being able to complete her classwork. Online  enrollments have grown remarkably over time, increasing 17.2 just  from 2012 to 2016 Seaman, Allen, and Seaman 2018, 12, with much  of this growth coming from students who are considered nontraditionalstudents who may attend parttime, work fulltime jobs, or  care for dependents Layne, Boston, and Ice 2013. Without online  classes, these students might not be able to finish their degrees as  quickly, or they may not enroll in college at all Xu and Xu 2019. When Skurat Harris and I surveyed students at the University of  Arkansas at Little Rock, many of them mentioned the flexibility of  online classes. For instance, one student said, I generally have the  freedom to schedule classwork around my life instead of missing out 
THE PROBLEM on life to attend a brick and mortar class. Another student specifically  noted that they appreciated that the professor in their online class was  in tune with todays nontraditional adult student working on masters level classes while raising a family and having an active career.  Students today have a lot going on and nontraditional students often  turn to online classes for the flexibility they need to complete their  degrees National Adult Learner Coalition 2017; Tung 2012. Recent research looking at the Georgia Institute of Technologys  Master of Science in Computer Science program demonstrates that  providing an online option for this degree significantly increased overall enrollment, mostly among midcareer professionals Goodman,  Melkers, and Pallais 2019. The average age of a student applying  for the faceto-face program was 24, but the average age of a student  applying for the online program was 34. Although it is focused on a  single, advanced degree program, this research indicates that online  programs are not just substituting for faceto-face ones, but are, in  fact, expanding access to students who otherwise wouldnt attend. These nontraditional students represent an important higher education population. They are more likely to take online classes and  enroll parttime, but they are also more likely to be engaged academically Rabourn, BrckaLorenz, and Shoup 2018. They tend to spend  more hours studying and more hours working, compared to traditional students Woods and Frogge 2017. These are often students  who are paying for school themselves, who have families to support,  and who are taking their education very seriously. They need online  courses in order to fit college into their busy lives. Accessibility for Underserved Ethnic and Racial Groups Recent decades have also seen an increase in the ethnic and racial  diversity of the students attending college Lumina Foundation 2019;  Snyder, de Brey, and Dillow 2019, in part due to increasing accessibility as a result of online courses. The percentage of students of  color taking online classes has also increased over time Ortagus  2017. Institutions that offer more online classes are also more likely 

The Promise and the Peril of Online Higher Education   19 to enroll students of color. Between 1996 and 2016, the percentage  of the community college student population comprising students of  color increased from 31 to 50 Fry and Cilluffo 2019. Students  of color also make up 58 of the student population of private forprofit universities Fry and Cilluffo 2019, the majority of which specialize in online programs Deming, Goldin, and Katz 2012, compared to about 42 of college students overall Lumina Foundation  2019. Some studies also show that students of color are more likely  to take online classes, compared to white students Chen, Lambert,  and Guidry 2010; Classes  Careers 2011. Despite this, US Census data reveal that, at 57, Black high school  graduates enroll in college at rates about 15 lower than the national  average of 72 Snyder, de Brey, and Dillow 2019. One promise of  online higher education is the ability to close these racial gaps Killion,  GallagherLepak, and Reilly 2015; Kronk 2017. Students from disadvantaged backgrounds have not had the same educational opportunities as other students Engle and Tinto 2008. More students of color  are enrolling in online classes in part due to cost considerations, as  they are also more likely to be lowerincome and more likely to attend  affordable community colleges, where online classes are common Fry  and Cilluffo 2019. Research on Latinx students shows that online  classes can help them graduate, because many Latinx students work  fullor parttime jobs and they benefit from the flexibility of online  classes Contreras and Contreras 2015; Elliott and Parks 2018. Online classes may also hold additional, less obvious, benefits for  disadvantaged groups. Looking at African American students attending Predominantly White Institutions PWIs, Stanley 2014 finds  they have greater learning outcomes in online, compared to faceto-face, courses, arguing that the online environment provides a more  neutral space where African American students are able to expend less  energy on the intercultural efforts of engaging at PWIs and can instead  focus on learning Dowd, Sawatzky, and Korn 2011; Tanaka 2002.  Along these same lines, some scholars argue that online courses may  feel safer for students from marginalized groups because they provide some distance from peers and faculty, along with some degree of 
THE PROBLEM  anonymity Erichsen and Bolliger 2011; Humiston et al. 2020; Sullivan 2002. Despite decades of effort, higher education remains stratified by  race Bowen, Chingos, and McPherson 2009; Carnevale and Strohl  2013; Long and Bateman 2020; Sublett 2020. Online courses can  help close racial gaps in higher education attainment by putting a  college education within reach for students of color, although there  remain important digital divide issues regarding access to technology and internet infrastructure Ortagus 2017. Other Benefits of Online Learning Beyond these specific benefitsaffordability for lowerincome students, flexibility for nontraditional students, and accessibility for students of colorthere are many additional benefits of online learning.  When students arent required to be in a physical classroom at the  same time, access expands to potentially include students from all  over the world Rovai and Downey 2010. When students can watch  or read lectures multiple times, it can be more accommodating for different learning abilities Hollins and Foley 2013; Mikoajewska and  Mikoajewski 2011; Policar, Crawford, and Alligood 2017. A Universal Design for Learning approach in an online classroom, which  prioritizes creating a flexible environment to accommodate different  learners, disabilities, limitations, and needs, can be welcoming for all  students KingSears 2009. When class discussions take place asynchronously, students who are less outgoing or less confident in their  language skills have more of an opportunity to participate Bassett  2011; Campbell 2007; Erichsen and Bolliger 2011. Even absent a  pandemic, online learning is a good option for students who might be  immunocompromised. Online classes are often thought of as the second choice for higher  education, but there are benefits to online courses that should be  appreciated in their own right Bayne et al. 2020. For instance, online  classes can provide improved access to primary sources, the ability to  take virtual field trips, collaboration across more diverse student popThe Promise and the Peril of Online Higher Education   21 ulations, and opportunities to use technology to engage students in  innovative ways Journell 2007. Online learning helps make higher education accessible for all  kinds of previously hardto-reach student groups, including students  from rural areas, older students, and those who are primary caregivers  Thomas, Herbert, and Teras 2014. Those who live in what Rosenboom and Blagg 2018 call geographical higher education deserts  are too far from a college campus to attend in person and so online  courses provide higher education access they otherwise wouldnt  have. There are many populations who benefit from taking online  classesthat is one reason online enrollment has been growing so  quickly! Almost a million more students were taking online courses in  2016, compared to 2012 Seaman, Allen, and Seaman 2018, 15. The  promise of online classes is that they serve a crucial function in higher  education: expanding access to college. Among this greatly expanding pool of collegeattending adults are increasing numbers of lowerincome students and students of color, signaling positive forward  progress for society and for universities. More students are depending  on online higher education than ever before, which makes a focus on  equity in online courses even more imperative Sublett 2020. What a Degree Can Mean for Students The promise of online higher education is not just about access to  college but also about what a college degree can mean for graduates.  Receiving a college degree can make a significant difference in terms  of earning potential and quality of life, especially for the categories of  students discussed above, who are relatively new in the higher education market Ma, Pender, and Welch 2016, and especially if they are  coming from lowerincome backgrounds or are the first in their families to earn a college diploma. Higher education can mean the key to upward social and economic  mobility Johnson, Brett, and Deary 2010 and can raise entire communities. The unemployment rate is consistently lower for those with  a bachelors degree or higher, with the gap between college graduates 
THE PROBLEM and those with less educational attainment only growing during times  of economic uncertainty Snyder, de Brey, and Dillow 2019. During  the Great Recession 2008 2013, the unemployment gap between a  25to 34-yearold with a high school diploma and one with a bachelors degree was about 12 percentage points Snyder, de Brey, and  Dillow 2019, 657. Early data from the pandemic recession of 2020  indicated that those with a college degree had an advantage of 8 to  14 percentage points over those without one when it came to finding  themselves unemployed Whistle 2020. We also have to consider the  devastating reality that the types of jobs that require college degrees  are the ones more likely to be able to be done from home. Tragically,  lowwage workers bore the brunt of both financial and health losses  in the early months of the COVID19 pandemic in 2020, illustrating  how people without college degrees are at greater risk not only for  economic hardship but also, in the case of the pandemic, for infection  Kinder and Ross 2020. College degrees, in other words, give people  more than just an education which is a laudable thing on its own;  they give people greater economic and sometimes health security. As high school counselors regularly advise, the economic payoffs  in terms of salary gained make a college degree well worth the investment. US Census data reveal that the median annual earnings of yearround, fulltime workers age 25 and older are 61,830 for college  graduates but 36,715 for those with only a high school diploma  Snyder, de Brey, and Dillow 2019, 658. What that means in very real  terms for students is that, if they can graduate, they can boost their  earning potential by an average of 25,000 a year. That gain in earnings can make a world of difference for them and their families, particularly for those students who come from lower income brackets.  We see this promise of upward mobility in a very real way when we  look at the data from Minority Serving Institutions MSIs of higher  education, where the extended mobility ratestudents moving from  the bottom two income quintiles to the top twois more than double  that of nonMSIs 20, compared to 9 Espinosa, Kelchen, and  Taylor 2018. College is a major engine of upward mobility, especially 

The Promise and the Peril of Online Higher Education   23 for students of color. This is how students and their families get out of  poverty and into the middle class. Beyond the cold calculations of financial wellbeing, these students  also get to engage in the process of learning. They get to come into  our classrooms and leave transformed. A firstgeneration college student enthusiastically told my colleagues and me in a survey about  an online class she took, I learned so much about things that I can  actually apply in my life! This class was very enlightening. Another  was just starting graduate school and said, Im very excited to finally  be in grad school and to be learning! Without online classes, many  of our students wouldnt have these opportunities and, as I discuss  below, colleges and universities would lose out on these amazing students from diverse backgrounds. This is the promise of online higher  education. The Importance of Online Education for Universities The promise of online education is not just in the benefits it holds  for students. As access has increased, universities have been happy to  welcome new students. As we have seen, the students in higher education today are drawn from a broader and more diverse population  than ever before, thanks in part to advances in technology that provide students with the flexibility to access content anywhere, at any  time Herbert 2006; Layne, Boston, and Ice 2013, making for a richer  learning experience for all students. Seeing the potential to bring in  new students, many universities have prioritized online education as  a strategic approach to increase enrollment Clinefelter and Aslanian  2016, especially in the face of declining traditional enrollments Gering et al. 2018. University administrators explicitly see online education as a way to expand access and broaden the pool of potential students. Fiftyseven percent of university leaders say that online learning  can help them attract students from outside the traditional service  area, and 71 say it can increase student access Smith, Samors,  and Mayadas 2008, 98.
THE PROBLEM In fact, as students have increasingly taken more online classes,  universities have increasingly become financially dependent on online  enrollment. Although certainly an outlier, Arizona State University grew from around 400 students enrolled in online programs to  more than 30,000 in just six years ASU Online 2020. At a time  when many colleges and universities are facing enrollment challenges,  online courses are an enrollment bright spot. For instance, in the state  of Oregon, enrollment in community colleges declined by 28 from  2009 to 2019, but enrollment in online classes increased by 1 Wallis 2020. Similarly, from 2002 to 2012, the California Community  College system increased online enrollments by almost 850,000, while  at the same time enrollment in faceto-face classes declined by about  285,000 Johnson and Mejia 2014; Xu and Xu 2019. Greater numbers of studentseven students who live on campusare opting to  take online classes. In 2018, more than 30 of all college students in  the United States were enrolled in at least one online class Seaman,  Allen, and Seaman 2018, 3. It is critically important to note that at the same time that online  enrollment has been increasing, traditional enrollment has been declining. From 2012 to 2017, 44 of the 50 states saw a decline in enrollment at their colleges and universities, with 28 states declining 5  or more. Nationally, annual enrollment numbers for 2017 2018 are  about 10 lower than for 2010 2011 Snyder, de Brey, and Dillow  2019. And these numbers are prepandemic. Note that while these  overall enrollment declines have plagued institutions, the number of  students taking online courses has steadily climbed. Looking to the  future, many institutions of higher education are concerned about the  coming enrollment cliff due to demographic changes and a reverse  baby boom as a result of the Great Recession Grawe 2018. With  fewer children born from 2008 to 2013, universities with enrollmentbased funding models, especially nonelite universities, are likely to  find themselves in a tight spot, with predicted enrollment drops of up  to 15 over just five years Grawe 2018. Many university administrators see these current and future enrollment declines, together with the real and potential growth in online 

The Promise and the Peril of Online Higher Education   25 education, and they view online classes as critical to the strategic  future of their institutions Allen and Seaman 2016; McCarthy 2009.  Before the COVID-19 pandemic hit in 2020 and moved virtually all of  higher education online, about 90 of higher education institutions  offered some form of online education Bowers and Kumar 2015;  Capra 2011. Online education is attractive to institutions from a business perspective because it does not come with the physical costs of  buildings and infrastructure and because it broadens the pool of prospective students King and Alperstein 2014, 11. Online education is  thus seen as a revenuepositive endeavor Bacow et al. 2012. Online  classes are also often taught by contingent faculty, who are paid less  than tenured or tenuretrack faculty and have fewer benefits Chapman 2011; Franklin 2015; Kezar, DePaola, and Scott 2019; Mandernach, Register, and ODonnell 2015. The COVID-19 pandemic only  heightened the focus on online education beginning in 2020, as universities around the world shifted to emergency remote teaching on  very short notice Hodges et al. 2020. The need for physical distance  raises the prominence of online education in the shortterm strategic  calculations of colleges and universities around the world, and some  may find value in keeping a portion of their courses there. At a time when students are well aware of the rising costs of tuition,  universities would much rather choose an entrepreneurial path of market expansion through online education than have to issue another  tuition hike Dykman and Davis 2008. Online courses are a quick  and easy way to gain access to a larger market. When asked about  whether the growth of online education excited or frightened them,  80 of university administrators were more excited than afraid, compared to just 42 of faculty Allen and Seaman 2012. While there is  certainly not a universal embrace of online education, many who are  thinking longterm about the strategic future of institutions of higher  education are turning to online courses. The promise of online education is the golden winwin situation  it provides. Online college courses provide underserved populations  with access to higher education, all while ensuring enrollment growth  and fiscal stability for universities. What more could you ask for?
THE PROBLEM The Peril of Online Higher Education: Low Retention Rates Although online courses have the potential to provide an ideal symbiotic arrangement in which a greater number of students are able to  access higher education and universities are able to access a greater  number of students King and Alperstein 2014, 26, they are hiding  a difficult truth, one university enrollment officers are often loath to  confront and faculty may prefer to stay in the dark about. Many more  students are failing and dropping out of online classes, compared to  faceto-face classes Boston, Ice, and Burgess 2012. We have seen  from the data that many different kinds of students are taking online  classes today and, although some students do better than others, students are generally more likely to drop and fail online classes, compared to faceto-face classes. Repeated studies across different types  of universities, different kinds of programs, and different student populations all indicate persistent and significantly lower retention rates  for online courses. Students are simply more likely to fail and withdraw from online classes. This is the reality that has created an online  retention crisis. What do I mean when I say that higher education is facing an online  retention crisis? Retention is sometimes used like a higher education  buzzword that is casually dropped in administration meetings, along  with flexible classrooms and studentcentered, but without any real  intent behind it. Different institutions and researchers use the term  retention in different ways, so that it sometimes means keeping a student enrolled in a single class and other times means ensuring they  graduate from the institution. In all cases, retention looks at the issue  from the institutions perspectiveand improving retention comes  down to keeping students enrolled and getting them graduated in a  timely manner. From another perspective, we could talk about student  persistence, or the students decision to stay enrolled in a particular  class or in college Mortenson 2012. Although institutions want to  retain and graduate as many of their students as they can, when we  take the students point of view, being retained at a particular institution may not be the best choice for them. A student may see transferThe Promise and the Peril of Online Higher Education   27 ring to another institution or even leaving higher education as the best  option de los Santos and Sutton 2012; Hagedorn 2012. No matter which way we look at it, a crisis arises when we notice  the gap between online and faceto-face classes. All else being equal,  retention rates are significantly lower for students in online classes,  compared to faceto-face classes Xu and Xu 2019. There are many  reasons why students may leave college, but for any given class, any  given semester, students who need or have to take a class online  should not be significantly more likely to fail or drop out just because  the class is online. Currently, lower retention rates for online classes  are the reality for the vast majority of students. Given the increasing  numbers of students taking online classes, and the higher education  need online classes fill for underserved student populations, the online  retention gap is a crisis for higher education. There is no excuse for letting this gap persist and letting so many of our students fail. The gap between online and faceto-face retention is not a small  one. Although there is no systematic, national study of online retention rates Angelino, Williams, and Natvig 2007; Frankola 2001,  singlecampus studies usually place the online retention rate between  5 and 35 lower than the in-person retention rate Dutton, Dutton,  and Perry 2001; Patterson and McFadden 2009; Stover 2005; Terry  2001, and some reviews roughly estimate that students enrolled in  distance education are twice as likely to drop out than oncampus students Willging and Johnson 2009, 115 16. Patterson and McFaddens 2009 study of students seeking masters degrees found online  retention six to seven times lower than faceto-face retention rates.  The retention gap persists across disciplines and universities Carr Chellman and Duchastel 2000; Levy 2007; McLaren 2004; Tello  2007. Looking specifically at community colleges, Aragon and Johnson 2008 find that online retention rates lagged behind traditional  faceto-face classes by at least 20. Simply put, more students are  failing and dropping out of online classes. Imagine being a student,  excited to finally go to college, and then having an experience with  a professor in an online class like the one this student reported in  one of our research surveys: He needs to be more involved and less 
THE PROBLEM contemptuous with students . . . I know several students that have  dropped this class because of the lack of communication. This is just  one qualitative example of what might be behind the retention gap. The online retention gap is even worse for underserved student populations. Studies show that lowerincome students, firstgeneration  students, and students of color are attracted to the flexibility of online  classes, and are more likely to enroll at institutions that cater to online  students, like community colleges and forprofit colleges Deming,  Goldin, and Katz 2012; Fry and Cilluffo 2019; Snyder, de Brey, and  Dillow 2019. But work by Xu and Jaggars 2014 finds, consistent  with other research Glazier et al. 2019a; Hamann et al. 2020, that  the more online courses students take, the less likely they are to complete their degrees. This finding holds across demographics but is even  stronger for some groups, including Black students, male students,  younger students, and students with lower gradepoint averages. In  fact, both performance and retention gaps are significantly greater for  those students who have less academic preparation, are from underrepresented racial or ethnic groups, or are younger Figlio, Rush, and  Yin 2013; Jaggars and Bailey 2010; Johnson and Mejia 2014; Krieg  and Henson 2016; Peterson and Bond 2004; Xu and Jaggars 2014. Further research affirms that some students of color are struggling  to succeed in their online classes Jaggars and Xu 2014. In California Community Colleges, dropout rates for Latinx students in online  classes are twice as high as those in faceto-face classes Kaupp 2012.  Multiple statistical studies across different student populations demonstrate that the racial achievement gaps that are already a problem in  faceto-face college classes are exacerbated even further in online college classes Bennett, McCarty, and Carter 2019; Figlio, Rush, and Yin  2013; McCarty, Bennett, and Carter 2013. And, although one might  think that online courses would reduce biases, a field experiment by  Baker et al. 2018 finds that professors still show implicit bias in on line classes, responding to comments by students with stereotypically  white male names more often than to comments by students with  stereotypically Black, South Asian, or female names. Although more  students of color are accessing college through online courses, online 

The Promise and the Peril of Online Higher Education   29 classes can be hard on them. Low retention rates are harming the  very student populations we thought were being helped by expanded  access to college through online courses Jaggars and Bailey 2010. The peril of online education thus boils down to a problem of retention. What this means in practice is that institutions of higher education are inviting students to pursue college degrees through online  courses yet making it difficult for them to successfully complete those  courses and earn those degrees because of the medium through which  the courses are delivered. Even if a student is only taking a few online  classes, if they are failing and dropping out of those classes, it can  harm their degree progression, preventing them from passing important prerequisites, reducing their chances of graduating, and harming  their sense of self Bailey, Jeong, and Cho 2010; Tinto 2006; Urwin  et al. 2010. It is not just fully online students who are harmed by the  online retention crisis. It is the millions of students each year who  enroll in online classes. When retention rates in online classes are significantly and persistently lower than in faceto-face classes, and we  continue to ignore that fact, we are setting our students up to fail. This is a dire situation for both universities and students. Federal  financial aid covers a smaller proportion of the cost of college than  in years past, and the vast majority of students are taking out loans  to attend GoldrickRab 2016. Students who drop out of college are  financially devastatednot only do they fail to realize the higher earning potential they could have achieved with a degree, but they are also  often saddled with student loan debt. This double whammy can leave  them worse off financially than before they enrolled: buried under  a mountain of debt that can be quite literally inescapable Hiltonsmith 2017. Dropping out can also be emotionally devastating, damaging a students sense of self and belief in what they can accomplish  Hoeschler and BackesGellner 2019; Ramsdal, Bergvik, and Wynn  2018; Urwin et al. 2010. As one student wrote on an anonymous survey, When a student drops, its hard as hell to get the student loans or  the scholarships . . . we are already losing our home and cars. While the reality of low online retention rates can be disastrous  for students, it is also harmful for universities, who find themselves 
THE PROBLEM spending valuable limited resources to recruit students only to lose  them when they drop or fail. Low retention rates can lead to millions  in lost revenue, at an increasingly financially difficult time for universities Nelson and Creagh 2013. This situation is even more perilous  due to the growing use of performancebased funding models that use  retention and graduation data as key metrics Atchley, Wingenbach,  and Akers 2013; Polatajko and Monaghan 2017. The growth trajectory of online enrollments over the past 20 years has made it possible  for many colleges to overlook their online retention problems. With so  much online growth, what is the loss of 10, or even 20, of those  students? The very real longterm enrollment problems many universities are facing, together with the detrimental impact low retention  rates have on our students, mean that this time of naivet, perhaps  even willful blindness, is quickly ending. The bottom line is that the  cost of losing our studentswhether counted in terms of time, money,  or effortis simply too high to bear, for students, faculty, universities,  or society as a whole Willging and Johnson 2009, 118. We can no  longer afford to ignore this problem. Finding a Solution In order to know how to reverse the online retention crisis, we have  to better understand what is causing it. In the next chapter, I look  closely at the research on student retention and ask why so many students are dropping out of and failing online classes. Although this  problem is complex, at the heart of it is a lack of human connection.  Online classes inherently create distance between instructors and students. Chapter 2 also looks at successful retention efforts and identifies those that close this distance and build rapport with students as  the most effective at improving student outcomes. There is hope for  restoring the promise of online higher education for our students, our  universities, and our communities. But in order to do so, we have to  make real human connections in our online classes by building rapport with our students.

 TWO  The Digital Divide O nline higher education is facing a retention crisis. And I have to  warn you, looking at the data on online retention rates can be  downright demoralizing. In this chapter, I present data from diverse  courses, institutions, and student populations to demonstrate just how  staggering the online retention crisis is. I then take a close look at the  research on student retention and three key explanations for why students dont succeed in online classes. In doing so, I introduce the concept of rapport in the online classroom and the academic research  in support of its importance to student success. Next, because many  universities are trying to address the online retention crisis right now,  I take a look at some of those solutions, specifically ones targeted at  improving student skills and setting early alerts for when students are  struggling. Ultimately, I argue that increased human connections are  at the heart of most successful online retention efforts. Building rapport with our students is a key way to close the retention gap and  reverse the online retention crisis.
THE PROBLEM The Online Retention Crisis Heartbreaking retention gaps between online and faceto-face classes  as high as 40 e.g., Jaggars 2013 bear witness to the wasted potential of students who might have succeeded if the circumstances had  been different. A sample of just some of the published research studies  on university online versus faceto-face course retention rates is provided in table 2.1. These data provide, as closely as possible, an applesto-apples comparison of the same courses, taught at the same university, often by the same professors, via different modalities online vs.  faceto-face. These data starkly demonstrate the seriousness of the  problem. We are losing our online students. Because community colleges have been leaders in providing online  higher education, a great deal of excellent scholarly research has focused on online community college students. For bigpicture comparisons aggregated across entire community college systems, see the data  in table 2.2. In both tables, retention rates are significantly lower in  online classes. Although there may be slight differences in how each study in tables  2.1 and 2.2 defines retention, retained students are usually defined as  students who successfully pass a class by earning at least a C. Students  who earn a D, an F, or withdraw from the course completely are not  Table 2.1. Online and Face-to-Face Retention Rates in Specific Courses in percentages Course

Face-to-Face  Retention  Rate

Online  Retention  Rate

Gap in  Retention  Rates

Citation Beginning Algebra 85 50 35 Blackner 2000 Intermediate Algebra 73 51 22 Summerlin 2004 Basic Algebra 80 61 19 Zavarella and Ignash  2009 Introductory Computer  Science 94 53 41 kleinman and Entin  2002 Political Methodology 90 71 19 Roberts 2015 Introductory Political  Science 70 57 13 Glazier 2016

The digital divide   33 considered retained Mortenson 2012. Lower online retention rates  present many challenges to universities, damage already flagging university finances, and harm university reputations Crosling, Heagney,  and Thomas 2009. Universities want to keep these students enrolled.  As we will see, those universities that have begun to confront the  online retention crisis often sink vast amounts of time and resources  into complex technological fixes Beer and Lawson 2017, 774. Not only are low online retention rates bad for universities, but  withdrawing from a course can be financially devastating for students  Jaggars 2013. When students drop out of a class in the middle of  a semester, or even when they complete the class but earn an F or a  D and do not get credit for it as is the policy at many universities,  they are less likely to take the next required class, less likely to enroll  in the university in the subsequent semester, and less likely to graduate Bailey, Jeong, and Cho 2010; Jaggars and Xu 2010; Xu and Jaggars 2011b. Failing or dropping a course interrupts students education, while also negatively affecting both their career advancement  and their selfesteem Tinto 2006; Urwin et al. 2010. Dropping out  of college can lead to a spiral of failure and debt that can mar a students life and finances for years to come Alexander 2014; Hiltonsmith 2017; ScottClayton and Li 2016. Although some amount of failure or withdrawal is inevitable Urwin  Table 2.2. Online and Face-to-Face Retention Rates,   across Community College Systems in percentages  Institution

Face-to-Face  Retention  Rate

Online  Retention  Rate

Gap  in Retention  Rates

Citation Aggregate of six Ohio  community colleges 90 77 13 Chambers 2002 Aggregate of Virginia  community colleges 81 68 13 Jaggars and xu  2010 Aggregate of washington  community colleges 90 82  8 xu and Jaggars  2011b Aggregate of California  community colleges 70 60 10 Johnson and Mejia  2014
THE PROBLEM et al. 2010a college degree is not the right fit for every person who  enrollsthe gap between online and faceto-face retention tells us  that something is seriously wrong with our online classes. The more  cynical among us might venture that low online retention rates are a  design feature of the current academic system. Higher education does  not care so much if students drop out halfway through the semester, so  long as they pay their tuition up front. I will admit that over a decade  of teaching at a public university has left me a bit more jaded than  when I started. Nevertheless, it is financially shortsighted for institutions to let students fail in the short term when they could be returning  for subsequent semesters and eventually graduating in the long term.  There are too many ways that low retention hurts institutions and students. Even from a cold, pragmatic, financially driven perspective, this  retention crisis is bad news for colleges and universities. Some have suggested that the key to reducing the retention gap is to  allow only students who meet a particular GPA or experience threshold to take online classes e.g., Cochran et al. 2014. Although this  may seem like a tempting solution, it would undermine a fundamental promise of online education: expanding access to broader student  populations. For some students, the ability to take classes online is  key to their success Shea and Bidjerano 2014. Indeed, our most vulnerable student populations are often the ones who most need online  classes to graduate. They wont be able to finish otherwise. Data from my own school, the University of Arkansas at Little  Rock, show that retention numbers increase slightly when students  take some of their course load online see figure 2.1. UA Little Rock  is an urban, state university serving a nontraditional student population; many of our students need the flexibility that online classes provide. Research based on data from over half a million community college students similarly indicates that students taking a mix of online  and faceto-face classes are more likely to succeed James, Swan, and  Daston 2016. The data in figure 2.1 show a slight uptick in retention for students taking some online classes but also illustrate how those retention numbers decline when we look at students who are taking more 

The digital divide   35 than 50 of their course load online. The lowest retention rate is in  the category of students who are taking all of their classes online they are 20 less likely to be retained than the students who are taking some, but less than 50, of their course load online. Similarly, in their study of California Community College students,  Johnson and Mejia 2014 find that students who take at least some  of their courses online are more likely than those who take only traditional courses to earn an associates degree or to transfer to a fouryear institution. Shea and Bidjerano 2018 looked at data from more  than 45,000 community college students in the State University of  New York system and found that there was a tipping point in terms  of course load. Taking some online classes helped students complete  their degrees, but when students took more than 40 of their courses  online, they were less likely to graduate. Importantly, the effect of online classes on retention rates is likely  to vary by student population. It can be difficult to track students who  take a mix of online and faceto-face classes; sometimes students even  take classes across different universities as they start and restart college Cuba 2016; Katsinas et al. 2019. Students who engage in this  institutional swirling behavior, often nontraditional students who  are searching out the needed classes at any institution or underserved  students who are taking as many classes as possible at a community  Figure 2.1. University of Arkansas at Little Rock Retention Rate by Course  Load, 2017 2018
THE PROBLEM college before transferring to a fouryear school de los Santos and  Sutton 2012, are actually more likely to successfully complete their  degrees Kolodner 2016. The student populations at the University of  Arkansas at Little Rock, in the California Community College system,  and in the State University of New York system include many nontraditional college students who may be more likely to benefit from  the flexibility that taking some online classes can provide. Research  from other universities indicates a more directly linear relationship  between the proportion of a students course load that is online and  their retention rate. Data I collected with my colleagues at the University of Central Florida indicate that, for their student population, any  additional online classes lead to lower retention rates Glazier et al.  2019b; Hamann et al. 2020. While advising students to avoid a fully online load if at all possible is probably a good idea Shea and Bidjerano 2018, preventing  students from taking online classes is not going to help them succeed  or expand access to higher education. We need to do a better job of  reaching students through the online classes we are offering. Why Do Students Drop and Fail Online Classes? In order to reach our online students, we need to start with understanding why they fail and drop out at consistently higher rates than  students in faceto-face classes. What is driving the online retention  crisis? This question has lurked in the background of higher education since courses first moved online. Often, it has been overshadowed  by the remarkable growth of online enrollmentwhen students keep  signing up for online classes, lower retention rates tend to fall down  the priority list. But for years, scholars of online teaching and learning  have been seeking to better understand why online students are significantly less likely to succeed e.g., Moore and Fetzner 2009; Muljana and Luo 2019; Willging and Johnson 2009. There are many reasons why students drop and fail online classes. Here, I look at three  categories of explanations: online student characteristics, online student skills, and the online course environment. In these sections, I use 

The digital divide   37 quotes, both from others research and my own, to illustrate the student experience beyond the academic research. Explanation 1: Online Students Are Inherently different I value my education and am appreciative that I am able to obtain an education with as little time away from my family as possible. Because education  is important to me and I want to show my sons . . . there is just no way that I  could do it in any kind of time, without that online. Online student at Utah State University   quoted in Maxfield 2008, 65 One intuitively popular explanation is that students who take online  classes are just different from students who take faceto-face classes.  Students in online courses tend to be older Cochran et al. 2014; Horn  1998; Murtaugh, Burns, and Schuster 1999; Patterson and McFadden 2009; Xenos, Pierrakeas, and Pintelas 2002, are more likely to  be women Kearsley 2002; Willging and Johnson 2009, and are more  likely to have the kind of work and family responsibilities that might  disrupt coursework Aslanian and Clinefelter 2012; Cochran et al.  2014; Daymont, Blau, and Campbell 2011; Frydenberg 2007; Hannay and Newvine 2006; Hirschheim 2005; Jaggars 2014; Kramarae  2001; McEwen 2001; Tello 2007; Woodyard and Larson 2018;.  When researchers ask students about their online experiences, concerns about family, childcare, and finances are regularly the reasons  students give for dropping online classes Fetzner 2013; Martinez  2003. For instance, Beer and Lawson 2017 surveyed 2,643 nonreenrolling online students at an Australian university and found that  personal reasons were most likely to be cited for not returning to the  university. In their survey of 305 students in a rural community college, Aragon and Johnson 2008 found that a lack of time due to  work and family commitments was a significant predictor of students  dropping online classes. Using survey data collected at the University  of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Willging and Johnson 2009 find  that most online students who leave do so for a variety of personal, 
THE PROBLEM financial, and family reasons that can be hard to predict see also  Thompson 1997. Looking at students in Malaysia, Tung 2012 similarly finds that many students drop online classes because of family  matters and job commitments. According to the online students are inherently different explanation, the students who are selfselecting into online classes just have  more complicated lives and are more likely to drop out of college anyway. Online students who tell us about using the flexibility of asynchronous online classes to balance work and caretaking responsibilities, as well as college classes, reinforce this point. Take, for instance,  the student who responded to a survey Skurat Harris and I conducted  with this comment, As an online student I need to be able to work  ahead when I have available days. I work full time and have a family so I need plenty of time to plan my schedule of studying. Not all  faceto-face students may be carrying such a full load. The conclusion  that many faculty members and administrators draw from such data  is simple and absolving: there is nothing we can do about it. However, Jaggerss 2013 rigorous research in repeated studies  involving tens of thousands of community college students and dozens of control variables over multiple states clearly illustrates that  lower completion rates in online classes are not due to the effects of  students selfselecting into online classes. Yes, online student populations are often different, but those differences are not driving them to  drop out at higher rates. This research suggests that the same students  would be more successful if they took the same class in person. Selection effects are not the answer Willging and Johnson 2009; Xu and  Jaggars 2011a. The modalityand the way we as faculty are teaching via that modalityis having the effect. We also see the causal relationship between online modality and student success through experimental studies, like the one by Alpert, Couch, and Harmon 2016,  which looked at students randomly assigned to three different sections  of a microeconomics course: one online, one hybrid, and one faceto-face. The final exam grades for the students in the online section  were significantly lower than for those students in either the hybrid or  the faceto-face section.

The digital divide   39 In short, it is clear that personal, work, and family challenges lead  students to drop online classes, but not necessarily any more often  than students drop faceto-face classes. Willging and Johnson 2009  conclude that the reasons given by the online students for dropping  out of the program were not very different from those typically given  by dropouts from traditional faceto-face programs p. 125. In fact,  Johnson and Mejia 2014 argue that more motivated students enroll  in online classes, at least at the community college level. When it  comes to the personal characteristics of students, online students are  actually better off, compared to students in faceto-face classes. Thus,  looking just at the raw retention numbers, like in table 2.1, without accounting for personal factors, actually undercounts the negative  effect of the online medium on retention. In their research, Johnson  and Mejia 2014 find that the gap between online and traditional  courses becomes larger once we control for student characteristics  that cannot be observed p. 9. That is a sobering thought. The actual  gaps in retention rates between in-person and online courses could be  even larger than they appear in table 2.1. Thus, although it feels like an easy out to blame busy, older, working  students for low online retention, the data dont support that explanation. We have to dig a little deeper to figure out whats really going on. Explanation 2: Online Classes Require Specific Skills   That Online Students Lack It was very studentpaced and I think that kind of put the student in the professors position. You taught yourself. Online student at the University of Alaska Fairbanks   quoted in Gering et al. 2018, 71 Success in online classes may be more likely with a particular set of  skills. It is no surprise that students with lower GPAs are less likely to  persist in online courses. One study found that students who successfully completed online courses had an average GPA of 2.47, compared  to 1.66 for noncompleters Aragon and Johnson 2008.
THE PROBLEM But beyond GPA or academic ability, there are particular skills that  contribute to online success. Computer literacy, time management,  and even the ability to interact well online, all contribute to online  course success Rovai 2003. Online courses are sometimes considered  learnerautonomous interfaces, which require students to have high  levels of selfdirection, motivation, and selfdiscipline in order to be  successful Bambara et al. 2009; Ehrman 1990; Eisenberg and Dowsett 1990; Guglielmino and Guglielmino 2003; Jaasma and Koper  1999; Roll and Winne 2015; Xu and Xu 2019. In fact, repeated studies indicate that selfmotivated, selfregulated, and independent learners tend to do better in online classes Bell and Akroyd 2006; Blocher  et al. 2002; Diaz 2002; Diaz and Cartnal 1999; Gaytan 2015; Lee,  Choi, and Kim 2013. In addition to motivation Waschull 2005,  study skills, time commitment, and goal setting also matter for online  student success Leeds et  al. 2013; Schrum and Hong 2002; Tung  2012. As one online student surveyed at the University of Arkansas  at Little Rock put it, My attention span and discipline is not focused  enough to do online courses. Research by Lee, Choi, and Kim 2013 focuses on students Academic Locus of Controlbasically, whether students believe their academic success is in their own hands or whether they believe it is at  least partly subject to luck or circumstance. The more students externalize control, together with other metacognitive selfregulation skills,  the less likely they are to persist and be successful in online classes. In  her book, Minds Online, Michelle Miller 2014 writes about the connection between motivation and belief. Students who think they can  do well are more likely to succeed. It can be difficult for students or anyoneto recognize their own weaknesses, but if students are  struggling in online classes and see it as within their power to change  things, they are more likely to succeed. A related concept is grit, or perseverance for longterm goals such  as a college degree, even in the face of challenges Duckworth et al.  2007. Research shows that grit can help online learners; not if they  have it coming into a class, but if their instructor utilizes deliberate  strategies to encourage the development of grit and a growth mindset 

The digital divide   41 like allowing for failure and multiple attempts at assignments, providing positive encouragement, and being open to taking risks BuzzettoHollywood et al. 2019; McClendon, Neugebauer, and King 2017.  This research is particularly interesting because it switches the focus  from the student to the instructor. One student survey response from the University of Arkansas at  Little Rock captured how a students ability to recognize their own  challenges and persist through them can bolster academic success:  Because of the difficulties I was having with online classes and selfdiscipline, I moved to doing strictly faceto-face on campus classes  to improve my GPA and my relationships with my professors. Of  course, not all students will realize that they have difficulties succeeding in an online environment and not all students will have the luxury  of moving to faceto-face classes. When Skurat Harris and I surveyed students about their preferences in taking online versus faceto-face classes, one student said, I  enjoy online but if I could I would choose faceto-face. I feel like I pay  more attention to whats going on around me. Students who struggle  with time management or selfregulation may do better in faceto-face  classes, where the regular schedule of in-person class meetings keeps  them engaged with the course material, but the same students would  not do as well with online classes, at least those held asynchronously,  where they would have to impose that structure themselves. At the same time, the online format really works for some students. Another student surveyed wrote, I actually have a better time  with focusing on classes that I take online rather than classes that I  take faceto-face. To a certain extent, the ability to succeed online  may be less about skills and more about learning preferences and  constraints. The format of online classes, especially asynchronous  online classes that are more selfpaced, tend to play to particular  strengths among learners. Not all students do well in these circumstances. In fact, Palacios and Wood 2016 argue that building positive personal relationships with faculty is so important to the success of men of color attending community collegesand happens so  rarely in online classesthat community colleges should consider 
THE PROBLEM carefully before recommending online classes to men of color. Improving student time management, organization, and selfregulation may  improve retention, but greater improvement will likely come by focusing on connection and belonging, the explanation covered in the next   section. Explanation 3: Online Classes Lack Connection and Belonging It was a very handsoff approach to teaching. All the assignments were loaded  onto Blackboard on the first day of the semester, including weekly discussions  that the instructor very obviously paid no attention to . . . About a month into  the class, I stopped trying to learn. Online student at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock One of the key themes in the research on student retention at colleges  and universities is the need for students to integrateboth socially  and academicallyif they are going to graduate Stavredes and  Herder 2013. Integration means being part of a community and feeling connected. Building a sense of belonging and community among  students makes them more likely to stay enrolled Karp 2011. Making the kinds of connections that will take a studentparticularly a  firstgeneration or nontraditional studentfrom feeling like an outsider to feeling like they belong, can be challenging in an online class.  Connecting is often simply easier in person. But a sense of connection  can be that much more important for online students, who dont necessarily have the same opportunities for personal, faceto-face interactions that naturally foster a sense of community. This connection is sometimes talked about in terms of presence  Lowenthal 2010 as with the Community of Inquiry framework  Garrison, Anderson, and Archer 1999; Garrison and ClevelandInnes  2004, which has been used in hundreds of teaching studies over the  last 40 years. In a course with a high degree of social presence, the  professor and the students perceive each other as real people Garrison, Anderson, and Archer 1999. A class with positive presence from  the instructor means a lowrisk learning environment where selfThe digital divide   43 disclosure and humor are possible and students can communicate on  an emotional and not just an intellectual level. Although it may sound  like Im describing a class that differs from other classes by just being  more fun, research shows that its more than that; instructor presence significantly improves student retention and learning Daigle and  Stuvland 2020; Liu, Gomez, and Yen 2009; Wei and Chen 2012. For  instance, Boston et al. 2009 analyzed data from over 28,000 students and found that a large amount of the variance in retention rates  between online and faceto-face students is explained by accounting  for presence. A growing body of work emphasizes the importance of a positive  connection between faculty and students. Michelle PacanskyBrock  2020 talks about humanizing the online classroom and the interactions therein. Sean Michael Morris and Jesse Stommel 2018 focus on  critical digital pedagogy to bring the heart and soul of compassionate  teaching back. Researchers in an older school of thought more stringently seek to measure perceptions of instructor immediacy, or how  much instructors respond to and interact with students, and its impact  Arbaugh 2001; Hutchins 2003; Richardson and Swan 2003; Woods  and Baker 2004. More recently, movements toward creating welcoming online classrooms have been termed pedagogical warmth Bond  2019, pedagogy of empathy Eyler 2018, or, arising in the wake of  the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic, pedagogies of care Mondelli and  Tobin 2020. I draw from and build on this work for my concept of connecting  with students through building rapport. Building rapport with students means letting students know that we are on their side in this  whole learning endeavor. It means good communication, supportive  messages, informative feedback, and authentic caring. In short, building rapport with students is connecting with them on a human level  to support their learning so that students know their success matters. Unfortunately, human connection is something that online classes  are often lacking. Students report feeling isolated and unsupported  in online classes Aversa and MacCall 2013; Hammond and Shoemaker 2014; Pinchbeck and Heaney 2017, feelings that can be espe44   THE PROBLEM cially prevalent for students of color at predominantly white institutions Crosson 1991; Rovai and Gallien Jr. 2005; Rovai and Wighting  2005. As a student responded in one of my research surveys, I just  feel alone in this course. Students arent the only ones who miss the  human connection in online classes. Faculty say they hesitate to teach  online because they miss the interaction with students Lin 2002;  Nelson 2003; Shattuck 2013; Shea, Pickett, and Li 2005. To faculty,  online classes can seem like cold and distant places that just dont support their pedagogical values. As I argue throughout the rest of this  book, most of our problems with retention come down to thisa lack  of human connection. What Have Universities Tried Already? The fact that online classes have lower retention rates than faceto-face classes is not news to most universities. Many universities with  large online programs have been working to address this problem  for years. Arizona State University, which housed the largest public  online higher education program in the United States in 2019, with  over 36,000 students Moody 2019, also runs a multimilliondollar  EdPlus Action Lab to improve online teaching and learning. The University of Central Floridas Center for Distributed Learning has a  staff of 90 working to support online students and faculty Bailey  et al. 2018. The California Community College system has a massive  online professional development program for faculty called ONE,  Online Network of Educators, which serves over 60,000 instructors  and won the 2019 Online Learning Consortium Award for Excellence  in Faculty Development for Online Teaching. These universities and  others are addressing online education on a scale that is far beyond  individual faculty members and their classes, and far exceeds the reach  of most institutions. In chapter 7, I look more closely at different institutional models by presenting three case studies of universities that are  successfully improving online retention. In this chapter, I take a bigpicture look at academic research and data. I draw from a variety of sources throughout the bookincluding 

The digital divide   45 reports, raw data, original studies, and peerreviewed researchbut  I consistently rely on rigorous, academic scholarship in making my  claims. The evidence is compelling. By the end of the book, I hope  you will agree that the online retention gap represents a crisis for  higher education and that building rapport is an excellent approach  to addressing it. As both a social scientist and an academic, I am upfront about  my bias toward evaluating online retention efforts through published,  peerreviewed studies. Every university has an incentive to make itself  look better to potential students, to donors, and to administrators, so  internal reports and website statistics, not to mention pitches from  forprofit companies hoping to sell universities the latest technology to  improve retention, should all be taken with a grain of salt. Published  peerreviewed studies, on the other hand, are held to rigorous scientific standards and can provide datadriven insights into successful  retention efforts. The downside is that not many unsuccessful retention efforts reach publication, because academia tends to favor publishing research on things that do work over things that dont Ferguson and Heene 2012; Therrien and Cook 2018. The published, academic literature on online retention generally  points to two, nonmutually exclusive, categories of interventions  to reverse the retention gap between online and faceto-face classes:  improving the skills of online learners and using early alert systems to  identify struggling students. Both of these categories of interventions  are targeted at the characteristics and skills of students explanations  1 and 2 from earlier in the chapter and not the characteristics of and  pedagogy of online classes explanation 3. I will look closely at both  categories of interventions in the next sections. In the end, I argue  that the efficacy of either strategy is improved by building rapport  between students and faculty. The success of most retention efforts is  bolstered by the extent to which university faculty and staff are able  to make real human connections with online students. The more we  move beyond blaming students for the retention crisis and begin to  address the ways we can improve online classes, the more easily we  will be able to turn this ship around.
THE PROBLEM Improving the Skills of Online Learners One of the obstacles to higher online retention rates is students overestimation of their capabilities in online classes Bawa 2016. Although  students may go into a class thinking that they will do fine, they often  dont have the time, the time management skills, andor the technological skills to succeed Boston et al. 2014; Lee and Choi 2013. As mentioned earlier, the lack of preparation for online classes has led some  scholars to suggest that one approach to improving retention would  be to restrict enrollment and exclude risky studentsperhaps students  with low GPAs or little college experiencefrom online courses e.g.,  Cochran et al. 2014. This approach is unlikely to yield the desired  outcome. Looking just at community college classes, a major hub for  online higher education, enrollment would have to be limited to those  students with a GPA of 3.0 or better in order to see significant gains  in retention, which would impose severe accessibility restrictions, and  likely run counter to many colleges missions Hachey, Wladis, and  Conway 2013. Instead, most institutions have sought to intervene and improve students skills before they begin online classes. Highly successful online  programsthose with retention rates above 85 and equal to or  better than oncampus retention ratesprovide 24 7 help desks, prepare students through orientations, support them with tutors, and  help them gauge their own readiness with online skill assessments  Moore and Fetzner 2009. Requiring students to attend orientation  is one way to ensure that they have some baseline level of information  before classes begin and also that they personally connect with faculty,  staff, and other students. Requiring the orientation may be necessary,  because otherwise students will view it as optional and may not complete it Bawa 2016; Bozarth, Chapman, and LaMonica 2004, but  a required orientation places another hurdle in front of potentially  overwhelmed firsttime students and may actually end up reducing  retention on the front end. While the specifics may require some thought, given the student  population, online student orientations have led to impressive retenThe digital divide   47 tion gains for some universities. Boise State University requires firstyear online students to attend an online boot camp, where they learn  about course navigation, email etiquette, and get a chance to interact  with classmates before courses start Carnevale 2000. On the cutting  edge when it first began in the early 2000s, Boise States online boot  camp improved online retention from around 60 to over 80 in  just the first year. A nursing program at the University of Southern  Mississippi held a oneday intensive, faceto-face orientation for its  online students and improved retention from 80 to 99 Gilmore  and Lyons 2012. At Kennesaw State University, professors organized a multifaceted  intervention for students in a single online undergraduate business  information systems course Ali and Leeds 2009. Students were contacted by email, received course documents ahead of time, were contacted by phone, and were invited to a precourse faceto-face orientation. In the end, there was a massive difference between the retention  rates for students attending the orientation at 91 n  35, and the  retention rates for students who didnt attend the orientation at 18  n  29. These orientations represent resourceintensive interventions  for institutions, faculty, and students, but the outcomes suggest significant improvements in retention. However, other attempts at relatively nonintrusive skills interventions have had minimal success. For instance, Baker et al. 2019 did  an intervention to help students with their time management skills,  where some students in an advanced undergraduate STEM class were  required to schedule watching a lecture video. The intervention helped  a little in the short termthe ones who scheduled did slightly better  on the first quizbut the intervention had no lasting impact on their  time management, their later quiz grades, or their overall grade in the  class. Bernacki, Vosicka, and Utz 2020 find that a short twohour  online training in study skills did lead students to better utilize digital resources in a course and earn higher grades, but we dont know  if these results last beyond a single class. More intensive orientation  and skill building may be required for the longterm benefits universities are interested in.
THE PROBLEM In terms of skill building, orientations seem to have the biggest payoff, as students learn basic skills in navigation, start dates, where to  find resources, and so on. These skills may seem rudimentary, but we  can compare students without them, as Darby and Lang 2019 do,  to students showing up to campus on the first day of class and not  knowing where the building is, or finding the classroom locked, or  realizing that the professor is gone and there is just a stack of syllabi  waiting on the desk. We would do all we could to prevent that situation from happening on campusdistributing maps ahead of time,  having directional signs on campus, posting numbers to call for help,  or having volunteers available to answer questions. We should similarly prepare and support our online students. One reason orientations are helpful in improving retention is because they are excellent rapportbuilding opportunities. Sure, students  may get a campus map at orientation, but they also make personal  connections with faculty, staff, and classmates. Those connections can  be key to their success. At a minimum, the effort put into an orientation, either at the university level or at the level of a single course,  likely signals to students that their success matters to the university or  instructor. That signal alone marks an important step toward building rapport. Early Alert Systems Another popular intervention is the use of so-called early alert systems. These systems take advantage of big data to determine which  students are most at risk of dropping out Arnold and Pistilli 2012;  Romero and Ventura 2010. Online programs with better than average retention records tend to use a Learning Management System, or  LMS like Blackboard, Canvas, Moodle, or any other number of platforms to observe and track how students are doing and intervene  with those who are not doing so well Moore and Fetzner 2009. A  systematic review of 40 empirical articles on online retention in higher  education published between 2010 and 2018, determined that early 

The digital divide   49 interventions are one of the most effective ways that universities can  improve their online retention rates Muljana and Luo 2019. One example of an early alert system comes from a group of  scholars in Brazil, de Castro e Lima Baesse, Grisolia, and de Oliveira  2016, who developed and patented Monsys, a pedagogical monitoring tool to enable data mining in Moodle, one type of Learning  Management System. Developed through a partnership with the government of Brazil, Monsys helps faculty and institutions make sense  of all of the data that the LMS collects and uses it to identify students at risk of dropping out. Monsys aggregates and organizes the  data into a userfriendly format that pedagogical teams can then use  when deciding which students to reach out to via email, phone call, or  Whatsapp message. One class of Family Health graduate students was  taught without it in 2010 and one with it in 2011. Students were then  matched on demographics for comparison n  444, and the students  in the class with the early alert data used by the pedagogical teams  were 13 more likely to be retained. Another example is the Course Signals system at Purdue, which  is integrated with the Blackboard LMS, provides user analytics, and  allows faculty to send personalized emails to students informing them  of problems Arnold and Pistilli 2012. Researchers found that taking  a course with Course Signals led to higher retention, a statistic that  was improved if the student took more than one class using Course  Signals. Effectively using early alert systems can be resource intensive, though.   An example comes from the University System of Georgia USG,  which created eCore, a collaborative program to help students easily take and transfer online core classes. This online education portal includes 60 people on staff and over a dozen people working on a  student success team. Its this student success team that does the challenging work of personal engagement with those students who are at  risk of dropping outmaking hundreds of personal phone calls every  day Zatynsk 2013. In six years, they were able to reduce the dropout rate by 11. Importantly, some of the students they were able to 
THE PROBLEM keep in classes were still not able to pass those classesthat is, they  stayed enrolled just to earn an Fbut the efforts of the student success  team to make personal contact and help students through challenges  did pay off in measurable ways Clay, Rowland, and Packard 2008.  The important fact remains that the extent to which early alert systems help students succeed in online learning environments largely  depends on the quality of follow-up supports that instructors and  advisers provide Xu and Xu 2019, 28. Some data scientists caution that the data inputs used by most early  alert systems are not detailed enough to capture the unique circumstances of students of color and nontraditional studentspopulations  that tend to take online classes but tend not to follow linear degree  progression paths Berzenski 2019; Cano and Leonard 2019. Thus,  they may fail at accurately predicting online student success and may  lead to poor recommendationslike increasing course loads in order  to shorten the time to degreethat will not lead to more success for  these students. We cant data mine and algorithm our way to knowing  our students Veletsianos 2020. Overrelying on technological solutions, instead of personally knowing the students in our classes, may  even lead to worse outcomes. These early alert systems are most successful when coupled with a human touchsomeone who sees the  warning signs and reaches out to students in need. A Common Denominator in Retention Success:   Human Connection Retention is not just a problem for online courses. There is a vast body  of literature on how to retain college students more broadly. Vincent  Tinto, who has been studying the topic since the 1970s, argues that,  among other things, students need to feel valued through frequent and  quality contact, especially with faculty members Tinto 2007. Felten  and Lambert 2020 similarly argue that a relationshiprich educational experience in college is much more likely to lead to successful  learning and graduation, and that this experience should be available  to all students, not just those in the Ivy League or in honors programs 

The digital divide   51 at their universities. Although much of this work focuses on traditional students taking faceto-face classes, the importance of quality contact persists for any student population taking classes in any  medium. In fact, it becomes even more important when classes move  partially or fully online Davidson and Wilson 2013. When we look closely at the successful efforts to improve online  retention just reviewed, we see a simple and consistent theme: personal connections with students lead to success. An orientation is  about more than learning how to log into a Learning Management  System. It is about meeting the person who is on the other side of the  screen, connecting with the other students in the class, and finding  out about the support services the campus offers. Similarly, early alert  systems get a lot of the credit for online retention, but monitoring by  itself will make no difference. You need real humans who will act on  the data to reach out to students and help them do better. Early alert  systems improve retention because they tell real peoplewhether it  be faculty or retention teamswhere to focus their attention Villano  et al. 2018. As researchers from the University of Central Floridas  very successful, and datadriven, online program put it, Data do not  make decisions, people do Dziuban et al. 2012, 27. The success of the early alert system at the University of Georgia  didnt come because of a new piece of technology. It came because of  a dedicated investment in human connection, facilitated by the eCore  technology. Its success required a massive staff, a reporting portal  that faculty had to be trained on, and literally thousands of outreach  efforts made within the first few days of each semester, many to help  with technical problems like forgotten passwords Zatynsk 2013. All  the early alerts in the world will not retain a student if a real human  being doesnt take the information and then reach out to the student with an offer of help and support Hachey, Wladis, and Conway 2013. The staff at the University of Georgia talk about serving  more as counselors than technical support Zatynsk 2013, 3. They  check in with students, encourage them, and remind them of assignment deadlines. They are constantly making individual, personal contact with students.
THE PROBLEM Whether it is meeting faculty at orientation or receiving check-in  phone calls from support staff, these examples represent universities  that are fostering a culture of connection. These connections make a  difference on the university level, but they matter even more when it  comes to individual classes. A sense of belonging and good communication with the instructor are strongly associated with online course  persistence Hart 2012. Highquality, collegial interactions with faculty get students to stay in the class Ivankova and Stick 2005. One study of institutions that performed above expectations to defy  the usual retention gap between online and faceto-face classes found  that successful colleges and universities included a personal touch  with students at every possible step of the way: via marketers, advisors, troubleshooters, peers and coaches throughout the students academic career, even dedicating individual administrative or programmatic advisors to work with individual students Moore and Fetzner  2009, 6. Universities with successful retention efforts have firstyear  experiences, online and faceto-face student orientations, and online  student community websites. They use every possible opportunity to  make personal connections with students. When the New York Times did an investigation into The College  Dropout Crisis in 2019, it identified a number of universities that  outperformed their expected graduation rates, as well as those that  underperformed Leonhardt and Chino 2019. One institution that  was high on its list of successful universities was Alfred State College,  in the State University of New York system. Given the student demographics at Alfred State, its expected sixyear graduation rate was  50, but its actual graduation rate was 74. Alfred States online  learning website is full of encouraging messages to students, telling  them, Our faculty love what they do and truly want you to succeed  Alfred State 2020, while also providing links to an online readiness  assessment, a place to check technology requirements, and a list of tips  for online success. Alfred State provost Dr. Kristin Poppo says, When  a student chooses a degree that we offer 100 percent online, we still  promise to provide personal attention and experiential learning. These  are traits for which our college is well known Alfred State News 

The digital divide   53 2017. Show me a college that is successfully improving its online  retention rates and I will show you a college that is building rapport  with its online students. Human connection is what mattersand what is often missing  from online classes. The good news is that building rapport through  human connection can be purposefully introduced into online courses.  The common denominator among successful retention efforts is real  human connections with students. When we make those connections,  students are more likely to stay enrolled in our classes. Bridging the Digital Divide Eliminating the large and devastating online retention gap will not be  an easy task. When we look at the many factors that contribute to students dropping out of college, we find that, as Australian professors  Beer and Lawson 2017 put it, students are socially complex, diverse  and fluid, which means they resist mechanical, timelimited solutions  p. 775. To translate that from professorspeak: its complicated. Rapport is not the only solution to the online retention crisis, and  faculty are not the only problem solvers. With the complex layers  of personal, circumstantial, and course problems that may lead students to withdraw Gering et al. 2018, universities will need to take  a multifaceted approach, working across bureaucratic layers toward  a common goal, to address it. Colleges and universities may find that  they need a variety of interventionssome inside the classroom, some  through support services, and some targeted at training students. Each  institution should consider its own needs carefully. Research and data indicate that there are other strategies, and other  people, who can move the needle on the retention problem Kirp 2019;  Leonhardt and Chino 2019. More funding for students is probably  the most critical and immediate need. Many students drop out because  they cant afford to keep attending Boston, Ice, and Gibson 2010;  Parkes et al. 2015. Others get caught at choke points, like continually repeating remedial courses Bahr 2010; Hoyt 1999. Student support services, like counseling and tutoring, could also help with reten54   THE PROBLEM tion Aversa and MacCall 2013; Nichols 2010. But when it comes to  solutions that can be implemented immediately, without any academic  red tape, or even any budget allocations, rapport rises to the top. It  works best when there is a university culture of rapport, administrative support, and budget allocations as well, but even without those  things individual faculty can make a difference for individual students  by connecting and building rapport with them. It is critically important to recognize that the people on the front  lines at universities, the ones coming into the most frequent contact  with students, and the ones that the research shows have the greatest  impact on their retention, are professors. The classroom is the most  important place for building and fostering relationships Felten and  Lambert 2020, 11. That doesnt mean that solving the retention crisis should rest on the shoulders of college faculty alone. Building rapport is resourceintensive. Chapter 6 talks about faculty strategies for  balancing that workload, and chapter 7 speaks to the other players  who should be supporting faculty in their frontline role. But  faculty,  as human beings, have the agility to deal with complex human problems; we can consider context and adjust on the fly. Just look at the  incredible ability professors around the world demonstrated in adjusting their classes, their teaching format, their grading schemes, and  their interactions with students in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic  in 2020. While this singular moment meant nearly everyone moving online,  there has been a consistent trend over time toward colleges and universities relying on online courses to boost their overall enrollment  numbers. Those who are paying attention are aware that retention in  their online courses is significantly lower than retention in their faceto-face courses. Most of the interventions to address this problem  are resourceintensive, requiring large investments in time and capital across multiple organizational levelsfrom student support services, to administration, to instructors. They also may require online  students to act like faceto-face students, for instance, by attending  in-person orientation events. These large investments sometimes pay 

The digital divide   55 off in terms of increased retention, but the costs to both the institution  and to the students are high. A common denominator across all successful efforts is that they  address the driving reason behind the online retention crisisthe lack  of human connection in online education. Successful retention efforts  bridge the digital divide by helping students build relationships with  each other, get support when they need it, and connect with engaged  faculty members. The truth is that the retention problem is complex  and multifaceted. But whatever angle we take on it, at the heart we  will find a lack of human connection exacerbating the problem. Building rapport can help fix it.

This page intentionally left blank 

PART II THE SOLUTION We can improve retention by building rapport with our students The teachers instructions were straight forward and she cared about student success. She even emailed me when I missed an assignment. The  teacher engaged with students and really cared about the students. Online student at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock

This page intentionally left blank 

 THREE  Relationships Matter A nyone who has ever taught a class, or who has even been a student in a class, knows that there is a real difference in learning and motivation when the students connect with the instructor.  Think all the way back to elementary school. Didnt it make attending fourth grade that much better if you knew that your teacher liked  you and was cheering for you to succeed? And didnt you come home  from a challenging day of long division even more discouraged if you  felt like the teacher just hates me or the teacher doesnt even care  about this stuff? The same basic principles carry forward to college.  When professors connect with their students, the students are more  likely to come to class, stay enrolled, put forward greater effort, and  earn higher grades. Whether we are talking about online classes or  faceto-face classes, decades of research consistently demonstrate that  involved and caring professors are one of the most important factors  in student success. In fact, as discussed in the previous chapter, a common thread  underlying almost all successful retention efforts is human connection. One root cause of poor online course retentiona key difference between online and faceto-face classes that makes students more  likely to drop and fail themis the lack of a personal connection 
THE SOLUTION between the instructor and the students. Professors are thus perfectly  placed to play a critical role in retaining students. Research clearly  shows that involved and engaged faculty can make a significant difference when it comes to student success and retention. In this chapter, I take a close look at data and research demonstrating that when  faculty build rapport with their students by making real human connections they can eliminate the retention gap between online and faceto-face classes completely. First, I demonstrate how critical faculty are  in faceto-face classes. Using original data from the Best Worst Study, I  then demonstrate how, without those same personal connections that  faceto-face students make with faculty, our online students are being  treated as secondclass. Next, I draw on a wide range of published  research studies to show how faculty are just as critical for the success  of the students in their online classes. I further make this case with evidence from my own multiyear Rapport Teaching Experiment. Using  data from my classes, I show how employing rapportbuilding techniques in online teachingeven in completely asynchronous online  classescan lead to real human connections with students and eliminate the online retention gap. The Impact of Faculty in Faceto-Face Classes One of the most consistent and effective predictors of student success in college is the extent and quality of their interactions with faculty. As George D. Kuh, the founding director of the National Institute for Learning Outcomes Assessment, and his coauthors put it, In  general, for most students most of the time, the more interaction with  faculty the better Kuh et al. 2006, 55. Kezar and Maxey 2014a  reviewed dozens of studies over more than forty years e.g., Braxton, Bray, and Berger 2000; Johnson 1997; Lundquist, Spalding, and  Landrum 2002 and concluded that both the amount of time students interact with faculty and the quality of their relationships with  them effectively decreases student dropout rates and increases their  persistence toward degrees p. 31. National data from over 1,500  firstyear college students show significant and positive relationships 

Relationships Matter   61 between interaction with faculty and perceived growth in knowledge,  academic adjustment, and satisfaction with courses Delaney 2008.  Statistical regression analysis using these same data reveals that, even  after controlling for demographic and academic variables, interaction  with faculty significantly predicts academic performance. Indeed, personal relationships can play a surprisingly decisive role  in student success at college. Chambliss and Takacs 2014 followed  over 100 students at a liberal arts college in New York for eight years  and found that their professors were far more important than any  technology, program, or curricular innovation. Relationships with  peers, even a few good friendships, also predict successful graduation McCabe 2016. Felten and Lambert 2020 conducted 385 interviews with students, faculty, administrators, and staff at 30 different  institutions, and they make a compelling case that all students should  experience welcome and care in order to get the most out of college.  The beneficial impact of positive relationships with professors is a  finding that comes up again and again in the literature. Not only are positive interactions with professors associated with  positive student outcomes across the board, they can be especially  impactful for at-risk student populations. For instance, firstgeneration  students who have positive interactions with faculty are more likely to  be successful than those who do not Amelink 2005; Ishiyama 2002,  and students with lower GPAs and lower SAT scores are the ones who  benefit the most from engagement with faculty members Carini, Kuh,  and Klein 2006. Research has found that positive informal interactions with faculty significantly improve the academic achievement of  Hispanic students Anaya and Cole 2001 and that a positive relationship with a faculty member can improve retention for African American students Lee 1999. In fact, data show that the race of the faculty  member is not as important as the quality of the mentor relationship,  which is good news, because our faculty are not nearly as diverse as  our students Espinosa et al. 2019. Why do interactions with faculty have such a strong effect on success and retention? When we get down to the methodological operationalization, we find that the heavy lifting of the instructor interaction 
THE SOLUTION effect is often done by rapport. A highrapport relationship between  an instructor and a student means the instructor is present, cares, and  communicates well Creasey, Jarvis, and Gadke 2009; Shevlin et al.  2000; Wilson, Ryan, and Pugh 2010. When students believe their  instructors care about them, they are more engaged in their courses  and motivated to do well Kezar and Maxey 2014a. Engaged and  motivated students earn better grades and are more likely to persist in  their studies Braxton, Bray, and Berger 2000; Chickering and Gamson 1987; Cokley 2000; Wang and Grimes 2000, so it is no wonder  that studies of rapport have repeatedly shown strongly positive outcomes in student learning in faceto-face classes e.g., Benson, Cohen,  and Buskist 2005; Frisby and Martin 2010; Frisby and Myers 2008;  Granitz, Koernig, and Harich 2009; Wilson 2006. Importantly, in statistical analysis aiming to explain variance in student success, rapport has added explanatory power above measures of  friendliness, as well as nonverbal behaviors like eye contact Wilson,  Ryan, and Pugh 2010. This means that rapport is not just a superficial measure of niceness or good public speaking. Professors who  have highrapport relationships with their students are approachable,  supportive of what the students need, and respond when contacted  Lundquist, Spalding, and Landrum 2002. When students reach out  in a time of crisis, like if they are considering dropping a class or dropping out of college altogether, they will find a listening ear in a highrapport professor. With someone they trust to talk to, students may  be more likely to find a solution to their problem that doesnt involve  withdrawing from classes. Students feel respected and valued when faculty make time for  them, respond quickly to their emails, and give them personal attention Hurtado et al. 2011; Lundquist, Spalding, and Landrum 2002.  These interactions build rapport one by one, over time. On the other  hand, students are less successful when they feel isolated or alienated  from faculty Cole 2007; Komarraju, Musulkin, and Bhattacharya  2010, with especially negative consequences for women and students  of color Bush and Bush 2010; Hurtado et al. 2011; Sax, Bryant, and  Harper 2005; Wood 2014b.

Relationships Matter   63 Although many facultystudent interactions that build rapport  take place in the traditional classroom environment, some of the most  impactful interactions take place outside of the classroom. Kuh et al.  2010 looked at 20 institutions doing better than expected on student  success and retention and concluded that facultystudent interactions  outside of class were critical to that success. Pascarella and Terenzini 2005 reviewed 30 years of empirical research and concluded  that studentfaculty contact outside of the classroom, even after controlling for other factors, positively affects student persistence and  degree completion. When we think of facultystudent contact that builds rapport outside the classroom, we may think only of intensive mentoring or oneonone undergraduate research supervision. These types of interactions do lead to improved student outcomes Ishiyama 2002; Kuh  and Hu 2001; Thiry et al. 2012, but more casual interactions are also  associated with increased retention and graduation rates and with  positive student development outcomes Komarraju, Musulkin, and  Bhattacharya 2010. Think about the many informal ways faculty  interact with students on campus: talking after class about academic  or personal issues, a simple greeting on the quad, giving advice about  a major or a job in office hours, or chatting about a speaker after an  event. These interactions are huge rapportbuildersmaking professors more approachable, easy to communicate with, and even more  human. These casual interactions signal a willingness to engage with  students. And students pick up on those signals and internalize them. In other words, students can tell when faculty want to be in contact  with them and when they are annoyed by having to interact with them  as a requirement of their jobs. Hurtado et al. 2011 found that students even read into the times that office hours are scheduled and the  ways that they are posted as cues of whether or not faculty really want  to meet with them. So, putting your office hours for only two hours  a week at 8:00 am on Mondays and posting that in a tiny corner of  your bulletin board sends a messageI am only doing this because I  have to; meeting with you is not my top priority. In his book, Radical  Hope: A Teaching Manifesto, Kevin Gannon 2020 challenges faculty 
THE SOLUTION to think critically about the things we tell our students. What are we  saying to them in the way we communicate our office hours? In the  way we structure our syllabus? Students pick up on those messages.  Choosing to be unavailable has real consequences. If faculty instead  choose to build rapport with students, even with relatively minimal  effort, we can have a meaningful positive impact on our students success in college. SecondClass Students Since contact with faculty is incredibly important to student success,  and a great deal of that contact happens outside of the traditional  classroom, what does this mean for our online students? As mentioned earlier, I often use student quotes drawn from research studies I have done with colleagues to bring in students perspectives and  deepen our understanding of the student experience. In this chapter in  particular, I use a number of quotes from a 2018 study my colleague  Heidi Skurat Harris and I conducted at the University of Arkansas at  Little Rock, which we call the Best Worst Study. For this study, every  student enrolled at the university received two email invitations: one  to participate in a survey about the best class they had ever taken at  the University of Arkansas at Little Rock and one to participate in a  survey about the worst class they had ever taken there. A breakdown  of the responses is given in table 3.1, illustrating that about half of  the students told us about their worst class n  1,070, 53.31 of the  total sample and about half told us about their best class n  937,  46.69 of the total sample. Table 3.1. also breaks down the student response by course mediumwhether the class was taught faceto-face or online. More than twice as many student respondents told  us about faceto-face classes n  1,376 than online classes n  631. Whereas students telling us about faceto-face classes were slightly   Students could fill out both surveys, but due to confidentiality, we are unable to  determine how many did so.

Relationships Matter   65 more likely to tell us about the best class they had ever taken n  714,  51.89, compared to the worst class they had ever taken n  662,  48.11, students telling us about online classes were much more  likely to tell us about their worst class n  408, 64.65 than their  best n  223, 35.34, by almost a twoto-one margin. The skew in our Best Worst survey data fits what we know from  the academic research. Although online students want and expect an  equivalent experience to their oncampus peers, despite geographical and time constraints, they clearly arent getting it Eliasquevici,  Seruffo, and Resque 2017; Muljana and Luo 2019. Our online students frequently tell us some version of what this student expressed in  the survey about the worst class experience: I feel like I dont have the  same relationships and opportunities for dialogue with my professors  as those individuals who live locally. It is a real disadvantage to the  online only community. Another student told us, There is more personal contact and a greater ability to network in live classes. Online  students might seek out the convenience of learning offcampus for at  least some of their courses, but they still want to be a part of a campus community Magda, Capranos, and Aslanian 2020. Instead of  equal opportunity, in the world of higher education, online students  are often treated like secondclass students. Online students are not  present on campus, have access to and use fewer campus resources,  and are often taught by parttime adjunct and nontenuretrack faculty Bettinger and Long 2010; FaganWilen et al. 2006. These contingent faculty lack the job security, resources, and institutional incentives that tenuretrack faculty may have Kezar, DePaola, and Scott  Table 3.1. Student Respondents by Course designation Best worst   and Medium Face-to-Face Online

Best worst Total Face-to-Face 714 662 1,376 Online 223 408 631 Total 937 1,070 2,007
THE SOLUTION 2019, and research indicates that the result can be a negative impact  on student learning Ehrenberg and Zhang 2005; Jaeger and Eagan  2009, 2011; Ran and Xu 2019. Instead of highquality facultystudent interactions that build rapport and improve retention, students who take online classes often  acutely feel the absence of an engaged instructor. Not only do students  lack highrapport relationships with their online professors, students  often express feelings of going it alone in their online classes, which  feel unsatisfying and impersonal Lee et al. 2011; Paechter, Maier, and  Macher 2010; Song et al. 2004; Vonderwell 2003. As one student put  it, Obviously we are the student, but I think when it comes to the  online course, were also the professor because we have to teach ourselves quoted in Gering et al. 2018, 71. Another student said that  the downside of online classes is the lack of interpersonal communication . . . not knowing who your professor might be . . . what they  may be like in real life quoted in Nate Evans 2009, 69. Openended  responses from surveys I have conducted, like the Best Worst Study,  have returned similarly heartbreaking responses, like this student who  said, The online book homework test is a joke. I have never been  more frustrated than having to struggle with automated assignments  that are buggy and completely unpersonal. Student learning and retention suffers when students feel isolated  and unimportant in online classes. And, to our shame, many of them  do. A study of Virginia Community Colleges found that 43 of students complained of not getting enough feedback and interaction from  professors Virginia Community College System 2001. Data from my  own research demonstrate that lack of instructor engagement is far  and away the number one complaint of students in what they have  categorized for us as poorquality online classes Glazier and Skurat  Harris 2020. Huss and Eastep 2013 found, in their survey of online students,  that many felt that their professor was missing from the educational  conversation. The ability, or willingness, of instructors to communicate online was perceived to be a crucial component of online learning p. 13. In our Best Worst Study, we saw extreme examples of 

Relationships Matter   67 this lack of communication. One student said about the worst class  experience: Absolute absence of professorstudent interaction. Tests are not  difficult and automatically graded, which is convenient for student to get an easy A, but not actually learn much. The rest of  the grade is based on weekly discussion boards with no grade  known until the end of the semester when it is too late to respond  or improve. Professor does not respond to emails or phone calls.  Does not read discussion boards or participate. Does not make  comments . . . I question whether the professor actually exists. If your students are questioning whether or not you exist, something has gone seriously off the rails. Most classes arent nearly this  bad, but many students express frustration with poor communication  in online classes. When we asked students to tell us about the worst  online class they had ever taken, 17 of students named poor instructor communication as a reason for their selection in openended comments. This statistic gives poor communication the dubious honor of  being second only to a lack of instructor engagement as the top reason why students said a class was the worst one they had ever taken  Glazier and Skurat Harris 2020. Nowhere is the secondclass status of online students clearer than  in the online retention gap. Even in the exemplary programs Bailey  et al. 2018 profile as case studies of online education excellence, like  the Kentucky Community and Technical College System, retention  rates are 9 lower for online classes pp. 44 45. This is an online  program in the spotlight for excellence! Any gap between the retention rates of online and faceto-face students should be unacceptable.  To do otherwise is to treat our online students as secondclass. The Impact of Faculty in Online Classes The academic research on rapport in faceto-face classes shows, both  in the classroom and out, that availability, engagement, good commu68   THE SOLUTION nication, and positive interactions with students all lead to better outcomes in terms of grades, student satisfaction, and retention. Is rapport just as important in online classes? While faculty members still engage with students online, the kinds  of informal exchanges that take place in the hallway, before class  starts, at events, and at socials are not available in the same ways.  Thus, one of the downsides of online education is the lack of both  formal and informal physical gathering places for instructors and students King and Alperstein 2014, 49. Without these opportunities to  interact, professors have to work harder to build relationships with  students. Building rapport in the online classroom is more challenging  than doing so in person. Instructors are pivotal in online education Eom, Wen, and Ashill  2006; Morris 2010 but, without the obvious spoken and visual cues  of communication we are used to in faceto-face classes Alman, Frey,  and Tomer 2012, online students can often feel isolated and unsupported Aversa and MacCall 2013; Hammond and Shoemaker 2014;  Pinchbeck and Heaney 2017. Teaching college students can be challenging enough, but trying to keep students motivated and engaged  online adds an additional layer of complexity to the pedagogical  mix Bennett and Lockyer 2004; Thomas, Herbert, and Teras 2014.  Instructors have to set the curriculum, design the course, use the time  effectively, model participation in discussion boards, and facilitate  discourse Garrison, Anderson, and Archer 1999all while providing direct instruction, or communicating content knowledge, which  is what most of us think of when we think of teaching. Add to that  the difficulties online instructors have to face when they are expected  to put out technology fires for students and deal with nonintuitive  electronic interfaces themselves and online teaching can become quite  a challenge. Even after doing all this well, even exceptionally, instructors may  lose a large number of their online students if they dont also take the  time to connect with them and humanize the sometimes sterile electronic environment Gustafson and Gibbs 2000. The students need  to see the professor as a real person, and the professor needs to see 

Relationships Matter   69 the students the same way Gunawardena and Zittle 1997. Although  adding rapport building on top of everything else professors do may  seem overwhelming a subject tackled head-on in chapter 6, paying  attention to human connection often pays dividends: when students  are engaged, they are more likely to stay enrolled and be successful  Crosling, Heagney, and Thomas 2009; Dhilla 2017; Meyer 2014. In fact, when it comes to effective online learning, the instructor is  more important than any other aspect of a course and plays a vital  role in driving course completion Muljana and Luo 2019; Nistor and  Neubauer 2010. Jaggars and Xu 2016 examined four design features in 23 online classes at two community colleges but found that  only the quality of interpersonal interaction within a course was positively and significantly related with student retention and achievement. Gering et al. 2018 similarly found that only teaching presence  was a statistically significant factor for student grades in online classes.  Muilenburg and Berge 2005 conducted a largescale factor analysis  of survey data from over 1,000 students and found that, from eight  potential barriers to online learning, the most significant impediment  was a perceived lack of social interaction. Somewhat ironically, the  least important barriers were technical issues, a lack of technical skill,  and a lack of academic skill, the things at which we so often target our  topdown retention solutions. Instead, it is a lack of social interaction  in online classes that is the biggest barrier to student success. This is not to say that technical issues dont matterthey absolutely do. Chapter 7 details some key steps students, administrators,  and supporters can take to ensure that basic technological needs are  met. But once you meet a pretty low baseline of technical skill and  accessibility e.g., a computer, a stable internet connection, and course  navigation skills, the rest is just technological icing. The real difference is made by human connections. Instructors may not realize just how powerful an effect they can  have on retention in their courses. A students relationship with their  instructor is often a significant predictor of whether or not they will  drop out of an online class. For instance, students who are dissatisfied  with instructor communication are more likely to drop out Astleitner 
THE SOLUTION 2000; Thompson 1997. Instructor presence, availability, and communication are among the most important things to students when  it comes to evaluating their courses Huss and Eastep 2013. In the  research I have done with colleagues, we often hear comments from  students like this one we received on a survey about online classes:  I think that the most important thing for any kind of class is that  the instructor promptly responds to emails and other communication  from students. Poor communication can have a devastating effect on  student learning and motivation, like the student who responded to  the Best Worst Study by telling us, This was by far the worst online  class that I have taken. The teacher would either not respond to emails,  would be rude to where I felt like I was bothering her, or didnt provide the information that I was asking for. It was not helpful. We know the online retention gap is even worse for students of  color Figlio, Rush, and Yin 2013; Johnson and Mejia 2014; Sublett  2020; Xu and Jaggars 2014. This may be in part because many online  classes have such isolating designs, intended to be selfdirected  courses, whereas some students of color may thrive in more collaborative or communal environments Ashong and Commander 2012;  Boyette 2008; Rovai and Ponton 2005. Kaupp 2012 looks specifically at the retention gap for Latinx students in California community colleges and finds that the absence of a strong studentinstructor  relationship was identified as the key difference between their faceto-face and online educational experience p. 8. Merrills 2010  studied African American students in online world literature classes  and found that they had stronger preferences for offline communication with their professors and oral communication among students.  Wood, Harris III, and White 2015 similarly find that building trusting relationships between men of color and faculty is critically important to their success. When online environments make these relationships more challenging to forge, the success of men of color is thwarted  Palacios and Wood 2016. When instructors build rapport with their students, it has a positive  impact on student learning and motivation in online classes Baker   2010; Liu, Gomez, and Yen 2009; Russo and Benson 2005; Tu 2002. 

Relationships Matter   71 Just as with faceto-face classes, when professors in online classes  demonstrate that they care about the students, students put more effort  into their work for the class and end up doing better academically  Jaggars and Xu 2016, 280. When that happens, you get comments  like these from students, who seem pleasantly surprised to encounter  such a professor: the instructor actually taught and interacted with  the students, providing feedback and helping them to understand the  concepts . . . he provided comments that motivated the student to continue. And, she was tough in a way, but she was right there with you  all the way. She senses when students under her watch are struggling  and will NOT let them go down without fighting for them and with  them. She is so wonderfully rare. Another great example of how good communication can build rapport and improve retention comes from this student comment: The  professor was so involved and he made the subject fun. I have taken a  lot of online classes at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock and  the professors are rarely involved. They assign and grade work. No  lectures, no interaction. I learned so much more from this class than  almost any other. Because he cared, I cared. Did you catch that last part? Because he cared, I cared. When we  show our students that we really care about a class and their success  in it, they are motivated to work harder and do well. Both research and student feedback make clear just how critical  relationships are in online classes. Their value becomes even more  apparent when students are in crisis. We know from published research  and many of us from personal experience that a highrapport relationship with a faculty member can save a student in crisis in a faceto-face class Lundquist, Spalding, and Landrum 2002. That same  effect may be amplified in an online environment. Students often drop  online classes because they get behind or their life circumstances make  success in the class difficult Fetzner 2013. Some faculty may feel  like, when life circumstances lead students to drop a class, there is  nothing they could have done. But, in many cases, a positive relationship with the instructor may make it possible for the student to pass  the class, even given challenging life circumstances in that semester. A 
THE SOLUTION key difference is that, in a faceto-face class, more students will feel  comfortable asking the professor for help. In an online classwithout eye contact, opportunities to talk after class, the ability to drop by  office hours, and other casual interactionsstudents may be less comfortable admitting they are in trouble. So, a highrapport relationship  with a professor becomes even more crucial. Take, for instance, a nontraditional student of mine who was  already feeling overwhelmed by the workload in his first semester  returning to college after a very long hiatus, when the grandchild for  whom he was a primary caretaker fell ill. With his grandchild in the  hospital, he didnt think he would be able to take the third exam by  the deadline, and he figured he should just drop the class. Because  we had emailed and had positive interactions previously, this student  reached out to let me know of his situation. I responded that the last  thing he should be thinking about when he had a sick grandchild was  an exam. I would be happy to work with him to reschedule it. Instead  of dropping the class, he took the exam a week later, and finished the  class with a B. His grandchild fully recovered and he went on to earn a  college degree. This students success required two things: him reaching out to ask for help when he needed it and me trusting him enough  to give him the grace he was asking for. Because we had built rapport  through real human connection, both of those things were present  when we needed them and he was able to successfully complete the  class. We can begin building these relationships before the semester  even starts, by preemptively reaching out to students via email to welcome them to our class. Chapter 4 details this and many other ideas  for building rapport. Our students experience all kinds of difficult life circumstances that  we cant do anything about. But, if we have spent the semester building  rapport with our students, when those difficulties arise, they will let  us know that they are struggling, instead of just dropping our classes.  That gives us the chance to do our part as professors to work with   In this case and elsewhere in the book where I give specific examples using my own  students, all names, details, and identifying information have been changed. 

Relationships Matter   73 them, if possible, and to help them stay enrolled and succeed. Chapter 5 talks more about how building rapport is particularly helpful for  students who are in crisis or who may be on the margins of academia. It may also be helpful to consider what rapport doesnt look like for  our online students. Rapport isnt built through automated systems or  formulas. Remember the success story of the eCore teams at the University of Georgia from chapter 2? They were able to make a major  dent in the online retention gap Zatynsk 2013. But the classes they  had the hardest time with were math classes. No matter how many  resources they threw at them, the retention rates in introductory math  classes stayed stubbornly high. What was different about math? Well,  for one thing, math is challenging to learn online Smith, Heindel, and  TorresAyala 2008. In a classroom, you can see the professor working  out the problem on the board in real time and ask questions as they  come up. Not so in an asynchronous online class. But more than that,  the eCore math tutoring system was automated. Although eCore provided some amazing resources, the main thing  students are looking for when they reach out for help in an online  math class is a real human to talk them through something they are  struggling with. Imagine instead meeting an automated tutoring interface. No wonder students wanted to quit! The same thing happened  when California Community Colleges implemented selfdirected  learning support services for math in 2015: the intervention had no  significant impact on retention in math classes Chatteinier 2016.  Sometimes, there is no electronic substitute for a little human contact. Students have remarkably wellattuned authenticity detectors and  they want professors who actually care. Putulowski and Crosby 2019  ran an experiment where they varied the frequency of instructorinitiated communication with students in an online class. They found  that students who received weekly contact initially rated their courses  more highly, but that effect dropped off after about four weeks, as  the students began to feel that the contact was rote and insincere. The  authors conclude that consistent instructorstudent communication is  important, but that approaching it in a formulaic way is unlikely to  be successful. There is not going to be a shiny new rapportbuilding 
THE SOLUTION technology that will do it for us. Building relationships requires real  human connectionthat is a feature, not a bug. The Impact of Meaningful Faculty Connections with Students When faculty connect with studentswhether in class or outside of  class, in-person or using technology, in intensive mentor relationships  or through casual contact, in response to student requests for help or  when faculty reach out proactivelythey have significant impacts see  figure 3.1. We see these positive impacts in the short term, when it  comes to the specific classes students are taking; in the long term, when  it comes to overall improvement for the university; and in the long  term, when it comes to positive outcomes in students lives and careers. First, in terms of enrollment, students who have positive relationships with their professors are more likely to be retained Astleitner  2000; Jaggars and Xu 2016; Kezar and Maxey 2014a; Thompson  1997 and are more likely to graduate Chambliss and Takacs 2014;  Kezar and Maxey 2014a. There is also a direct equity impact here,  as faculty connections with students have a particularly strong positive effect for firstgeneration students, lowachieving students, and  students of color Amelink 2005; Anaya and Cole 2001; Carini, Kuh,  and Klein 2006; Ishiyama 2002; Kaupp 2012; Lee 1999; Strayhorn  and Terrell 2007; Wood and Williams 2013. Second, in terms of academics, those students also gain greater knowledge in their classes  Baker 2010; Liu, Gomez, and Yen 2009; Russo and Benson 2005;  Tu 2002; Wilson, Ryan, and Pugh 2010 and earn higher grades Gering et al. 2018; Jaggars and Xu 2016; Wilson, Ryan, and Pugh 2010.  Third, these effects are further amplified because faculty relationships  with students have a direct impact on student behaviorresulting in  greater engagement and motivation on the part of the students Jaggars and Xu 2016; Kezar and Maxey 2014awhich then lead to  both enrollment Crosling, Heagney, and Thomas 2009; Daigle and  Stuvland 2020; Meyer 2014 and academic gains Chickering and  Gamson 1987; Cokley 2000; Wang and Grimes 2000. As faculty conRelationships Matter   75 nections with students positively impact enrollment, academic outcomes, and student behavior in individual classes, these effects aggregate up to result in higher retention rates, higher graduation rates, and  great equity gains for the university as a whole. Perhaps not surprisingly, the effects of highrapport relationships  last beyond graduation, benefiting students for the long term, as well.   Positive interactions with faculty lead to success in academia with better letters of recommendation and success in upper division courses  and in graduate school Calarco 2020; Eby et  al. 2008; Johnson  2015, as well as success in the workforce with higher rates of job  placement, and more successful and happier careers GallupPurdue  Index Report 2014; Johnson 2015; Roche 1979. Simply put, these  relationships are meaningful to students. For instance, one survey of  111 alumni from an online graduate program found that, even years  after graduation, the alumni valued the engagement they had with the  faculty in the program more than even the content they learned or  the relationships they built with fellow students Tanis 2020; see also  GallupPurdue Index Report 2014. Even in retrospect, rapport is still  the most important thing to students. Figure 3.1. The Impact of Meaningful Faculty Connections with Students
THE SOLUTION Results from an Online RapportBuilding Experiment Like many firsttime online instructors, when I started teaching online,  I had no idea what I was doing. I had good student evaluations in my  faceto-face classes and the best of intentions, but I had never even  taken an online course, and knew very little about how to teach one.  I did my best with common sense and enthusiasm, but after a few  semesters of teaching online, I realized that I had a significant problem, the same problem faced by online instructors across higher education. The students in my online classes were failing and dropping  out at much higher rates than the students in my faceto-face classes.  When I looked at the data, I found that the retention rate for my  online classesthe number of students succeeding by earning Cs or  betterwas about 13 lower than for my faceto-face classes. This fact bothered me, both as a professor who cared about the success of my students and as a social scientist. I was the same professor,  using the same textbook and requiring the same assignments, so why  were my online students doing so poorly? After consulting the literature and discussing the problem with my colleagues and with my students, I concluded that the most important of the many factors that  might be depressing the retention rate in my online classes was the  lack of personal connection with my students. Nowhere was this hard truth more evident than in the way I personally viewed online teaching. I loved teaching my faceto-face classes.  I loved connecting with students, seeing them grasp new concepts,  and pushing them to think deeply in class discussion. In my online  classes, on the other hand, few students participated in the online discussion boards, and I found myself rarely checking them or posting in  them. Whereas I would regularly come across current events and think  about how I would incorporate them into my next faceto-face lecture,  I could go days without thinking about my online class. No wonder  my students were failing and dropping! They had an instructor who  was barely engaged in the classso how could I expect them to be? In 2012, I began a teaching experiment to see if I could affect the  retention rate in my online classes by changing the way I interacted with 

Relationships Matter   77 my students. I tried to make real human connections with my students  by implementing rapportbuilding measures. Chapter 4 has details on  the specific rapportbuilding strategies I used, as well as tips and advice  from research and experience on how to build rapport with your students. Here, I present the results of the experiment Glazier 2016. I implemented rapportbuilding measures in six introductory online  classes I taught over the course of three years n  143. I compared  data from these courses to data from three introductory online courses  I taught without the rapportbuilding measures during the same time  period, as well as data from online introductory courses I taught before  the rapport experiment began n  322, and data from students who  took my introductory political science class faceto-face n  125. In  all of these courses, students covered the same content, used the same  textbook and readings, and completed the same assignments. The  online classes were fully asynchronous, and my lectures were available  to the students via notes and PowerPoint slides. The online classes  that received the rapport treatment were determined by random assignment. How did retention compare across these three groups? The percentage of students in each category who passed the class  with a C or better is displayed in figure 3.2. Those who earned a D, F,  or withdrew from the class are not considered successfully retained.  Figure 3.2. Retention Rate by Course Type
THE SOLUTION In line with data from around the country, the students in the online  classes taught without rapport are retained about 13 less than students in faceto-face classes. In this introductory course at a university  with a large percentage of firstgeneration and underserved students,  that retention rate falls depressingly below 60. When we compare  the second two columns, however, we see that the retention rate for  online courses taught with rapport and the retention rate for faceto-face courses are indistinguishable. These data indicate that building  relationships with students in online classes can eliminate the retention gap between online and faceto-face courses. Note that in figure  3.2, when we compare the online classes taught with and without rapport, the retention gap is a statistically significant 13.5strong support that the rapport experiment worked. Additionally, statistical models that take into account the age, gender, ethnicity, year in college, transfer status, and GPA of the students  also consistently return results that indicate that being in the rapport  condition significantly improves retention, even when accounting for  the effects of these control variables. In fact, rapport has a greater  influence on student retention than any other variable besides GPA. I had considered extending this experiment to collect more data  social scientists always want more data, but after I ran these initial  numbers, I knew I couldnt go back. I felt like I had been conducting a  randomized drug trial and the patients in the rapport treatment were  responding remarkably well. Ethically, I couldnt keep giving the other  patients the placebo. I now had hard evidence that rapport worked. I  couldnt go back to teaching the way I used to before I started making a concerted effort to build relationships with my online students.  I could already see a difference in my course evaluations from students in the rapportbuilding condition. I was getting comments like  online classes can have a disconnected feel to them, and Dr. Glazier  did the best job Ive seen of closing that gap and Dr. Glaziers lecLogit and OLS regression models are not shown here but are available in the peer-reviewed academic journal that originally published these findings, the Journal of Political  Science Education Glazier 2016.

Relationships Matter   79 tures gave me a virtual in class experience. Matched with her availability, I was confident that I would succeed in her course. I knew I  was making a difference and that I would never go back to teaching  without rapport. If instructors want to improve the retention rates in their online  classes, they can start right away by connecting with their students  and building relationships. In chapter 4, I outline a number of specific  recommendations and detail the steps that I took, but building rapport is about your personality and how you connect with students, so  it works best when you make it your own. Remember that authenticity is key. Students know when the effort to connect is sincere. Closing the Gap There is a gap between online and faceto-face classes that goes beyond  retention rates. Moore 1991 refers to the sense of space between  teacher and learner as transactional distance and cautions that  when transactional distance becomes too great, it can increase misunderstanding and be a barrier to learning McCabe and GonzalezFlores 2017. George Veletsianos similarly describes online classes  as having a distinctive quality, one that risks creating and widening  the distance between us and our students. That quality is the physical distance that separates us from students and requires us to take  active steps to build and foster our relationship with them 2020,  3. Thankfully, the nature of this transactional distance is not fixed.  Classes arent categorized in a binary way as either distant or not. If  we teach online we are not inherently stuck in isolating nonrelationships with our students. Instead, transactional distance runs along a  continuum, with highdistance, lowrapport courses at one end and  lowdistance, highrapport courses at the other. Along this imagined continuum we could array all kinds of course  delivery optionsfrom hybrid courses that combine elements of both  online and faceto-face formats, to hyflex courses that provide students with the maximum flexibility to choose the format that works  for them on any particular day. We could imagine both synchronous 
THE SOLUTION and asynchronous online classes fitting along this continuum, as well  as traditional faceto-face classes. But no matter how the course content is delivered, the level of rapport in the course could be high and  the transactional distance low, or the level of rapport in the class could  be low and the transactional distance high. Just because a class takes  place in person doesnt mean that there is going to be a high level of  rapport in that class. For instance, in the move to online education in response to the  COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, some faculty thought that they could  maintain or create a sense of community in their suddenly online  classes by simply holding synchronous Zoom lectures Flaherty  2020b, as opposed to, for instance, posting asynchronous textbased  lectures and hosting discussion boards. Building rapport takes a lot  more than synchronous video. Think back to table 3.1. and the students who told us about their best and worst classes. There were hundreds of students who said that a faceto-face class was the worst one  they had ever taken. Take the student who said, The professor was  the worst. She had no sympathy or empathy for anything or anyone.  Her class was also very boring. There was very little enthusiasm in her  teaching. An hour long lecture felt like 5. Similarly, there were hundreds of students who named an online class as the best class they had  ever taken. The student who said, The teacher engaged with students  and really cared about the students. You could always count on getting a response back from them, is a great example. Although it may be easier to build rapport in person, the course  medium is not determinative. Even a little bit of human contact tends  to help. The research shows that hybrid courses have retention and  learning outcomes that are often similar to faceto-face courses Alpert, Couch, and Harmon 2016; Bowen et  al. 2014; Chingos et  al.  2017. Palacios and Wood 2016 looked at data from nearly four  million students across 112 campuses in the California Community  College system and found that Black men did significantly worse in  asynchronous online classes, compared to faceto-face classes, but  that their performance improved when the online classes included a  multimedia component.

Relationships Matter   81 Making a course hybrid or adding synchronous video wont automatically improve relationships between faculty and students. You  need sincere effort and caring to go along with those course elements.  This really gets at the heart of how present we are in our classes and  how much we connect with our students Lowenthal 2010. Even  when we are not faceto-face nor synchronous, both students and  instructors can project themselves and their personalities into the education environment with text by telling stories, using emoticons, and  employing humor Lindt and Miller 2018; Swan 2003; Swan and Shih  2005. Its not just about technologyfor instance, whether or not  you have a video camerait is at least as much about how you use it.  Many professors have successfully built rapport with engaging synchronous course discussions or office hours, but we are deluding ourselves if we think we are building connections with students who log  on to a synchronous class just to be lectured at with their cameras off  and their microphones muted. How can we reduce the transactional distance in our courses and  move them closer to the highrapport end of the spectrum? How can  we make online education work better for our students so that more  of them stay enrolled and graduate? Closing the gap may feel like a  daunting endeavor, but we can think creatively about how to bring  the human connection that makes student success more likely in faceto-face classes into the online realm. An online discussion forum is  never going to be the same as sitting around a synchronous discussion group in the classroom. But the elements that make the discussion  great can transcend the teaching medium. Online learning provides  new opportunities for creative engagement and innovating teaching,  as well Bayne et al. 2020. If faculty can replicate the human connections that make in-person classes so rewarding for both the instructor and the student, teaching and learning online might not be such  a struggle. If we cant reduce the distance physically, we have to do  it socially and emotionally. The next chapter describes specific, datatested rapportbuilding strategies that faculty can implement in their  online classes to begin to reduce that distance immediately.

 FOUR  Strategies for Building Rapport L ike most professors, I send a lot of emails. One of the most memorable responses I ever received came after I sent a checkin  email halfway through the semester. As I detail below, I send personal check-in emails to all of the students in my online classes, to ask  them how they are doing, give them their grades on assignments completed so far, and share some words of encouragement. This particular response stayed with me because of how perfectly it encapsulated  the sometimes heartbreaking experience of being a struggling online  student. I opened my email and found this vulnerable message: I can  honestly admit that an online course can be tricky. I know that I can  perform a lot better than what I have been. Yes, if we can have a video  call that would be more than helpful. Thank you for your concern as  well because there arent that many professors that care if students  succeed or not. I thank you for that and I am going to give it my best. Imagine being a student taking online classes and going through  your college career believing that not many of your professors care  whether you succeed or not. The data in chapter 3 present a compelling case that when professors develop positive, rapportfilled relationships with their students, the students do better in the class and  are more likely to stay enrolled. The email I received from the student 

Strategies for Building Rapport   83 who was struggling epitomizes how students are motivated to give  it their best when they believe that their professors care about their  success. Not coincidentally, this is the same conclusion that scholars  who study online teaching and learning have reached: Frequent and  effective studentinstructor interaction creates an online environment  that encourages students to commit themselves to the course and perform at a stronger academic level Jaggars and Xu 2016, 271. So, how do we demonstrate to students that we care about their  success? How do we build rapport with our online students? In  chapter 3, I presented the results of a multiyear experiment where I  changed my teaching style to prioritize building rapport with my students. The result was that the retention rates in my online classes significantly improved, by 13, making them statistically indistinguishable from the retention rates in my faceto-face classes. To set up this  experiment, I randomly selected one online class each semester to be  the experimental condition and one to be the control condition.  If I taught only one online section that semester, I would alternate  whether I taught the course with the experimental treatment or not. The specific techniques I used in the experimental, or rapportbuilding, treatment are summarized in table 4.1, along with additional rapportbuilding methods I have learned and developed over  the years. These strategies can be grouped into three general categories: humanizing the instructor, providing personalized feedback,  and reaching out to students. Underlying each of these three categories is a core message: the instructor cares about the success of each  student. In table 4.1. these strategies are also organized according to  intensity level meaning how much effort the strategy will likely take  on the instructors part. Building rapport with students can begin  with something as simple as adding a profile picture to your Learning  Management System e.g., Blackboard, Canvas, etc. Or, it can be as  involved as holding extended oneonone video conferences with students to update them on their individual progress in the course and  develop a plan for mentoring them going forward. If you are just getting started with rapport building, you may want to stick to the lowintensity strategies in the table at first and build from there.

Table 4.1. Rapport-Building Techniques Intensity  Level

Humanizing the Instructor

Providing   Personalized Feedback

Reaching out to Students Low Add a profile picture to your  Learning Management System, email, etc. Apologize when you make  mistakes Host an introductions discussion thread with a humanizing question e.g., the story  of your name, your travel  bucket list, your class walk-up  song, past or current pictures  of pets, your favorite foods,  etc. Use students names in  replying to comments on  discussion boards Leave positive comments  on assignments along with  any critiques when appropriate, consider  using plural pronouns e.g.,  we want to make sure you  get the best possible grade  on the next exam  Respond to emails as  quickly as possible List expected email  response times in your syllabus, and perhaps below  your email signature line Send emails to the whole  class as opposed to personal emails, which is the  next intensity level disable Learning Management System communication so student messages  dont get lost in the LMS Medium  Add personal style to your  lecture notes, including jokes  yes, even bad ones, references to current events, and  to the extent that you feel  comfortable, details about  your life, preferences, hobbies, pets, TV shows youre  watching, etc. Make your syllabus more  accessible through friendly  writing and using headings Respond frequently to  comments on discussion  boards, refer back to comments made by other students, and push the discussion forward Create a document with  detailed, but often-used,  feedback in your own voice  that can be used to provide  similar feedback to multiple students through a  copy-paste-personalize  method Send personal emails welcoming students to the  class before the semester  starts; consider including a  short survey to learn more  about your students Send personal reminder  emails before assignment  deadlines Send personal emails to  check on students who havent participated in online  discussions recently Hold office hours on a video  conference platform High Record videos or a podcast-style audio recording to  give updates on course material, touch base on due dates,  comment on current events,  talk through especially thorny  topics, etc. Hide an Easter Egg assignment in the syllabus requiring  students to contact you and  complete some task Leave audio comments in a  PdF document to provide  specific feedback Use the comment feature  in Adobe PdF to electronically mark up a PdF document with colored pen and  provide feedback Return assignments as  quickly as possible  Send personal check-in  emails informing students  of their grades on major  assignments and telling  them how to improve for  the remainder of the class Use mail merge to send  personal emails with  detailed assignment  feedback If you have their phone  number, call or text students you havent heard  from in a while

Strategies for Building Rapport   85 The remainder of this chapter provides detailed information on the  rapportbuilding strategies I have honed over more than a decade of  teaching online. These strategies may not work for every professor  and should be adapted to suit each instructors personality and teaching style. Hopefully, among these techniques are a few suggestions  that you can see yourself using in your own online classes. This chapter, and table 4.1 in particular, might be worth discussing with some  of your colleagues who teach online to kick off a rapport brainstorming session. Table 4.1 is far from exhaustive. It is more like a starting point for building rapport. As you read through these ideas, think  about your own courses, and talk with colleagues; you may see how  your teaching strategies fit into the chart. I would guess that nearly  every online college professor will have some of their own rapportbuilding techniques to share and that more may come up in the course  of conversation. Humanizing the Instructor In order to build rapport with students in online classes, it is important for the students to see their professor as a real person who cares  about their success. Students have a lot on their plates, and online  classes especially can easily slip their minds. Humanizing demonstrates to students that the professor is a real person and not an automatic gradegenerating robot or, perhaps even worse, a cold, unfeeling  instructor who lacks both personality and emotions. When students  know that there is a real person with them in the course, they feel  more of a responsibility to the course and to the professor. Relationships are central to teaching and learning Holmberg 2003. If the students know their professor, and know that their professor cares about  them, the course becomes a higher priority and they are more likely  to succeed. Learning is a very human activity. The more people feel  they are being treated as human beingsthat their human needs are  being taken into accountthe more they are likely to learn and learn  to learn Knowles 1990, 129. When we see human connection as 
THE SOLUTION central to learning, it makes both teaching and learning more fruitful  and rewarding. Building authentic human relationships with our students through  an online interface takes time and effort. I use a number of strategies  to help the students in my classes see me as a real human being who  cares about their success. I include a profile picture on my Blackboard  account so that with every message I send and every post I make, the  students see my smiling face. I know some instructors who dont feel  comfortable including their own photograph, and instead they include  a picture of their pet or their favorite vista. Even this approach helps  to humanize the instructor. I always provide written lecture notes to  students, but instead of just bland facts, I try to include some personality in my lectures, letting my natural sarcasm come through and  adding tidbits about pop culture and current events. Just to give you a  taste of what this looks like for my students, here is an actual excerpt  from a lecture in my US foreign policy class about how the international relations theory of constructivism would explain the end of the  Cold War: It would probably give a lot of the credit to changing ideas  and pressure from within. The people of the USSR ended it, not anyone else. Ideas got in, people demanded more from their government,  and they decided to fight for freedom. The Pope in Poland calling  for more freedom and religious liberty; the popularity of Levis jeans;  Baywatch. This is how empires rise and fall. One way I try to connect with students and help them see me as a  human being is through making my course syllabus a little more interesting to read. The syllabus is likely the most important document in  a course because it sets the tone and the expectations for the course.  But some students, especially if they are firstgeneration or early in  their college careers, may not know how important the syllabus is or  read it very carefully Cataldi, Bennett, and Chen 2018; Collier and  Morgan 2008. I try to make my syllabus more accessible by having  informative headings e.g., Email Policy and Inclement Weather  Policy so they can easily find what they need. I also try to make it  more interesting by letting my personality shine through in snarky  comments e.g., The best way to get ahold of me is through email. 

Strategies for Building Rapport   87 The Blackboard email system is terrible, so I have disabled it. And  Sometimes bad weather makes it difficult to have class. I know that  would be deeply disappointing to you, so the university administration requires me to put the inclement weather policy in our syllabus.  Because many students access course materials through their smartphones, PacanskyBrock, Smedshammer, and VincentLayton 2020  recommend putting your syllabus on a website, not as a document,  but in a liquid format, with active links that are formatted to be  easily read by a smartphone. Universities may even have web hosting  space and tech support to help with this. One additional thing I have started doing in recent years is hiding  an Easter egg in my syllabus. The idea here is that students who  read the syllabus carefully will find an opportunity for bonus points.  For my introductory classes, both faceto-face and online, I add a section at the end of the syllabus under the heading Just Checking that  says, Are you really reading this syllabus? It is actually shockingly  important to your success in the class. It is like an agreement between  you and me. It is like a map to getting an A. It is really important!  Once you finish reading the whole syllabusincluding the schedule  and reading assignments below; those are super importantemail me  a picture of a panda raglazierualr .edu and I will give you an extra  credit point towards your participation grade. The panda picture Easter egg and please feel free to pick the animal that best suits your personality or the class; sometimes I rotate  in a tiger cub accomplishes at least three things. First, submitting the  panda pictures gives students an opportunity to initiate email contact  with me. This can be a high hurdle for some students. Especially if a  student has no one in their personal circle with a college degree, sending a professional email to someone with a PhD can be really intimidating Jack 2016. Once they overcome this hurdle with the panda  picture, it is easier for them to email at other times in the semester,  when they may need help. Plus, I now have an outstanding collection  of panda pics. Second, and related, the email from the student allows me to return  a friendly reply thanking them for the panda, welcoming them to the 
THE SOLUTION class, and inviting them to reach out if they ever need anything at all.  This oneonone interaction can set the tone for a successful semester  and calm their fears. I like to imagine my students having fun selecting  their panda pictures. They send me emails saying, Hope you enjoy  the panda! and once a student sent a memorable picture of a raccoon  with the subject line trash panda. The lighthearted exchange is definitely humanizing on both sides. Third, the paragraph under the Just Checking heading emphasizes as strongly as I know how just how important the syllabus is.  Plus, the students only get the extra credit point associated with the  panda picture by reading at least that far in the syllabus. These two  things send a strong signal to the student to pay close attention to the  syllabus, which will set them up for success in the class. I know other faculty members who ask students to take selfies outside the faculty members office and send them via email, which similarly requires the students to make contact, but also requires them to  find your office, making it more likely that the students will come to  office hours should they ever need to. This task might be challenging  for some online students who dont get to campus very often, but a  selfie task could help build rapport as students send pictures of themselves. I would recommend including an alternative for students who  dont feel socially or religiously comfortable sending pictures of themselves. Other professors use interactive maps to build community  among their online students as class members share where they are  geographically and interact spatially with one another Cavanaugh  and Cavanaugh 2008. Although they dont see each other in class,  they might see that they like the same taco truck or get their nails  done at the same salon. You could also consider a preclass survey to  ask students about things like preferred pronouns and anything that  might interfere with their success in the class PacanskyBrock, Smedshammer, and VincentLayton 2020. I like to include a few fun questions, like the show they most recently bingewatched or the place in  the world they would most like to visit. A copy of the survey questions  I use are available in the appendix; please feel free to use as many or  as few as you would like for your own presemester surveys. When 

Strategies for Building Rapport   89 the students respond, keep the information in a spreadsheet and refer  back to it if something comes up with a student. Nothing could be  more humanizing than a professor remembering that your mom was  going to be going through chemo in February and following up to ask  how shes doing. Faculty can be creative in thinking of ways to connect with online  students at the beginning of the semester and broach that first hurdle of making contact outside the course Learning Management System. Students have a tendency to start, stop, and restart college, so the  beginning of each course is a new opportunity to engage students and  get off on the right foot Felten and Lambert 2020. As the class first  gets going, a simple introductions thread in the discussion board could  also help students get to know you and each other. Consider including a question that could be fun or interesting to answer, like a travel  bucket list or a request to share pet pictures or a class walk-up song. To build rapport through human connection, I also record weekly  videos. To keep students attention and work with both mental and  actual bandwidth issues, these videos are just a few minutes long  Darby and Lang 2019, but they tell students what might be particularly important in the material for the coming week, remind them of  upcoming assignments, and mention current events. Through videos,  instructors can act as a living resource for the students to help guide  them through the course McCabe and GonzalezFlores 2017, 127.  This small effort makes a big difference to students. As one student  wrote in an anonymous course evaluation, I genuinely appreciate you taking the time on Mondays to make  and publish your videos, the outline really makes a huge difference for me, it seems to be very easy to get clouded up with online  classes due to the lack of interaction one normally sees with  attending an actual class. I unfortunately cannot say the same for  my other classes, a little more engagement from my other professors would make a huge impact. And if you are someone who prerecords your online lecture material and the idea of a weekly video seems overwhelming, consider even  
THE SOLUTION a weekly audio message. I have one colleague who realized that even  the lowstakes recording of a weekly video was overwhelming enough  to mean that she just wasnt recording them, and so instead she decided  to record a weekly podcast about how each weeks readings and prerecorded lecture materials related to current events. She records these  audio messages each week while walking her dog, and thus calls them  not podcasts but dogcasts. At the end of each dogcast, she gives  a count of the number of squirrels her dog saw during the recording.  The production quality is low, but these recordings communicate to  students that their professor is a very human and b thinking about  her students and the course material in real time even while walking  her dog. These weekly video or audio communications send students a signal that their professor is available and accessible. I even include a  lowstakes opportunity for extra credit in the first video I post for the  course, telling students in that video that if they make an introductory  post sharing a description of the best part of their break, I will give  them an extra point for the discussion board that week. This small  opportunity for extra credit accomplishes a number of things. First,  it encourages the students to watch the videos I post, in the hopes of  earning more extra credit points and I make sure to sprinkle these  extra credit opportunities throughout. Second, it gives the students  the chance to post something about themselves, making it possible to  get to know each other better and build rapport. And third, it may signal to students who havent watched the video that there is something  to see there, from the posts on the discussion board, leading them to  pay closer attention to assignments and posts. Students tend to respond positively to this kind of multimedia interaction Costa 2020. Data from surveys my colleague Skurat Harris  and I have done show that students like videos both for learning and  for personal connection. One student wrote, Videos from the instructor made you feel like you got to know them. In one survey of 1,500  online students, videos and PowerPoints were named by students as  the most helpful class activity58 of students said that they were  very helpful to their learning and success Clinefelter and Aslanian 

Strategies for Building Rapport   91 2016. Importantly, students differentiate videos made by the professor, which build rapport and they view as very helpful, from videos  made by thirdparty content providers, which are rated by the students as the least helpful of all of the class activities listed. Thus, it is  not the video medium itself that matters; it is the fact that the professor is using the video to connect with the class on a real human level. We see similar evidence of this connection in research from Huss  and Eastep 2013, who asked students if seeing a video message or  hearing an audio message from the instructor helped them feel more  connected to an online professor. Sixtytwo percent of the students  said that it did, 23 said that it didnt, and 15 had never had such  messages pp. 8 9. I record videos even when I am traveling with students on study abroad trips, when I am attending academic conferences, and, when my son was young, I would keep recording when a  toddler would wander into the shot. I purposefully leave these markers of everyday life in the videos as a way to show my own humanity  and connect with students. A great resource for creating videos that  build rapport with students is Karen Costas book 99 Tips for Creating  Simple and Sustainable Educational Videos, where she writes about  bringing her dog, Rocky, into the videos she records for her online  classes, as a humanizing element Costa 2020. Michelle PacanskyBrock and colleagues have done a great deal  of work on the importance of humanizing for student learning e.g.,  PacanskyBrock 2020; PacanskyBrock, Smedshammer, and VincentLayton 2020. When students see their professor as a human being  they can connect with, instead of a distant and unreachable electronic  force that hands down grades, it makes opportunities for connection  more likely and gives instructors the chance to help students when  they need it. We dont need to worry about professionally edited videos. Its okay if your cat jumps up on your lap or your toddler asks for  a cookie in the middle of a lecture. Your students may have cats and  toddlers, too, and even if they dont, letting these dayto-day elements  be a part of the video can help make a human connection PacanskyBrock, Smedshammer, and VincentLayton 2020. Video and audio recordings are also helpful because students tend 
THE SOLUTION to equate teaching with verbal communication. When course content  is only written and students have to read it, they feel like they are  doing the work and teaching themselves. If you want to have a real  teacherlearner relationship with them, you need to communicate with  them beyond the written word Gering et al. 2018, 76. This is especially important for students early in their college careers, before they  have developed the study skills that make learning on their own easier.  Because students value verbal communication so much, incorporating  some synchronous features, like realtime conversations, or at least  videos and images of yourself Bawa 2016, can improve student success in your classes Daigle and Stuvland 2020. Some research indicates that these synchronous, personal connections may be even more  important for supporting the success of students of color in online  classes Ashong and Commander 2012; Merrills 2010; Palacios and  Wood 2016. However, it is important to be sensitive to student schedules and not require synchronous attendance in an online class, unless  the class is listed as synchronous in the catalog. Many students take  online classes specifically because of the flexibility for their unpredictable schedules. Unfortunately, most instructors who teach online receive some  technical training but no pedagogical training, and so end up simply  transferring their faceto-face courses online with minimal changes  and few opportunities for synchronous interaction Cox 2006; Jaggars and Xu 2016; Xu and Xu 2019. If you do teach an online class  with a synchronous component, think carefully about how to use that  synchronous time Roberts 2020. Qualitative responses to a survey  about course delivery preferences at the University of Arkansas at  Little Rock in May 2020 revealed that only 5 of students n  15  want synchronous time to be used for lectures; instead, students want  this time to be used for interacting with faculty and students 14,  n  41 and answering questions 15, n  45 Slagle et al. 2020.  Lecture content can usually be delivered better asynchronously. When  content is recorded as video or audio, or presented in written format,  students can access it once the kids are in bed, review it again just  before the test, and download it when they have a strong WiFi conStrategies for Building Rapport   93 nection. When you are synchronously present together, use that time  to build rapport through interaction and to make real human connections as a class. This approach takes advantage of the strengths of  both synchronous and asynchronous learning Daigle and Stuvland  2020; Kemp and Grieve 2014. Two examples illustrate the impact of building rapport through  humanizing. The first is a simple story about human connection.  When faculty teach online classes, we may not get to meet many of  our students in person. One day, while talking with a colleague at a  local caf, I was approached from behind by someone who asked,  Dr. Glazier? Is that you? I recognized your voice from our online   videos! She was a student who had taken my online class the previous semester and was excited to meet in person. Without the videos I  had recorded, she never would have become so familiar with my voice  and never would have felt a close enough connection to approach me  to talk about the class, her upcoming graduation, and her career plans.  She knew I would be happy to see her because we had connected on  a human level through our online class. A second example comes from a student who was having a challenging semester. Early in the semester, Jennifer not her real name  fell behind on a couple of assignments, but was quick to respond positively when I sent her an email reminding her about them and checking in. I gave her the chance to make up some lowstakes reading   quizzes and gave her some advice about studying for the next exam.  In our email exchanges, Jennifer confessed, I bit off more than I could  chew . . . I signed up for 19 hours this semester and being a full time  working mama and that havent meshed well. Sometimes it can be  easy to write off students who fail to turn in assignments or dont  check in to our online classes for days or weeks at a time, but often  we simply dont know what is going on behind the scenes. With a little bit of grace, Jennifer was able to get back on track  in our class. With a few weeks to go, she wrote, I just want to say I  really am thankful for the patience and feedback you have given me  this semester. I got in over my head and you have been there for me  every time Ive needed it. Jennifer worked incredibly hard to study 
THE SOLUTION for the final exam and make up the ground she lost early in the semester. I was so happy when the final exams were graded and I got an  email from her with the subject line I did it! She wrote, Dr. Glazier  I just checked my final exam grade. I studied so hard. I cant believe  I got that A! Thank you so much for your patience this semester. A  student I could have easily written off after the first few weeks of class  ended up with an A on the final exam and a B in the class. Not only  was she successfully retained in my class, but she graduated and went  on to earn a masters degree. Think back to figure 3.1 in chapter 3 and  the longterm effects of building rapport. Jennifer is a great example  of how real human connection in this class helped her succeed. Now,  Jennifer is a smart and capable student and rapport certainly doesnt  deserve the credit for her accomplishments, but in retrospect, we can  see how, in this challenging semester, things could have ended up on  a different trajectory. Showing my students that I am human also means recognizing  when I make mistakes. Working with online Learning Management  Systems like Blackboard provides plenty of opportunities to make  mistakes! I apologize to my students whenever I mess up a release  date for an assignment or learning module; I told my students when  my grandmother died and their exams were graded more slowly than  they were used to. For some professors, this may feel too personal, but  I think it gives students permission to be human with me as well. I try  to be kind and understanding when it comes to family crises, missed  deadlines, and assignment questions. As I will cover in more depth in  chapter 5, this can make the difference for students on the margins. As  one student put it in an anonymous evaluation comment, Professor  Glazier is a very understanding teacher. I have had a rough year but  she assisted me when I needed it. Students know when their professors really care about them. We  communicate that message directly and indirectly in a thousand different ways Gannon 2020. When students feel like their success matters to their professors, it has an impact on how they approach the  class. My students sometimes send me preemptive emails warning me  that they may not do well on an exam, but not to worry. Like the stuStrategies for Building Rapport   95 dent who wrote, I would like to apologize upfront for my exam, it  was not my best work. My mind is not in a good place right now due  to personal issues. I know you truly care about your students, so I just  wanted to warn you up front, so you would not be concerned. I will  give you much better next time. When our students know we care,  they want to do their best. Providing Personalized Feedback Nothing can make a student feel more important and seen than receiving feedback that is clearly tailored just for them in order to help them  improve and succeed. Most students are eager to receive feedback on  their assignments Gallien and OomenEarly 2008. Less than 7 of  students say that receiving just the grade on an assignment is sufficient  Huss and Eastep 2013. Students want to learn and want to know  how to improve going forward. Without feedback, they may feel like  they are in the dark and dont know how to do better. When we asked students about the worst class they had ever taken  at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock in our Best Worst Study,  they often told us about classes where they didnt receive feedback  and never knew where they stood. This is an incredibly frustrating situation for students. You can feel the exasperation coming through in  student comments like this one: The professor gives no clear instructions as to what he expects from us in our weekly reading journals.  Im taking this class now. We are two weeks away from the end of the  semester, and have yet to receive any grades or feedback whatsoever  as to whether or not were doing the assignments correctly. Another  student said, The teacher has only graded ONE assignment throughout the entire semester and there has been no active communication  whatsoever. Most people like to know where they stand in a class so  that they know how to improve, but that hasnt been possible with  this class. While providing good feedback is an important element of any  teaching and learning relationship, it is especially important in the  on line classroom because students lack faceto-face interaction Bon96   THE SOLUTION nel, Ludwig, and Smith 2008; Leibold and Schwarz 2015. Good feedback can help bridge the disconnect that is inherent in online courses.  Researchers who study feedback suggest some helpful best practices:  instructors call students by name when providing feedback, get feedback to students as quickly as possible within 72 hours for discussions and one week for assignments, and use a positive tone, among  other recommendations Leibold and Schwarz 2015, 37. These recommendations can help build rapport with online students, and the literature clearly points to improvements in student  outcomes when students receive prompt feedback on assignments  from their instructors. In fact, prompt feedback is so important to  student success that Rio Salado College uses a proprietary software to  alert the department chair if an instructor takes longer than 72 hours  to grade an assignment Bailey et al. 2018. I wouldnt go so far as to  recommend a faculty surveillance approach to encourage timely feedback, as it is unlikely to engender the kind of positive facultystudent  relationships that have really meaningful effects over time, but students do appreciate timely feedback. In fact, it is clear that students would prefer a speed and level of  detail in assignment feedback that would seem to come with heavy  costs for instructors. Providing individualized and substantive feedback to students can be time consuming and challenging, especially in  large classes Ackerman and Gross 2010. Although students love to  receive feedback, nothing sparks dread in the heart of a college professor more than providing rapid, personalized feedback for a large  number of students. How can we find the right balance here? First, at an administrative  level, it is important that online class sizes be kept manageable so that  personalized feedback is possible. Some universities may view online  education as a financially wise path because it is possible to raise class  sizes beyond what a typical classroom might hold. That model has  proven profitable for some universities Bailey et al. 2018, but it is  difficult to build rapport in very large online classes. The best practice  recommendation is that online classes be no more than 25 students for  undergraduate classes Arbaugh and BenbunanFich 2005 and 13 to 

Strategies for Building Rapport   97 15 for graduate classes Qiu, Hewitt, and Brett 2012. One survey of  online instructors reports that they would prefer class sizes to be even  smaller, at 15.9 students on average, to achieve the highest level of  interaction Orellana 2009. Research that further takes into account  the additional effort required by faculty to engage students in online  classes recommends class sizes of around 12 North Carolina General  Assembly 2010; Tomei 2006. These numbers are miles away from recent trends toward Massive  Open Online Classes, or MOOCs, which soared in popularity and  then quickly faded as attrition rates as high as 90 became widely  known Chamberlin and Parish 2011; Daniel 2012; Gtl et al. 2014.  Establishing relationships between faculty and thousands of individual students in a MOOC is impossible, leading many of the students in  those classes to feel disconnected, uninvested, and to ultimately drop  out. That said, some students in MOOCs do make connections with  one another, illustrating both how important community building is  to online students and the possibility of achieving it under even the  most trying circumstances Bali et al. 2015. Yet, even when classes are kept at a reasonable size for building  rapport with individual students, faculty and administrators have to  come to grips with a difficult truthone that is at the heart of this book  and is critical to building rapport and improving retention. Retaining online students requires better relationships between instructors  and students, and building those relationships takes resources. Most  importantly, it takes instructor time. The data and evidence presented  here will hopefully convince both faculty and administrators that the  resources necessary to improve online retention are worth it, but we  cant pretend that retention will improve without effort. The time and  effort required of faculty to build rapport with students is the first and  most effective means of improving online retention. Chapter 7 provides more detail about the roles that students, administrators, and  others play in the process, but this chapter focuses on faculty. Simply  put, online instructors can improve retention by building rapport with  their students through taking the time to connect with them, including  through providing more personalized feedback.
THE SOLUTION For all those online instructors gnashing their teeth in despair, there  are ways to provide personalized feedback that are more efficient than  writing individual comments for each student. I have learned a number of strategies from the literature and have developed a few of my  own in my years of teaching online. The great thing about leaving feedback in online classes is that  students turn in assignments electronically and so expect feedback  electronically. This makes it easy to use a copypastepersonalize  method of providing feedback that may be similar across students  but doesnt require typing extensive comments that are specifically  tailored to each individual student. Instructors using this strategy for  providing personalized feedback would create a document with comments they often leave on a particular assignment, written in their  own voice, and then slightly adjust them for each student. One simple adjustment is to use each students name in the feedback you give  them. It matters a lot to students that their professors know their  names; it makes them feel valued and they feel more invested in the  course Cooper et al. 2017. I use the copypastepersonalize method to provide feedback to  students on their annotated bibliography assignment in my introductory international politics course. For instance, sometimes the students might select sources that may be outdated and I want to push  them to justify why a source from 40 years ago is the best one to consult to understand the question of, for example, whether economic  development is a necessary prerequisite for democracy. I may leave  a comment like, This seems like a really interesting source, student  name, but I see that it was published in year. That is quite a while  ago! If you are going to use a source that is that old, I would like to  see some justification in your annotation telling me why it is still relevant today. Is this one of the foundational works in the field? Is this  where you found some key definitions? Instead of typing out this comment each time a student uses an outdated source, with the copypastepersonalize method I can copy  and paste the comment, just adding in the student name and the publication date. The feedback is just as relevant as if I had not added those 

Strategies for Building Rapport   99 two specific details, but with them, I signal to the student that I am  paying attention to their particular assignment and care about helping  them do better in the future. That signal is just as importantmaybe  even more sothan the substance of the feedback. I know of some instructors who compile a list of common mistakes  on an assignment into a single document and number them, say 1 to  15, and then provide each student with the numbers of the things they  did wrong. Thus, the student would get their assignment back with the  numbers 3, 5, 9, 10, and 11 across the top. The student would then  consult the document and see that they: didnt cite their sources properly number 3, lacked a clear thesis statement number 5, and so  on. This method may get students some substantive feedback regarding their academic shortcomings, but it is incredibly impersonal and  can literally make the students feel like a number. It doesnt take much  more time to copy and paste the actual comments into the appropriate place in the students assignment and it likely makes the student  feel like you actually read the work they spent so much time producing. There are even computerassisted grading rubrics that can help  instructors get meaningful and substantive feedback to students more  quickly Czaplewski 2009. When Skurat Harris and I asked students about the best class they  had ever taken at our university in our Best Worst Study, the theme of  good feedback came up repeatedly Glazier and Skurat Harris 2020.  One student said, What made this class the BEST class was the feedback from and interaction with my professor. She challenged me, but  also let me know the things I was doing well. Student respondents  also often noted that this was not the norm for online classes. Another  said, Though it was online, the professor was attentive and always  made sure to give feedback on time and graded work back on time.  Another illustrative example is the student who said their professor  is an example of an instructor who actually knows that teaching  is possible with online classes . . . the instructor actually taught and  interacted with the students, providing feedback and helping them to  understand the concepts. Good feedback can be difficult to give in an  online class, but our students are clearly hungry for it.
THE SOLUTION The copypastepersonalize method is one very simple way to  get more substantive yet personal feedback to students, but there are  many other solutions. The tools provided by Adobe make it possible  to provide personalized feedback in additional, creative ways that can  reach students and make them feel seen. For instance, you can leave  audio comments in a pdf document. This can be easier for some, compared to typing, and hearing a professors voice can really help make  a connection and communicate encouragement more clearly. A study  of nursing students found a strong preference among students for  audio feedback, as opposed to written feedback Wood, Moskovitz,   and Valiga 2011. Imagine being a student and getting a worse grade than you would  have liked on an assignment. Then imagine hearing your professors  voice saying, I realize this may not be the grade you were hoping for,  John, but I think you are a smart student and believe you can do better  on the next assignment. You have some good ideas, and understand  many of the major concepts. You just need to spend a little more time  on organization to make sure you communicate those ideas clearly  and on research to make sure you have the citations to back your  work up. You can do it! I am happy to help you with the next paper  if you need it. Please feel free to send me an email and we can talk  through your ideas or questions. If you were John, you might come  away from that assignment feeling like you had hope for success in the  class, instead of perhaps feeling like you wanted to quit the class or  even drop out of college. Of course, that feedback to our hypothetical  student John is provided in my own voice and presumes a relationship  with John and knowledge of his work in the course. You may not be  able to imagine yourself leaving feedback like this for your students,  and that is just fine! Connecting with students authentically is what  matters and that has to happen on your own terms. In Adobe pdf documents you can also use the feedback tools to  mark up a document with a colorful pen. And, no matter what format a student used to turn in an assignment, you can convert it to a  pdf to leave comments, even writing some of them out in virtual ink if  you want. While some students may dread receiving a heavily marked 

Strategies for Building Rapport   101 up paper back, it is another way to send a signal that you really read  their assignment. Importantly, electronic marks, and all kinds of comments, dont have to be negative. They should sometimes be positive.  In fact, experts recommend a balance of two positive comments for  every critical one Leibold and Schwarz 2015. I like to underline or  circle important ideas, leave exclamation marks by surprising points,  and write yes! when a thesis is stated clearly. Two other ideas for types of feedback include video feedback and  peer feedback. Video feedback can be more engaging and accessible  than written feedback, and it offers another way to connect with students on a human level. Research indicates that both faculty and  students believe video feedback improves their feedback experience  Crook et al. 2012. And incorporating some peer feedback may be  one way to relieve the feedback burden on the professor, while also  helping improve students writing. Getting feedback both from the  instructor and from peers can lead to greater gains in learning for the  students Tai, Lin, and Yang 2015, but peer feedback is not a substitute for instructor feedback. Students need to know that their instructors are present and paying attention to the work they are producing. Research shows that it is not so much the amount of the feedback that matters to students, but the nature of that feedback. An  overwhelming amount of critical feedback is sure to be discouraging.  More is not always better. Constructive comments, along with some  encouragement and even the opportunity to revise, can instead lead  students to be optimistic about their chances for success in a class and  contribute to a positive feedback loop with greater commitment and  effort by the students on future assignments Ackerman, Dommeyer,  and Gross 2017; Ackerman and Gross 2010. Feedback doesnt have  to be long and detailed. Keep it personal, positive, and specific, and  students will not only learn, they will build rapport. No matter the medium through which it is provided, giving students personalized feedback does require more time from instructors.  But it is time that directly builds relationships with students. Timely  feedback on assignments is one of the critical things students want  and appreciate in online classes. It is one of the key ways that instruc102   THE SOLUTION tors can signal to students that they are engaged in the class and care  about the students learning. There are teaching hacks that instructors can use to make providing personalized feedback less time consuming, but the increased effort is worth the payoff, as students feel  seen and valued in online classes. Timely, personalized feedback is a  key way to improve online retention. Reaching Out to Students Although rapport is almost by definition dyadic and mutual Altman 1990; TickleDegnen and Rosenthal 1990, when it comes to  the online classroom, a lot of the responsibility for creating a highrapport environment rests on the instructor Murphy and RodrguezManzanares 2012. One of the most important ways that professors  can build rapport with their students is by fostering good communication, including through responsive and helpful email exchanges and  by proactively reaching out to contact students outside of class. Email is one of the most important means of communicating with  online students, and students have very high expectations about faculty  response times. In one study by Zhang, Hurst, and McLean 2016,  91 of student respondents believed that faculty should return emails  within 24 hours. Although the online student demand for high responsiveness from professors can be frustrating for some faculty Hiltz,  Kim, and Shea 2007; Leidman, Piwinsky, and McKeague 2010, a  quick response to an email makes a student feel respected and valued  Hurtado et al. 2011; Lundquist, Spalding, and Landrum 2002. If  you are able to prioritize your email replies to online students to provide that kind of responsiveness, students will feel cared for, and will  be more likely to stay in the class. However, not all online instructors want to be, or are able to be,  that responsive to email. I recommend two initial steps in email communication with students to facilitate responsiveness and set expectations. First, disable any email platform embedded in your Learning  Management System. My university has a contract with Blackboard,  which has an internal messaging system where students can individStrategies for Building Rapport   103 ually send me messages. I delete this widget from the menu in all of  my online courses. In providing another way for students to contact  me, Blackboard has provided another system in which I have to check  my messages, which takes time and mental space to remember, both  of which are in short supply. I have tried telling students that the best  way to reach me is via my university email address, but one hard truth  of online classes is that students do not read everything that instructors post online. Each semester, a student would inevitably contact  me through the Blackboard system, where their message would languish for days before I happened to check it, and the student would  feel ignored and unimportant. I disable the internal messaging system  altogether so the students have no choice but to email me through  my university email address. I put this information in the syllabus  and even make a joke of it, using it as another opportunity to let my  human side come through in the course materials. My second email recommendation is to set the expectations for  email responsiveness early and often. The syllabus should list your  response time for emails. Mine says, I am also readily available by  email and promise to respond within 24 hours during the work week  usually sooner and within 48 hours on the weekend. If you ever  need anything at all, I hope you will email me. This statement is also  on the instructor contact page in Blackboard near my email address.  With this information available to students, they know what to expect  from me and wont be left thinking that I am ignoring them if I take a  day or two off on the weekend. A harder ask in terms of responsiveness would be to do more to  align our schedules as professors with those of our students. One  study of nursing students found that the students online course usage  is very consistent Monday through Saturday, but they spend twice as  much time in their online courses on Sundays Huun and Kummerow  2018. Data from the University of Georgia similarly indicates that,  looking just at one spring semester, the majority of online students  were logged into their classes between 8 and 10 pm on Sunday night  Zatynsk 2013. Those are definitely not my working hours, but with  Sundays being such a high usage day for students, and many assign104   THE SOLUTION ment deadlines corresponding with the MondaySunday week, if we  want to meet our students where they are, we may want to consider  checking in before bed on Sunday night to see if there are any fires  that need our attention. In his book Learning Online: The Student  Experience, George Veletsianos 2020 looks at online learning from  the perspective of students and argues that we need to understand our  students as people. Building rapport is all about making these human  connections. When we put ourselves in our students shoes and connect with them as fellow humans, they learn better and the experience of teaching is better as well. Thinking about adjusting our work  schedule to be available during the times when students might need  us the most is a challenging recommendation, but both students and  faculty could benefit in the end. Responding to student emails is part timeliness, but tone and content are also critical. When it comes to the latter, many busy instructors may default to a rushed response or may even tell students to  check the syllabus instead of providing the answer. This is certainly  understandable, but it also sends students a signal that they are a  bother, they are missing important things, and perhaps even that they  are not cut out for college. Even when I may be annoyed by a question that is answered in the  syllabus, I always try to do four things when I respond to any student  email: 1. Address the student by their first name. This models good email  etiquette for students, who are often lacking in this department, and lets them know that you know who they are. I have  a spreadsheet for each class where I keep track of students who  go by middle names or nicknames and I work hard to remember those when I email students. I have found that universities  are particularly slow at changing emails for students who are  transgender, so having your own list can be really important  for getting a students name right. Also, beware of some email  programs like Gmail that autosuggest a recipients name;  often the suggestions are accurate, but sometimes the suggested 

Strategies for Building Rapport   105 name is pulled from the students name as listed in their official  email contact and not the name they prefer to go by. 2. Validate the question. Building rapport with students means  encouraging questions and engagement in the class. No matter  what I think of the substance of the question, I always thank  the student for asking the question or tell them I am glad they  asked. Thus, even if a student emails to ask what citation format they should use for the research paper and the information  is right in the assignment handout, I would respond by saying  something like, Thanks so much for the question; I am so glad  you asked. 3. Answer the question. Even if you are frustrated by the question and think the student should be able to find this information on their own, answer the question. Imagine how frustrating it would be for the student to get an email response with  no actual answer to their question! I like to tell students that  the information is also available, for instance, in the syllabus or  in the assignment description, and then attach that document  to the email. That way, the student knows where to check first  before emailing next time. In the example of the citation format, I would tell them to please cite using the Chicago Manual of Style, link them to the online quick citation guide, and  attach the assignment handout. 4. Invite them to follow up if they have additional questions.  Especially if this is the students first time initiating an email  with me, I want them to know that they can continue to email  me and ask questions. I always invite them to let me know if  they need anything and tell them that I am happy to help. In  the case of the citation question, I would close by telling them  that the research paper is a really important assignment, so  they should feel free to email me again if any other questions  come up. Imagine how a firstgeneration college student, uncertain in their  ability to succeed in college and mustering all their courage to email 
THE SOLUTION a professor for the first time, might feel receiving the two different  emails displayed below. In email 1, in table 4.2, the professor is curt  to the point of rudeness and clearly annoyed to be asked a question  that is answered in the syllabus. In email 2, in table 4.3, the professor still tells the student that the  answer is in the syllabus but also validates the question and invites  further communication. Also note the more accessible signature line in  the second email, which provides additional means of contact. Email  signatures are personal choices, but in signing with Dr. Glazier  instead of RG the professor in the second email is both signaling  the importance of the email I didnt just dash off this reply; I took the  time to sign my name to it and modeling professional email etiquette.  Students may be looking for cues of how to address the professor, and  an email signed RG can be confusing for them. Responding to student emails is an important part of building  rapport with students in an online class. While good communication is always an important component of good teaching, it is critical in the online classroom Capra 2011. When online instructors  respond quickly and positively to emails from students, the students  feel encouraged and seen. Students who participated in our Best  Worst Study report that instructors in the best online classes are very  interactive, instructor was very attentive to assignments posted and  responding within hours to all communication or the instructor  Table 4.2. Email 1: Saves Time but Alienates Students To: jxjonesualr .edu From: raglazierualr .edu Subject: re: Final Exam date Please check the syllabus for the answer. RG dr. Rebecca A. Glazier  Associate Professor  University of Arkansas at Little Rock  School of Public Affairs On wed., Nov 20, 2019 at 4:21 PM Jason Jones jxjonesualr .edu wrote: Hey professor! I am just wondering when the final exam is. I may be traveling at the end of the  semester and I dont want to miss it!

Strategies for Building Rapport   107 keeps open communication and responds to emails within the same  day. One student even said about an online instructor, You do not  feel like its much of an online class because he is so awesome about  communication. That is the power of rapport to eliminate the distance created by the online interface. But many students in online classesparticularly those from a  lowerincome, firstgeneration, or otherwise disadvantaged backgroundwill never initiate an email with a professor Jack 2016. In  order to truly build rapport and improve retention in online classes,  instructors need to connect with all of their students. One critical way  to do this is through professorinitiated emails. I send the students in  my online classes at least five personal emails throughout the course  of the semester. I have included the full text of these emails in the  appendix, and my colleagues should feel free to borrow as much as  they would like. The Hope Center at Temple University also has some  Table 4.3. Email 2: Takes a Little More Time but Builds Rapport with Students To: jxjonesualr .edu From: raglazierualr .edu Subject: re: Final Exam date Hi Jason, Thanks for the email. I am so glad you asked about the final exam. As you know, it is worth  20 of your total grade for the class, so it is definitely important that you do well on it! I am  glad that you are thinking about it now. The date for the final exam is Thursday, december 12 from 9:00am to 11:00am. This  information is also in the syllabus, which I have attached for you here. If you have any other questions, please dont hesitate to ask. Hope you have some exciting  travels to look forward to at the end of the semester! Take care,  dr. Glazier dr. Rebecca A. Glazier  Associate Professor University of Arkansas at Little Rock  School of Public Affairs  501.813.xxxx cell  raglazierualr .edu  twitter .com rebeccaglazier  research.ualr .edu lrcs  rebeccaglazier .net On wed., Nov 20, 2019 at 4:21 PM Jason Jones jxjonesualr .edu wrote: Hey professor! I am just wondering when the final exam is. I may be traveling at the end of the  semester and I dont want to miss it!
THE SOLUTION email templates online for reaching out to students to show them that  their professors care GoldrickRab 2020. 1. A welcome email at the start of the semester, welcoming them  to the class, telling them how to register for the online textbook, asking them to complete a brief survey about themselves,  and including a link to the syllabus. 2. A check-in email after 3 weeks of a 15-week semester, asking how the online textbook is working for them, telling them  what their grade is for the online textbook readings and quizzes so far, and inviting them to let me know if they need an  extension on any deadlines as we get used to a new class and  online textbook together. 3. An assignment reminder email about their satire assignment in  my online introduction to international politics classes, every  week 1 2 students are assigned to share a piece of political   satire with the class and turn in a onepage critical analysis. I  send students a personal reminder a few days before their satire  assignment is due, with assignment details, the assignment itself  attached, and encouragement about how I am looking forward  to seeing the satire that they find. 4. An assignment reminder email about their discussion leadership assignment in my online classes, students are assigned  to be online discussion leaders once during the semester.  This involves coming up with discussion questions ahead of  time, submitting an outline to me, and leading the discussion  throughout their assigned week. I send students a personal  reminder a few days before the week they are assigned to lead  the discussion with assignment details, a reminder to send me  their outline for feedback, and encouragement about how I  am looking forward to their discussion on such an interesting  topic. 5. A check-in email around week 9 of a 15-week semester. I send  students a personal email a little more than halfway through  the course to check in with them on how they are doing and 

Strategies for Building Rapport   109 any adjustments they may need to make to succeed in the class.  I give them their specific grade for the discussion boards, for  the first two exams including a comment on whether they  improved or declined from one exam to the next, and for the  textbook readings and quizzes. I also encourage them to reach  out to me to talk about their grade if they have questions or  want to improve it. I provide advice on how to do better in the  class and assure them that I want them to succeed. In addition to these five personal emails that every student receives,  I reach out extra times to students that I see are struggling or are not  engaged. If a student misses an exam or hasnt posted in the discussion  board for two weeks, I will send an email to ask if everything is okay  and if there is anything that I can do to help. I emphasize to students  that I am happy to accept late work and that any grade is better than  a zero. Other instructors encourage more flexible deadlines or even  ungrading entirely Blum 2020; Boucher 2016; Eyler 2018; Morris  and Stommel 2018. The specific policies that any professor chooses  for their course will depend on their course goals, their student population, and their preferences. Each professor should choose the policies that work best for them and their students. The potential impact we can have through the small act of reaching  out to our students is illustrated by a response I received after emailing  to check in on a student who hadnt posted in the discussion boards  for a while. The student wrote, I really appreciate you checking in  with me, and I think that your interaction with students is wonderful! I want to try harder for the class and for you, so I will see you in  the boards! The effort the student contributed to the class changed  based on the effort they saw the professor exerting to reach out. When  we show our students that we care about them, it makes them want  to work harder and do better in our classes. Research by Dunlap and  Lowenthal 2009 concludes, When faculty stay in touch with students through formal and informal communication and dialogue, students report that it helps them get through the rough times and keep  on working p. 130.
THE SOLUTION Students can respond incredibly positively to these proactive emails.  When I send emails to check in on students course progress, I often  get responses like this one, Thanks so much for checking in, so grateful for how interactive you are even though its an online class! One  transfer student replied with an email that illustrated just how much  efforts to reach out to students via personal emails can build rapport with them, saying, Again, thanks for reaching out. Its something my other school professors didnt really do so I feel very cared  about. When I reached out to one student who had missed a couple  of deadlines, she quickly replied with a grateful email because, as a  new online student, she hadnt realized she had missed those assignments: I just want to thank you again for reaching out because I  know some teachers might have dropped me for missing assignments  so I really appreciate you! Reaching out to students through personal  emails can make a difference in how they feel about the course and it  can make a difference in their success in the class. Of course, the downside to sending a lot of personal emails to students is the amount of time it takes. In a class of 30 online students,  writing five emails per student each semester is 150 extra personalized  emails. If those emails include detailed information on course grades  and personalized encouragement, it could take up to 20 minutes per  student to write each email, overwhelming already harried instructors with 50 extra hours of workmore than an entire extra week  of work in a semester. And thats only for one online class! Importantly, research shows that sending generic emails to the entire class  does not significantly improve student outcomes Leeds et al. 2013  and lighter touch emails with less personalization have less of an  impact Carrell and Kurlaender 2020. Building rapport takes a personal touchthe kind of personal touch that can add up to 50 extra  hours of email time per class. For those readers thinking that 50 extra hours sending emails is  too much to ask of online instructors, I agree. Luckily, technology  can greatly reduce the time and logistical burden of writing personalized emails, while still getting students information that can help 

Strategies for Building Rapport   111 them succeed in the class and making them feel like they matter to  the instructor. My favorite tool to facilitate personalized emails is using an email  mail merge application. I personally use a Google Sheets add-on  called Mail Merge for Gmail with Attachments, but you can accomplish the same thing with Microsoft Word and Excel. With a mail merge  tool, you can add student names and email addresses to a spreadsheet  and then add in any other information you want to merge into your  email to students. I copy over entire columns from my gradebook so  I can easily share grade information with students. Just put the information specific to each student in a row corresponding to that students name and put a field in the email that corresponds to the header  of that column. For instance, if I wanted to share a students discussion grade with  them, I would have a column in my Google Sheets spreadsheet for Discussion and I would have a field in my email text for Discussion.  When the merge program sees the field Discussion in the email, it  will fill in the number in the spreadsheet under the column Discussion  for each student. An example unmerged check-in email with the merge  fields offset by brackets is displayed in table 4.4. The email mail merge application can connect this email with the  spreadsheet I upload to Google Sheets and fill in the merge fields indicated by brackets, which correspond to the column headings in the  spreadsheet. This way, I can send personal emails to students giving  them details on their grades, how they are doing in the class, and  encouragement to improve, without the time and hassle of writing  individual emails. An example of what a spreadsheet might look like  using fictional student data is in table 4.5 below. Once the emails  are merged, each student will receive a personal email like the one to  Alicia in table 4.6. The great thing about the email mail merge is that you can put any   information you want in the merge fields. You can put entire sen tences  of feedback or encouragement into the merge fields. My example  spreadsheet in table 4.5 contains both simple numeric scores and 
THE SOLUTION sentencelong comments about how students are doing the full sentences in the spreadsheet arent shown due to limited space. I know of writing instructors who use this method to provide feedback on writing. Instead of telling students you made mistakes 3, 5,  and 9 in the attached rubric the students get a personalized email  addressed to them by name that walks them through exactly what  those mistakes were, tells them how they can do better, and encourages them to improve on the next assignment. Just think of what a difference that can make from a student perspective! Remember the suggestion to send student surveys at the beginning  of the semester and keep that information in a spreadsheet? Refer back  to it when you are sending check-in emails. If you have it to remind  Table 4.4. Example Unmerged Check-in Email To: From: raglazierualr .edu Subject: POLS 2303 Online: Checking in 2 3 of the way through the semester!  Hi First Name, I hope that this email finds you well. I just wanted to check in with you now that we are about  2 3 of the way through the semester. You have had two exams now. You scored a Exam 1  on the first one and a Exam 2 on the second one. Exam Comment we have one more  Exam and then the final, so there are plenty of points left in the semester. Speaking of points, doing the textbook readings and comprehension quizzes are an easy  way to earn pointsit makes up 15 of your total grade for the class! Right now, your Online  Textbook grade is Online Textbook Grade. Online Textbook Comment Your next  textbook reading assignment is due by Monday, so be sure to get it turned in! But the easiest points of all come from participating in discussions. Your discussion grade is  discussion Grade. discussion Comment Our new discussion starts on Monday, so you  just need to post on two days next week to earn full points. Please also make sure that you are putting the time you need to into your annotated  bibliography, which is due Friday, November 8. There is an example in the Assignments folder  to help you get there. keep working hard as we turn the corner on our last 1 3 of our class together! Just let me  know if there is anything I can do to help you. Take care, dr. Glazier dr. Rebecca A. Glazier  Associate Professor University of Arkansas at Little Rock  School of Public Affairs  501.813.xxxx cell  raglazierualr .edu  twitter .com rebeccaglazier research.ualr .edu lrcs  rebeccaglazier .net

Table 4.5. Example Spreadsheet for Email Mail Merge First Name   Exam 1   Exam 2   Exam Comment

Online  Textbook  Grade

Online Textbook Comment

discussion  Grade 

discussion Comment Alicia 76 86 You did much better on  the second exam . . . 90.11 You are doing really well here! I  know textbook readings can get  boring, but you . . . 73.29 I think you can do a lot  better here. You can earn  more points . . . Robert 50 65.5 You did much better on  the second exam . . . 14.48 I would like to see you do better  here. It seems like you have thrown  in the towel on . . . 65.32 I think you can do a lot  better here. You can earn  more points . . . Andrew 94 97 You are doing great on  the exams . . . 98.16 You are doing really well here! I  know textbook readings can get  boring, but you . . . 100.59 You are literally doing  better than perfect here  extra point . . . Morgan 86 86 You are pretty consistent  in your exam . . . 88.97 You are doing pretty good here! I  know textbook readings can get  boring, but keep . . . 81.76 I think you can earn some  more points here. You can  earn more . . . Juan 88 81 You are doing pretty  good on the exams . . . 84.60 You are doing pretty good here! I  know textbook readings can get  boring, but keep . . . 92.35 You are doing great, but  you can earn more points  by posting early . . .
THE SOLUTION you that someone is going to give birth in the middle of the semester,  or they have a big project at work in October, it can help you understand why they might be participating less. Mentioning these challenges in a personal email to a student when you reach out to check in  on them can be really meaningful. It sends the students a strong signal  that you know who they are and you care about their success. Beyond just email, there are other ways to reach out to students.  One option is calling students on the phone. Some universities make  student phone numbers available to faculty for just this reason, but  some faculty might not be comfortable with calling their students.  Table 4.6. Example Merged Email To: axsmithualr .edu  From: raglazierualr .edu Subject: POLS 2303 Online: Checking in 2 3 of the way through the semester!  Hi Alicia, I hope that this email finds you well. I just wanted to check in with you now that we are about  2 3 of the way through the semester. You have had two exams now. You scored a 76 on the  first one and a 86 on the second one. You did much better on the second exam. Nice work! I  hope you are using the study guide and please feel free to email me if you have any questions.  we have one more Exam and then the final, so there are plenty of points left in the semester. Speaking of points, doing the textbook readings and comprehension quizzes are an easy  way to earn points--it makes up 15 of your total grade for the class! Right now, your Online  Texbook grade is 90.11. You are doing really well here! I know textbook readings can get  boring, but you are doing a great job. keep up the good work! Your next textbook reading  assignment is due by Monday, so be sure to get it turned in! But the easiest points of all come from participating in discussions. Your discussion grade  is 73.29. I think you can do a lot better here. You can earn more points by posting early and  often--at least twice on at least two different days in each thread. That will get you 10 10  points every time. Our new discussion starts on Monday, so you just need to post on two days  next week to earn full points. Please also make sure that you are putting the time you need to into your annotated  bibliography, which is due Friday, November 8. There is an example in the Assignments folder  to help you get there. keep working hard as we turn the corner on the last 1 3 of our class together! Just let me  know if there is anything I can do to help you. Take care, dr. Glazier dr. Rebecca A. Glazier  Associate Professor University of Arkansas at Little Rock  School of Public Affairs  501.813.xxxx cell  raglazierualr .edu  twitter .com rebeccaglazier research.ualr .edu lrcs  rebeccaglazier .net

Strategies for Building Rapport   115 Honestly, results are mixed with this one. A personal phone call with  each student at the beginning of the semester could help build rapport Franklin 2015, but it is also pretty resource intensive. The vast  majority of college students have cell phones and use them for coursework, research, texting, and Tweetingalmost everything but actual  phone calls Pew Research Center 2019. A phone call from a professor may be ignored, along with any other call from an unknown  number, or it may be viewed as charming and quaint. The willingness  to have an open line of communication to talk about course concerns  is something that students appreciate, though Kilburn, Kilburn, and  Cates 2014. Just the offer of a phone callif you are of course willing to follow through with it at the students requestmay be enough.  On the other hand, professors may be better off texting or just sticking to emails, which are where students are most likely to expect faculty contact. Research that has included phone calls to students has usually  treated them as oneshot interventions, for instance, calling students  at the start of courses in an attempt to improve retention rates Leeds  et al. 2013. However, to truly build rapport, efforts to reach out to  students should be continuous, from before classes even start to just  before grades are turned in. Building rapport is really about building  relationshipsand that is not done in a single shot. When it comes to  connecting with students, the classes that I have had the highest rapport with have been the classes that I have had the most contact with,  and those are undoubtably travel courses. In those courses, we have  set up group messages on WhatsApp to keep in contact as a group  while traveling. Im not sure that is a level of contact I would recommend for most courses, but the students in those courses definitely  know they can reach out to me if they need anything. I flip the phone call script and actually share my personal cell phone  number with my students, listing it in the syllabus with a request that  they use it judiciously. I would encourage instructors to think carefully about their student populations before going this route. The university that I teach at has a student population that includes a lot  of firstgeneration students, is located in the Southern United States, 
THE SOLUTION where there is a strong norm of deference to authority, and where I am  regularly referred to as maam. In short, I dont have a lot of entitled students and they dont call my cell phone very often. There are  definitely some student populations that I could imagine abusing that  phone number and I would not share it with them. Use your judgment.  There are technological solutions to that privacy problem, as well.  Apps like Remind, often used by K 12 educators to keep in touch  with parents, allow for texts without using your own phone number, so instructors can get creative if they want to connect with students over text while maintaining some professional distance Minero 2017. If all of this availability to online students sounds like too much,  it may be time to recalibrate expectations for online teaching. Online  teaching isnt the same as in-person teachingevery effort we make to  connect with our online students can make an outsized difference for  them. Jones and Davenport 2018 go so far as to say, Effective online  instructors embrace personal intrusion p. 71. I prefer to frame it as  a decision to choose human connection over a forcible intrusion by  students, but the end result is pretty much the same. When online  instructors choose to build rapport with their students, they choose to  make themselves available and to be responsive to them. Highrapport  professors respond quickly to emails, answer questions directly, reach  out to those who are struggling, and may even call and text with their  students. This is what it takes to build connections across the distance  imposed by technology. It is not always easy, but the result is greater  student success and retention. Helping Students Build Rapport with Each Other Our primary rapport focus as instructors should be on connecting  with our students, and that has been the focus of this chapter. But  students also benefit when they have an educational experience that  is filled with a multitude of relationships Felten and Lambert 2020;  friendship networks can improve both their academic and their social  success McCabe 2016. There are pedagogical choices that we can 

Strategies for Building Rapport   117 make as professors that will help students build rapport with their  peers while also building rapport with us. Following the Community  of Inquiry literature, this type of pedagogical approach would emphasize both social presence and teaching presence Garrison, Anderson,  and Archer 1999; Garrison and ClevelandInnes 2004. What might this look like in practice? Putting students into groups  to work on projects and receive feedback from the professor as a  group is one idea. Giving students tasks that they can complete by  working together in a shared Google document is another way that  they can collaborate, get to know each other, and build rapport with  one another. As professors enter the documents, leave comments, and  join the conversationseither synchronously or asynchronously they will build rapport with the students as well. Because human  beings love to create and identify with groups Tajfel and Turner  1979, something as simple as having randomly assigned groups come  up with group names, colors, or mottos can help them build rapport  with each other Burke 2011; Carron and Spink 1993. Research has  also shown that when online students connect with others who are in  geographic proximity to them, it can make relationships more meaningful Boyette 2008; Rovai and Gallien Jr. 2005. In my online classes, I like to assign one or two students each week  to be the discussion leaders in one of the discussion threads. This not  only gives students a good opportunity to develop important skills in  leading respectful political discussions, it also gives them an incentive  to participate in the studentled discussions, as they know that their  turn to lead is coming up and they want to rack up some good karma.  In some of my upperdivision online classes, I also give a few students  each week the opportunity to select current events readings that we  will discuss as a class. There is an assignment that goes along with their  selection, so that students get to exercise some critical media evaluation skills, but they also get to connect with their fellow students  as they talk about their pick for the week and why they selected it. As an extra credit question on their final exam, I ask students what  their favorite current events reading was for the semester. Almost  every response includes the name of the student who selected the 
THE SOLUTION reading. So, students will give responses like, I really liked Miguels  reading about the EU border crisis or my favorite was the article  Katie picked about the nuclear standoff on the Korean peninsula.  The studentselected current events readings are one way that students  are able to connect with each other and build rapport in my class. By  inviting them into the curriculum and telling them that I trust them  enough to let them pick readings for the class, Im also building rapport with them through this assignment. Building Rapport Your Way Using these three broad strategies to build rapport with students humanizing the instructor, providing personal feedback, and reaching  out to studentsfaculty can significantly improve retention rates in  online classes. Within these three categories, there is plenty of room  for instructors to adapt the techniques to their individual personalities, teaching styles, or student populations. And if we can find opportunities to help students build rapport with one another along the  way, that is a bonus. An example of an institution using these principles to build rapport and help their students succeed is Oakton Community College  and its Persistence Project. Faculty who participate in this project  commit to do four things in their classes: 1 learn students names,  2 return assignments with meaningful, helpful feedback in the first  few weeks of class, 3 communicate both high standards and support  resources, and, most challenging of all, 4 meet oneonone with each  student in their class for a tenminute conversation Felten and Lambert 2020. Data from 1,200 students in the classes of 132 faculty who  participated in the Persistence Project demonstrate that their rate of  persistencereturning to the university the next semesterwas 24  higher than for students who did not take classes taught by faculty  in the Persistence Project Barnett 2018. Although this effort did not  focus on online classes, it does show that when rapport building is put  into action, it makes a real difference for students. The key to building rapport is to find a strategy that fits your perStrategies for Building Rapport   119 sonality and teaching philosophy. Building relationships with students  means letting them see some of who you really are. Trying to perform  the role of a highrapport professor as seen on the pages of this book  without bringing your own personality to the interactions is unlikely  to come across as authentic and, ultimately, will not build rapport.  The keys to making real human connections with students are to be  yourself and demonstrate that you care. Even for those of us who have  been purposefully working to build rapport in our online classes for  years, there is always room for improvement. At the end of my multiyear Online RapportBuilding Experiment, described in chapter 3, I  had increased retention in my introductory classes from 57 to 70.  This experiment wrapped up in 2015, but I continued working hard  to build rapport with the students in my introductory classes and to  come up with innovative ways to connect with them. In the two years  leading up to the COVID-19 pandemic, the average retention rate in  my online intro courses was 78. Remember, when we are talking about building rapport with students, we are not talking about getting students to like usthis is not  a popularity contest. We are talking about making human connections that will engage students in the class, support their learning, and  show them that we care about their success. If we are able to connect  with our students, those interactions will have consequences beyond  just a single class. Especially when we are teaching students who are  new to college, the tone we set will influence how they interact with  other professors and whether or not they seek them out or ask for  help Graunke and Woosley 2005; Juillerat 2000; Kezar and Maxey  2014a; Reason, Terenzini, and Domingo 2007. This is all the more  reason to support students with highrapport courses as early and  often as possible. As we will see in the next chapter, for students on  the margins in particular, having rapport in online classes can make  all the difference.

 FIVE  Students on the Margins T he promise of online education is that it can provide access to  college for students who otherwise wouldnt be able to be there.  For many of these students, they would love to sit in a traditional college classroom and learn faceto-face, but that just isnt an option. If  they want a college education, they have to figure out another way.  Take, for instance, the nontraditional student who wrote, Im in an  allonline program, but some classes it would be nice to be in class,  but I have a busy work and family life too, so allonline is really my  only option or the one who told us, I work full time during the day  and Im a full time single mom. So I take online classes, its easier  for us that has to work for a living. For these students and so many  others, online classes are their only path to a college degree. As we  saw in chapter 2, all too often, these online students are treated as  secondclass. The result is that success can be precarious for many of our students taking online classes. Students of color, firstgeneration students,  and lowerincome students are exactly the demographic that online  classes are supposed to be reaching with expanded access to college.  But repeated studies show that these populations are less likely to successfully complete online classes Bennett, McCarty, and Carter 2019; 

Students on the Margins   121 Figlio, Rush, and Yin 2013; Kaupp 2012; McCarty, Bennett, and Carter 2013; Xu and Jaggars 2014. Higher education continues to be  stratified by class and race; the achievement gaps that plague faceto-face college classes are only exacerbated by the online environment  Carnevale and Strohl 2013; Sublett 2020. What can we do to help  support these students whose success is the most tenuous? While rapport building is a good practice for all of our online students, it is particularly helpful in retaining these students on the margins. In this chapter, I first present data to illustrate how students who  have traditionally been on the margins of higher educationlowerincome students, nontraditional students, and students of colornow  represent the future. Recognizing the reality of the changing face of  higher education, I then use research and student quotes to take a close  look at the experience of online classes from the perspective of these  students. Next, using original survey data from the Rapport Impact  Study, I demonstrate how rapport building can make an especially  meaningful difference for underserved student populations. I close  with recommendations for an empathetic approach to our online  students, addressing some of the key concerns of online instructors  around cheating, trauma, and second chances. The Changing Face of Higher Education Take the traditional college student in the United States. They graduate from high school and move directly into a residential dorm  on a campus where they begin a fouryear college degree. In 2011,  there were about 2.6 million of these students enrolled in college in  the United States, and faculty tend to think of them first when we  design our classes and our curriculum. But at the same time, there  were 14.9 million nontraditional students enrolled in college in the  United Statesmore than five times as many as the traditional students National Adult Learner Coalition 2017. The model of going  to college fulltime at 18, living on campus, taking all of your classes  faceto-face, and graduating in four years is followed by a diminishing number of students, probably less than 20 and falling, accord122   THE SOLUTION ing to the National Center for Education Statistics King and Alperstein 2014, 13. Instead, many more college students today are what we would consider nontraditional; 37 are 25 or older Lumina Foundation 2019.  They are parents, veterans, and employees. They may have delayed  going to college and are usually financially independent, even if they  are financially stressed. They often face different demands on their  timemany struggling to balance family, work, and education Layne,  Boston, and Ice 2013. They make up the vast majority of college students in the United States today and they are significantly more likely  to take online classes Rabourn, BrckaLorenz, and Shoup 2018. The racial and ethnic dynamics of higher education enrollments are  also shifting. Although the percentage of high school completers who  have enrolled in college has steadily climbed over timefrom around  49 in 1980, to 63 in 2000, to almost 70 by 2016these gains  have not been evenly distributed across race ethnicity. Census data  from the 2017 Digest of Education Statistics Report illustrate how  Asian and white students consistently enroll in college at numbers  above the average, while Black and Hispanic students they track Hispanic rather than Latinx populations consistently enroll at belowaverage levels, with some gains over time see figure 5.1. One promise of online higher education is the ability to close these   racial gaps. Some studies indicate that Black and Latinx students  enroll in online classes at higher rates than other racial ethnic groups  Classes  Careers 2011; Fry and Cilluffo 2019, although other research shows that this varies by institutional sector and that Black  students may be less likely than white students to take an online class  in their first year of college Sublett 2020. If students who have historically been underrepresented in college classrooms are using online  classes to access higher education, then the hope is that online classes  can help close racial gaps in higher education attainment Killion,  GallagherLepak, and Reilly 2015; Kronk 2017. But Black and Latinx students also tend to fail and drop out of online classes at higher  rates than other racial and ethnic groups Kaupp 2012; Xu and Jaggars  2014. Although racial and ethnic achievement gaps exist in many colStudents on the Margins   123 lege classes, research shows that they are exacerbated in online classes  Figlio, Rush, and Yin 2013; Johnson and Mejia 2014. As nontraditional students and students of color have begun to  ac cess college in greater numbers, we have also seen a shift in the  socio economic status of college students. In fact, when we look at  overall enrollment growth in colleges and universities in the United  States over the past 20 years, we find that it is fueled by an influx of  students from lowerincome backgrounds Fry and Cilluffo 2019. In  1996, 21 of undergraduates were in poverty, but this number rises  to 31 by 2016. Because the national poverty rate in the United States  for adults age 18 to 64 remained steady at about 12 during this same  period, this trend suggests that much of the recent growth in higher  education has come from lowerincome students who were previously  unable to access a college education Fry and Cilluffo 2019. One reason they may be able to finally break through is because of online  classes. When we look at independent undergraduates i.e., those who  are 24 and older as well as younger students who are not receiving  financial support from parents, they are much more likely to be poor  today than in prior years. In 2016, a full 42 of them were living in  poverty, compared to 29 in 1996 Fry and Cilluffo 2019. Figure 5.1. Recent High School Completers Enrolled in College, by Race  Ethnicity, in Percentages
THE SOLUTION Since the Higher Education Act of 1965, the federal Pell Grant  program has been a cornerstone of higher education funding for lowand middleincome families Umbricht 2016, helping many students  without independent financial means access college. Over the years,  however, the purchasing power of Pell Grants has decreased, as the  grant amounts have not kept pace with the rapid rise of college tuition GoldrickRab 2016. Receiving a Pell Grant is one indicator of  financial need, and Pell Grant recipients are likely to be more price  sensitive than other college studentsthis is reflected in data that  show that Pell Grant recipients are more likely to take classes online.  Data from five public, fouryear universities used by James, Swan, and  Daston 2016 in their retention analysis show that a higher percentage of students taking fully online course loads receive federal Pell  Grantsabout 9 more than students taking all of their classes faceto-face. Even in successful and prestigious programs, Pell Grant status is consistently about 5 percentage points higher among students  in online classes, compared to students in faceto-face classes Bailey  et al. 2018. Lowerincome students are also drawn to forprofit programs. Forprofit institutions saw a 13 percentage point increase in lowerincome  students from 1996 to 2016, whereas public nonprofit universities  only saw 6 growth and private nonprofit universities 3 growth  from the same population over the same time period Fry and Cilluffo  2019. This lopsided growth is likely because private forprofit institutions have explicitly reached out to lowerincome students seeking to  complete their degrees online Angulo 2016; Cottom 2017; Schade  2014. Expanding access to college through online classes has also meant  more firstgeneration students attending. Although there are no national statistics on whether firstgeneration college students are more  likely to enroll in online classes, we do know that they are more likely  to enroll in forprofit universities, which skew heavily online. Data  from the National Center for Education Statistics shows that 19 of  firstgeneration college students choose a forprofit school, compared 

Students on the Margins   125 to only 8 of college students with at least one parent with a bachelors degree Snyder, de Brey, and Dillow 2019. Although some of our most underserved students are more likely  to enroll in online classes, those classes dont always serve them  well. Nontraditional and underrepresented college students struggle  in online classes at higher rates than traditional university students  Kaupp 2012; Wladis, Conway, and Hachey 2015; Xu and Jaggars  2014. They take on higher rates of student debt and are less likely to  graduate, too ScottClayton and Li 2016. When the US Department  of Education released data on earnings and student loan payments  in 2017, it flagged 803 programs as saddling students with debt they  cant afford to repay defined as loans that exceed 12 of earnings and 787 of them were forprofit institutions US Department of Education 2017. These types of institutions have a history of explicitly  reaching out to students who lack traditional paths to a college degree  and are seeking to complete their degrees online, but they also have a  history of producing worse longterm outcomes for them Appel and  Taylor 2015; Cottom 2017; Deming, Goldin, and Katz 2012; Sridharam 2012. The face of higher education is changing. These changes are in  part attributable to online courses making higher education more  accessible, and they provide an opportunity for reflection on how far  short we are falling of the promises we have made to our students.  Instead of the expanding availability of online classes leading to more  students from disadvantaged populations earning college degrees,  research indicates that taking more online classes actually leads to  lower persistence in a given field and a lower likelihood of graduating  HuntingtonKlein, Cowan, and Goldhaber 2017. Nontraditional, firstgeneration, lowerincome students, and students of color are the future of higher education in the United States.  And they are enrolling in online classes. If we want to retain these  students and help them graduate, we owe them more of our time and  consideration. Because although they represent the future of higher  education, right now they are teetering on the edge.
THE SOLUTION A Mile in Their Shoes Looking beneath the statistics, what is it like to be an online student?  Few faculty members have had the experience of taking a class as an  online student. And even fewer have done it as a lowerincome, firstgeneration, student of color who was also working two jobs and raising kids on their own. Can we even imagine how precarious the academic lives of our students are? Its worth trying. Research, together  with quotes from real students, can give us a glimpse into what it  might be like to be a student in our classes. Taking on the perspective  of our students can make us better teachers Veletsianos 2020. Lets start with the challenges of being a firstgeneration college  student. If you dont have close relatives to model college and career,  enrolling in college at all is often a hurdle, not to mention succeeding once you are there, and persisting to graduation Cataldi, Bennett,  and Chen 2018; Choy 2001; Ishitani 2006; Pascarella et al. 2004; Stephens et al. 2012; Woosley and Shepler 2011. University life includes  a hidden curriculum, beyond the visible curriculum covered in class,  which students without collegeeducated parents dont even know  they are missing Collier and Morgan 2008. For instance, whereas  some entering students may have parents with graduate degrees who  read over the syllabus with them and encourage them to attend office  hours, many of the firstgeneration students in our online classes may  have never had a faceto-face conversation with someone with a PhD  before. They may not even know what office hours are Chatelain  2018; Collier and Morgan 2008. Academic preparedness cant make  up for not knowing that it is okay to ask for an extension on an assignment if a personal emergency comes up, or that coming to department events to get in facetime with faculty is a good idea. Even  if more privileged students dont know the specifics of a particular  university, they are more comfortable asking questions and demanding answersits how affluent, white parents teach their children to  interact with institutional authorities from the time they are young  Calarco 2014, 2018; Lareau 2011. Missing this hidden curriculum, 

Students on the Margins   127 and the resulting selfdoubt these students struggle with, can thwart  their academic success Cataldi, Bennett, and Chen 2018; Cox 2009. Even if our students do know what office hours are, and ours are  clearly posted, we may need to make an effort to overcome the typical firstgeneration mindset of selfsufficiency to get them to attend.  Interviews with firstgeneration students reveal that they often default  to a view of faculty as antagonistic gatekeepers. As one firstyear, firstgeneration student at a fouryear research university said, When I go to class, that is our time. It is time for us students. And  outside of that it just seems weird and I dont want to bug them.  I just have this idea in my head that if I do go to their office, they  are going to harangue me. They will say, What are you doing  here? You are a failure. Get out of here. What do you want? And  that is not something that I want to hear. And that is a big reason  for me not to see them. Quoted in LongwellGrice and LongwellGrice 2008, 416 Faculty set the tone for our classes in dozens of small ways that  affect how students perceive our accessibilityremember the study  referenced in chapter 3 about how students read into when and how  office hours are posted Hurtado et al. 2011? Many firstgeneration  college students begin from a place of assumed indifference from professors, if not outright antipathy. They may be afraid to speak up and  ask questions because they dont want to be judged by their professors  as needy or struggling Calarco 2020; Jack 2016. Layer onto these challenges those faced by lowerincome students.  Does your campus have a food pantry? If not, it probably should. A  survey of more than 86,000 students at 100 institutions across the  country revealed that 45 of students had been food insecure in the  last 30 days. The survey also showed that 17 had been homeless in  the previous year GoldrickRab et al. 2019. These are students who  worry about the cost of gas to drive to campus, who try to share textbooks with their roommates, and who are eager to pick up an extra  shift whenever they can. When we take the financial concerns of our 
THE SOLUTION students seriously, we see both why they are drawn to online classes  and also how online classes can be tenuous for them. A student of mine told me about one semester when she was taking an online class and her laptop died. In the two weeks it took to  get it fixed, shed lost notes, missed quizzes, and fell behind on lectures. Keeping up with the coursework by accessing public computers  on campus was difficult, she told me, because I was going to school  fulltime, and working nights to pay rent. Unfortunately . . . the professor was unforgiving. The COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 revealed  many of the deep inequities in our colleges and universities as classes  moved online and many students had to return homewhere some  had no reliable internet connections or computers, not to mention no  incomes without their campus jobs, and no consistent food sources  without campus meal plans Patel 2020. Now consider what it might be like to be a student of color. In  2017, nearly threequarters of college faculty were white, while only  55 of students were; Black students make up 14 of our collegegoing population, but only 6 of faculty; 20 of students are Hispanic, but only 5 of faculty are Espinosa et al. 2019. Students  of color are often taught by white faculty, and they may encounter  discrimination, microaggressions, or assumptions about affirmative  action, from faculty and from other students, which can have a negative effect on their mental health and sense of selfworth McCabe  2009; Nadal et al. 2014; Ong et al. 2013. Not only do our campus climates matter, but our students are also  affected by the world outside our classrooms. Research by Desmond  Ang 2020 using hyperlocal variation in how close students live to  the site of police killings, found that exposure to police violence led  to lower GPAs, lower high school completion rates, and lower levels  of college enrollment for students in Los Angeles public high schools.  The effects are driven almost entirely by Black and Hispanic students. Our students are powerfully affected by the world beyond our  courses. We are rarely able to measure those effects in such clear and  direct ways, but we should never forget that they are there. Especially for students of color at Predominantly White Institutions 

Students on the Margins   129 PWIs, college can be both isolating and exhausting. Research has  demonstrated that Black students put forth more effort but achieve  less gain, compared to white students Greene, Marti, and McClenney  2008; Kugelmass and Ready 2011. Even as universities made statements in support of Black Lives Matter, Black faculty, and Black students in the summer of 2020, those same faculty and students were  telling stories of discrimination with the hashtag BlackInTheIvory  Diep 2020. The surveys my colleagues and I have done regularly  return with comments about classes like, One of the instructors  would make offensive and racist comments and lack of cultural  sensitivity and racist remarks made by professor towards me. Imagine trying to learn in an environment like that. Some have suggested that online courses may be a way to mitigate  the intercultural effort that students of color have to put forth at PWIs.  For instance, Stanley 2014 examines students at fouryear PWIs and  finds greater learning gains for African American students online,  compared to African American students in faceto-face classes, arguing, Absent an environment that creates intercultural effort, AfricanAmerican students can direct their energy into educationally purposeful activities that translate into learning gains p. 106. Taken one step  further, imagine online classes that are not simply neutral spaces that  approach pedagogy in a colorblind way Killion, GallagherLepak,  and Reilly 2015, but online classes that actively invite and engage all  students to be part of the community of the class, to connect with the  professor, and to interrupt the reproduction of past inequities Humiston et al. 2020; Journell 2007; Zembylas 2008. Such classes might  result in even greater learning gains and stronger rapport. Building Rapport to Center Students on the Margins In the midst of all the demands students have on their time families,  jobs, learning disabilities, navigating college as firstgeneration students imagine the outsized impact even a little human connection  from an instructor can make. Data drawn mostly from in-person  classes show that firstgeneration students benefit enormously from 
THE SOLUTION personally connecting with an individual faculty member Amelink  2005; Ishiyama 2002. Mentorship also has a significant impact for  students of color Anaya and Cole 2001; Lee 1999, who tend to feel  more isolated in online classes and view asynchronous interactions  especially negatively Ashong and Commander 2012; Merrills 2010;  Rovai and Wighting 2005. We have seen study after study demonstrate that students want a deeper connection with their professors  e.g., Kezar and Maxey 2014a. Many students, especially the kinds of marginalized students I have  been focusing on in this chapter, may start college with fear and anxiety about their ability to succeed. A study of community college students demonstrates that the ones who were able to overcome these  fears and thrive were the ones who had a professor who came to  their level and related to them Cox 2009. These professors reassured them of their competence and ability to succeed. They believed  in them. When students believe they can succeed in a class, they are  more likely to do just that Miller 2014. Perhaps no one can have a  stronger influence over a students belief about their ability to succeed  in a class than the professor. That doesnt mean that we need to lie to  students who are struggling and tell them that everything is fine, but  a kind word of encouragement can go a long way. No matter where our students are academically, we can believe in  their ability to learn. Meeting our students where they are and supporting their learning is sometimes called scaffolding. The idea is  that we can support students exactly where they are and, with some  help, enable them to climb a little higher. Especially for firstgeneration  students, or students taking online classes for the first time, they may  need some scaffolding around the basics of how to navigate an online  course and find the appropriate assignments and learning modules  Stavredes 2011; Stavredes and Herder 2013. For these students who  are new to college or may feel like outsiders, professors can be a comforting presence to let them know that they belong. The welcome and  encouragement from a professorthe rapport and human connection  that is at the heart of this bookis exactly what marginalized students need in their online classes to help them succeed.

Students on the Margins   131 Measuring the Impact of Rapport on Our Most  Vulnerable Students Having seen the positive impact of rapport building in my own classes  through the multiyear Rapport Teaching Experiment discussed in  chapter 3, I got together with my colleague Heidi Skurat Harris in  2016 to expand the research. We were interested in knowing more  about the impact that rapport could have on student retention rates.  We surveyed students in 35 different online classes at the University  of Arkansas at Little Rock for our Rapport Impact Study. We asked  the students a series of questions to determine the level of rapport in  their relationship with their professor. For instance, we asked them  the extent to which they agreed or disagreed with statements like  my professor cares about students and I felt the instructor was  approachable to discuss classrelated issues. Using responses from  318 students, we summed a total of nine questions into a single rapport scale and calculated a rapport score for each of the 35 classes, by  averaging the scores from all of the responding students in each class.  Thus, the average of all of the responding students evaluations of the  rapport in the class was used to give a single score to the class as a  whole. This approach smooths out the outlying students who might  have been mad about a low grade or who rate every professor highly. With nine total rapport questions, each using a fivepoint Likert  scale, our rapport measure ranges from 9 to 45 M  38.73, SD  6.21,   Min  23, Max  44, Alpha  0.92. We brought these course scores  together with anonymous studentlevel demographic and academic  data GPA and course grade from all 910 students enrolled in the  35 classes to statistically determine the extent to which being in a  class with a higher average rapport score would influence student success. Were students in classes with higher average rapport scores more  likely to pass the class successfully? Because many factors can influence retention, we ran a logit regression model to account for GPA,  age, transfer status, gender, and race ethnicity. The short answer of  the Rapport Impact Study is yesrapport matters. Students in classes  with higher rapport scores were less likely to fail or drop out, even 
THE SOLUTION when all these other variables are considered Glazier and Skurat Harris 2021. But to more fully understand exactly what our findings mean for  students, we used our statistical model to predict the outcome of a  hypothetical student pulled from our data, using statistical averages.  This student is a woman of color, 28 years old, and coming to the university as a transfer student. We dont know if she is a firstgeneration  college student, but 80 of the student body at the University of  Arkansas at Little Rock is, so chances are good in this data set Quick  Facts 2019. Using predicted probabilities, we can set a hypothetical  student in our model with these parameters and see what happens. For  this first iteration, we also set her to have the average GPA for the sample at 2.79, or about a letter grade of B. Now, keeping all these characteristics the same, we predict her probability of passing the class she  is enrolled in with a C or better while changing one key variable: the  level of rapport. We move the level of rapport from the lowest level in  the sample, a class with an average rapport score of 23, to the highest  level, a class with an average rapport score of 44, about as high as possible on our 9 to 45 scale. The outcome of this prediction is depicted  graphically in the dashed center line in figure 5.2. Our hypothetical student gains more than 22 points displayed in  the text box in the center of the dashed line in terms of her likelihood  of passing the classgoing from 62.7 to 84.9just by moving from a  lowrapport to a highrapport class. Imagine if we could really do that  for every nontraditional female transfer student of color in our online  classesor better yet, every student! When we are willing to build real  human connections with them and believe in their success, it makes a  measurable difference in how students do in our classes. For this statistically created student, representing so many very real students out  there, that human connection is powerful enough to move retention  22 percentage points. The two other lines in figure 5.2 represent slight variations in the  characteristics of our hypothetical student. In the top line, all of the  demographic characteristics remain the same, but we change our hypothetical student to a very high achiever with a GPA of 3.75, or an A averStudents on the Margins   133 age. In this scenario, the retention gains are smaller: only 7.1 points.   At 96.6, this highachieving student is almost guaranteed to pass if  she is in a highrapport class. The bottom line of figure 5.2 tells a very different story. In this scenario, we take the same demographic characteristics again and this  time change the GPA downward to 1.75, or the letter grade equivalent of a low C. Now that our student is struggling academically, her  potential for success in the class is much lower, but the difference that  rapport can make is much higher. In this scenario, moving from a lowrapport to a highrapport class improves the probability of passing the  course by 25.7 percentage points, the largest gain of any of the three  scenarios. It is still a difficult road for this student. Even in the highestrapport class, her probability of passing is below 50. But it is vastly improved when she believes her professor truly cares about her success. Guiding Principles for Helping Struggling Students It can be challenging to pour a lot of time and caring into students  who might still drop out of our classes. Knowing that even in a highrapport class, our hypothetical student would fail or drop out more  than 50 of the time can be pretty discouraging. Having spent more  than ten years trying to build rapport with a student population that  Figure 5.2. Probability That a 28-yearold Female Transfer Student of Color  Will Pass with a Grade of C or Better
THE SOLUTION includes many students on the margins, I have come to learn the hard  way that there are students whose college careers cant be saved by  the sheer force of my caring. When I run into a situation where I keep  trying to reach out to a student but am not getting a response, I try  to remember the email I received a few years ago from a student who  told me: Thank you so much for showing concern at my overall wellbeing  as well as my success in the classroom. I actually decided that Im  placing my studies on hold at a point that was too late to drop  classes. Im actually going to be content with the Fs. Well, Im  going to just not log in to Blackboard or view my transcript and  face them. I have, however, received a promotion and raise since  I last reached out to you, and am finding myself very fulfilled in  a life outside of academics. Something that my 18 year old self  could never conceive. Again, I cannot express how much I appreciate having a teacher that truly cares about her students success  despite their lack of participation. I truly thank you for checking  in on me. I can honestly count on one hand the number of times that I have  received this kind of happyending closure over a student who disappeared from my online class, but I have to believe that it happens and  most students just dont think to send their Introduction to Political  Science professor an email update. Remember, institutions of higher  education may put student retention as their top goal, but staying  enrolled may not always be in a students best interest. For this student, she earned a promotion and made a choice not to  continue in our class. Far more common, unfortunately, are students  who have negative life circumstances that leave them feeling too overwhelmed to do well in class Beer and Lawson 2017; Fetzner 2013.  The loss of a job or a scholarship may make continuing to attend college financially impossible, while the loss of a parent or a child may  make it emotionally impossible. In any given semester, our students  may experience incredible trauma that can profoundly impact their 

Students on the Margins   135 ability to be successful in our classes. What is the role of an online  instructor here? This is something that each instructor has to decide for themselves.  Will you accept late work from a student who has had a death in the  family? What about one who has been up all night with a sick child?  What about one who hasnt checked in to the online class for the past  two weeks because she has been consumed with searching for a new  job after being laid off? What about the student who is returning to  college after a decade away and just isnt used to online classes yet? A  few guiding principles have helped me as I have grappled with these  questions over the years. First, know your student population. For me, it makes a difference  what kind of institution you are working at and what kind of students  you are teaching. This is where the difference between equality and  equity comes into play Gannon 2020. We know that students who  take online classes are more likely to be firstgeneration college students, are more likely to be older, and are more likely to have children  and work more hours Cochran et al. 2014; Frydenberg 2007; Patterson and McFadden 2009. For me, that already builds in a different set of constraints and circumstances. Firstgeneration and lowerincome students are likely to need more support and guidanceand  less likely to ask for itespecially if they are taking online classes for  the first time Karp 2011; LongwellGrice and LongwellGrice 2008;  Rosenbaum, DeilAmen, and Person 2007; ScottClayton 2011. The  privilege of coming from a community with college experience is not  just knowing the hidden curriculum, it is knowing when and how  to ask about the things that you dont know Calarco 2014, 2020;  Lareau 2011. When the University of California, Los Angeles began a firstgeneration faculty initiative to raise the visibility of faculty who were  the first in their family to graduate from a fouryear college, less  than 7 of the faculty selfidentified as firstgeneration, compared  to nearly half of UCLAs incoming class in fall 2016, when the campaign began UCLA First to Go 2016. We sometimes wonder why 
THE SOLUTION struggling students dont ask for help, but even knowing that asking for help is an option is part of the unwritten rules of academia,  which firstgeneration students might not know. Students from a  lowerincome background may have been raised with a noexcuses  approach to problem solving, where figuring out a solution yourself  was a sign of respect for the authority figure. Contrast this with a byanymeans approach to problem solving, more common among educated, middleclass families, where negotiating with the professor is a  learned strategy Calarco 2014. Faculty and students may have very  different backgrounds and life experiences. As you get to know your studentstheir cultural backgrounds,  their work responsibilities, their goals, their family livesyou can better design your classes with your students in mind Crosling, Heagney, and Thomas 2009. For instance, if you know some of your students work fulltime jobs, you might want to make your deadlines on  the weekends, so that they are able to turn things in on time. As one  student in the Best Worst Study said, Most online students, especially older students, work. To have an assignment due midweek by  5:00 p.m. is a major inconvenience and set-up for failure. Similarly, having a major assignment due at the end of spring break  may not be a great idea for students with familiesthey likely have  not had a lot of free time to work on it with the kids out of school  all week. Having an exam open only during 9 5 work hours or only  on the weekend is probably not convenient for all of your students.  Scheduling exams across a longer time period can make them work  for multiple schedules. Because helping students build relationships  with one another can be particularly beneficial to students of color in  online classes Ashong and Commander 2012; Rovai and Gallien Jr.   2005, we may want to consider assignments that bring students  together to work on projects, even grouping them geographically to  further facilitate connections Boyette 2008 or emphasizing communal over competitive values Flannery 1995. These are simple changes, but they can make it easier for students  to succeed. One way to get to know your students is through something like the introductory survey mentioned in chapter 4. A sample 

Students on the Margins   137 survey is available in the appendix. If you ask about concerns, challenges, work hours, and similar constraints, you wont have to guess  about the difficulties facing your students; you will know. Whether and to whom to extend grace are judgment calls that each  instructor has to make individually. These judgment calls are particularly difficult because many professors have not been in their students  shoes. We may feel uncomfortable making these calls, particularly  when we dont have complete information. In these circumstances, I  find a second guiding principle especially helpful: be compassionate.  I have never regretted being kind. I have never wished I could take  back a deadline extension for a student in crisis. Now, that may be in  large part due to the fact that, because of the student population that I  work with, I rarely encounter entitled jerks trying to game the system.  Instead, my students are most often trying their best in a system where  they are learning the rules as they go and I am the closest thing they  have to a guide. So, I dont mind giving them a chance to try again.  There is certainly an argument to be made for the importance of deadlines and teaching students selfsufficiency Zatynsk 2013, but sometimes learning that takes a few iterations. Just knowing to ask for a  deadline extension can come from a place of privilege. Recognizing  that, and coming from a place of critical pedagogy, some faculty have  rolling deadlines, or no late penalties at all e.g., Mehta and Aguilera  2020; Morris and Stommel 2018, but that approach may not work  for all instructors. One approach is to try to turn cheating into an opportunity for  learning. For instance, if a student research paper run through plagiarism screening software comes back matching with online sources,  this presents an opportunity for dialogue instead of a chance to throw  the book at the student. The professor can reach out to them, explain  that their plagiarism report indicated that their paper had uncited  content from online sources, which would be plagiarism and grounds  for getting an F for the assignment, and ask if perhaps they accidentally submitted the wrong version of the document. Maybe there was  some mistake and they uploaded the document before they entered  all of the citations? A student who has never written a research paper 
THE SOLUTION before, or perhaps never even taken a college class before, may not  entirely understand that reworking some online material into their  paper is against the rules. International students or secondlanguage  learners may have different expectations about what constitutes plagiarism Amsberry 2009; Pecorari and Petric 2014; cultural assumptions are part of our understanding of plagiarism and particularly  vulnerable students may be harmed by an unthinking application of  plagiarism policies Bayne et al. 2020; Hayes and Introna 2005. An  approach that gently suggests the student may have submitted the  wrong document and gives them the chance to turn in a correctly cited  paper with no penalty at all helps explain what went wrong, lets the  student save face, and gives them a chance to make it right. As more classes have moved online, concerns about academic integrity have increased. In April 2020, a poll of 312 institutions of higher  education found that 62 of them were using video surveillance for  online proctoring, with an additional 34 considering it Grajek  2020. Although Watson and Sottile 2010 find that cheating is actually more common in faceto-face classes than online classes, possibly because of social relationships and opportunities for students to  cheat off of one another, research does indicate that students are less  likely, or able, to cheat when an exam proctor is used Alessio et al.  2017. The fear of online cheating has led some to advocate for a full  studentsurveillance approach to online academic integrity, including  facial recognition software, video surveillance, and computer restriction software e.g., Rodchua, YiadomBoakye, and Woolsey 2011. Setting aside the simple practicalities of such an approachwe  know that not all of our students have reliable internet access and  that facial recognition is racially biased Bacchini and Lorusso 2019;  Folorunso, Busola, and Oluwatosin 2019, so such a system is sure to  have some implementation challengesthink of the message it sends  to students. We want students to feel like trusted partners, not like  criminalsto-be in their own education. These surveillance systems  can feel oppressive and authoritarian to students Andrejevic and Selwyn 2020.

Students on the Margins   139 Instead, we should create online classrooms where student learning is centered and rapport is paramount. When students believe they  are learning, and learning something meaningful, they are less likely  to cheat Lang 2013. When we build highrapport relationships with  the students in our online classes, they know we are invested in their  success and they will be less likely to cheat. As Jesse Stommel puts it,  Cheating is a pedagogical issue, not a technological one quoted in  Flaherty 2020a. In response to our Best Worst Study, one student told  us about a class where the assignments were tedious busywork and  the professor was unresponsive to questions. When a student posted  the answers online, many students in the class used them because,  Even good students will cheat if they feel the class is unfair. If we treat cheating like a technological issue, we will just end up  in an arms race with students who find ever more creative means of  cheating, like companies willing to take online classes in students  names Malesky, Baley, and Crow 2016, or ways to yawn or stretch  to fool active video surveillance while students glance at notes Harwell 2020. This doesnt mean that we should abandon all attempts at  academic integrity, but we should engage students as our partners in  the endeavor and help them understand that their learning and success is the ultimate goal. Every faculty member has to make the call  on what the best approach is for their class. In the past, when students  have submitted research papers in my online classes, they have had  the opportunity to run a draft through the plagiarism screening tool  first, to check out their matching report and make sure they have  cited everything correctly. Thus, the software is used as a teaching tool  instead of a gotcha trap for catching students. Increasingly, though,  I am persuaded that the teacher student relationship is changed by  the presence of surveillance technology meant to catch cheating in the  class Bayne et al. 2020. It sets the tone for the relationship as one  that lacks trust, which is antithetical to building rapport. Assessment design may also play a role hereusing the same multiple choice questions in an untimed online exam may lead to more  cheating Harmon, Lambrinos, and Buffolino 2010, but design fixes, 
THE SOLUTION like time limits, question randomization, having a limited number of  questions selected from a larger test bank, and including a variety of  question formats could reduce cheating Cluskey Jr., Ehlen, and Raiborn 2011. Whatever specific policies we each decide to adopt for our  classes, if we start by trusting students as Stommel urges quoted  in Flaherty 2020a, we can build rapport that will reduce cheating in  our classrooms and make them a place where learning is prioritized. Our first goal should be to help students learn. Kicking them out of  class at the first mistake doesnt meet that goal. Having a little compassion and showing a little kindness can help achieve it. If we decide  to be compassionate with all our students, there arent as many judgment calls to makejust relationships and learning to focus on. When to Give Up So, is it ever time to give up on trying to get a student to pass a class?  Although college attendance rates have been steadily increasing over  the past 40 years, and many peoples conception of what it means to  live the American Dream includes a college education, college is not  a good fit for everyone. Not every student is going to be able to make  it through four or six or eight years of college courses. Despite my  best rapportbuilding efforts, I still lose about 20 to 25 of students  in my online introductory courses. That is heartbreaking, but it is significantly better than the 43 I was losing before I started teaching  with rapport, or the 35 average in online courses that meet core  requirements at the university where I teach. My rule of thumb is, as long as the student hasnt told me they are  giving up, I am not giving up on them. However, because perseverance may not always be healthy, it may be a good idea to validate for  a student that they can take a semester off to deal with a crisis. I have  had students go through incredible traumasfrom family deaths to  hospitalizations to violent attacksand it can be hard to successfully  complete a course in the midst of that. Most universities have policies  that allow students to withdraw under such circumstances and that  may be the best course of action.

Students on the Margins   141 I have found that the biggest problem is students just disappearing when major crises arise, instead of talking with their professors and university staff. Students may think, as one firstgeneration,  workingclass student interviewed by LongwellGrice and LongwellGrice 2008 did, I feel like if I told my professors about problems  I was having, they would say, So why are you telling me?  Not trusting  faculty with major life problems, or just being too overwhelmed  to reach out, is understandable. Navigating university red tape and  arranging to extend course deadlines may be the last thing on a students mind if their father is dying of cancer, if they just got laid off  from their job, or if they were raped last week. When facing life problems like this, students say, like this one did in our Best Worst Study,  This was enough for me to want to leave the university. And for  firstgeneration students and students with less privilege, it may not  even cross their minds that they can ask for help Calarco 2014. They  may think that their life problem just means that they wont get to do  college after all. Part of building rapport is communicating to students that they can  come to us if they are struggling in the classwhether it is because  of the course material or because of a life problem. We arent social  workers, but we almost always know more about campus and its  resources than they do. For instance, we know about counseling services, the writing center, and if we have one the campus food pantry.  We know when the last day to withdraw from a class is and where to  find the right form. We know the number to the financial aid office  and that there is a hardship scholarship available for seniors. When  we build rapport with them, students can see us as partners in helping  them succeed, instead of as obstacles to overcome on their way to a  college degree LongwellGrice and LongwellGrice 2008. We can communicate our willingness to help through the policies we  set and by the information we share in our syllabi Knight 2020. For  example, Stommel 2020 recommends ungrading policies, where  students selfevaluate their work, reflect on the process, and receive  qualitative feedback from the professor. Nilson 2015 suggests giving  students tokens or passes, which they can trade in for a missed assign142   THE SOLUTION ment or a redo on an exam. Gannon 2018 recommends including  information on campus counseling services, academic support services, and student organizations in syllabi to send a message of inclusion. Putting these things in writing is one step in building rapport.  It signals caring to studentsabout them as complete people beyond  the grades they earn in the class. When syllabi are inviting, approachable, and focused on learning, students have more positive perceptions  of the course and the professor Palmer, Wheeler, and Aneece 2016. When we try to build rapport with students, they notice the difference. Take this email I received from a student in response to a  reminder about an assignment deadline: I cant thank you enough for  always keeping me updated and replying to my emails so fast. You are  the one teacher I have had so far in my college career that really made  me feel like you truly care that your students succeed. Online classes  tend to feel as if they are run on autopilot, but yours most definitely  does not. Thank you for this. After giving a student a second chance to make up an exam that  they missed, I received this email in return, I woke up this morning,  read this email, and burst into tears. I dont know how else to say.  Thank you! The small things we do in our classrooms can make a  huge difference for our students Lang 2016. The Power of Empathy The 2020 global COVID-19 pandemic brought into sharp relief for  many faculty members what it is like to teach students in crisis. Suddenly, our classes were filled with nothing but students dealing with  various levels of trauma and crisisand we had to teach them all online. Many professors and institutions reacted in studentcentered  ways, extending grace through flexible deadlines, providing options  to take classes for credit no credit, and offering emergency aid funds. I  did everything I could think of to help and support my students during  that traumatic first semester as we transitioned to emergency remote  learning, but sometimes a crisis is just too overwhelming. Looking  back, retention in my online intro class was only 66 in spring 2020 

Students on the Margins   143 down from 82 in fall 2019. The pandemic presented an incredible  challenge for all of us, but the reality is that trauma and crisis strike  at least some of our students every semester. They lose jobs, their family members get sick and even die, and they have overwhelming caregiving responsibilities. The task of responding to those individual crises with grace and empathy falls on the shoulders of each individual  instructor. After the first pandemic semester ended in May 2020, the University of Arkansas at Little Rock surveyed students and asked them what  professors did to help them the most, in the midst of the COVID-19  pandemic Slagle et al. 2020. Over a thousand students responded   n  1,052 and, presented with the following four options, this is how  their choices broke down:  Be available to answer questions and respond to emails n   410: 38.9  Be flexible in assignments and deadlines n  395: 37.5  Make sure the lectures and content are really interesting n   125: 11.8  Refer you to university and community resources where you  can get help for things beyond classes n  122: 11.5 More than threequarters of responding students named highrapport   behaviorsavailability and flexibilityas the most helpful things  their professors did. Survey research from the University of Wisconsin  Whitewater similarly shows that, when students reflected on their  experiences during the pandemic spring semester of 2020, what they  valued most was a good professorone who was compassionate and  communicated well Loepp 2020. In times of trauma and always,  our students need us to be flexible, compassionate, and to show up  for them. For context, in the same University of Arkansas at Little Rock survey, 77 of students reported that they worried about paying their  bills, 68 reported that they worried about accessing and successfully  using the technology they needed for their classes, 41 told researchers that they worried about having enough to eat dayto-day, and 32 
THE SOLUTION said that they worried about having a safe and secure place to sleep.  This is what Sara GoldrickRab means by RealCollege GoldrickRab et al. 2019. Another survey of more than 15,000 students at 21  different institutions in April and May of 2020 found that about a  third of students strongly agreed that they were concerned about their  mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic Blankstein, Frederick, and WolffEisenberg 2020. When we see our students as whole  people facing challenges beyond our classes, we can be better prepared to meet them with empathy. Although some may critique an empathetic approach as coddling,  the data show that empathy favors learning Holmberg 2003. Relationships are central to teaching and learning; building rapport with  students improves their grades and their graduation rates. When students feel like they belong and like they are understood, they want  to try hard and are more committed to learning Holmberg 2003;  PacanskyBrock 2020. Scholars who focus on developing a pedagogy of empathy Eyler 2018 or pedagogies of care Mondelli and  Tobin 2020 center students in the learning process and deliver the  message that they are not alone. For most people, empathy is easier to build faceto-face. Humans  are social beings and meeting in person tends to foster stronger connections as a simple byproduct of human nature Kock 2005 and the  availability of more social and emotional cues Daft and Lengel 1986;  MarnLpez et al. 2019. But, unfortunately, that fact works to the  detriment of our online students and represents another way that they  are secondclass students at our universities. Listen to the experience  of one student with disabilities, who left this anonymous comment on  a survey describing why they try to take faceto-face classes whenever  possible: I have a disability that limits when I can go, for me to succeed. So if the classes I need are in a time frame where Im able to go,  Id much rather go in person. The teachers are a lot more relaxed and  able to connect better to the students. Its easier for the teachers to be  understanding when they can put a face with the name. The ability  for this student to get the accommodations they need depends on the 

Students on the Margins   145 empathy and understanding of their professor, and that is easier to get  in a faceto-face class. This situation is difficult and possibly even illegal; we dont have the full details from these few comments, but students have rights to accommodations under the Americans with Disabilities Act that should not be subject to whether or not the teacher  is understanding. Students should be able to connect with considerate  and accommodating professors no matter the medium of the course  they are enrolled in. Yet, openended comments from survey research Skurat Harris and  I have done show time and again that students are frustrated when  they encounter online faculty who are not understanding of medical or  family emergencies. As one student in our Best Worst Study said, This  instructor has no sympathy for sick people in which they thought I  had a stroke and I asked if I could make up my exam the following  day or when I felt better and she said no. So yeah probably going to  fail this class because I made a zero. Sometimes students, like any  other humans, make mistakes. One student told us, Some professors  are willing to help and some dont care one bit. I have a class that I did  this weeks homework last week instead of last weeks homework on  accident. Im waiting for a big fat zero. You can just feel how dejected  and discouraged these students are. We dont know if they were able  to pass these classes or if they stayed enrolled at the university. But  a little rapport and understanding could have gone a long way to  encouraging them on that path. Many of our students, especially in online classes, are teetering on  the edge of success or failure. The thing that can make the difference  for them is an instructor who cares about their success and believes  in their ability to learn. In the online classroom, the instructor sets the  temperature of the class Lassitter 2009, 55 and can make it a place  where all students are welcome and invited to participate, a place  where the smallest mistakes are criticized, or a lonely wasteland where  they will find little interaction at all. Students in our online classes  are human beings. All but the most strongly selfmotivated need to  experience a real human connection to encourage them to participate 
THE SOLUTION and complete the coursework Artino and Ioannou 2008; Whipp and  Chiarelli 2004. We can be that for our studentsand dramatically  increase their ability to succeed in the process. So many of our students have plenty of voicesin their lives and in  their own headstelling them that they cant succeed. So long as they  are trying in my classes, I want to be a voice that tells them they can  do it and I am here to help.

PART III WHAT IT WILL TAKE Prioritizing retention will require students, faculty,   administrators, and supporters working together If the university had a better format and better trained faculty to make  online courses more engaging, Id choose online more often. Online student at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock

This page intentionally left blank 

 SIX  The Tradeoffs B uilding rapport with students takes thought and intentionality.  But it also takes timea resource that is often in short supply.  Rapport is built oneonone by individual faculty members connecting  with students. And when we take the time to make those real human  connections with our students we are necessarily giving up that time  to do other things. There are opportunity costs to building rapport,  and they are often paid directly by faculty who may have little left to  give. This chapter is about the tradeoffs that rapport building requires  and the decisions that faculty members and administrators must make  in weighing whether those tradeoffs are worth it. The benefits of building rapport have been repeatedly documented  in previous chapters. The results of the teaching experiment I ran in  my introductory classes, presented in chapter 3, demonstrate that  using rapportbuilding measures increased retention by 13 Glazier 2016. The predicted probabilities presented in chapter 5, drawn  from data from 35 different online classes in the Rapport Impact  Study, demonstrate how at-risk students in particular benefit from  highrapport classes, with retention increases as high as 27 Glazier  and Skurat Harris 2021. Student comments add meaning to these 
wHAT IT wILL TAkE statistics, helping us see what a difference rapport can make in the  lives of our students. When students in highrapport classes talk about  their professors, their comments are effusive. For instance, students in  our Best Worst Study provided comments like these about their best  online instructors: She is an excellent and enthusiastic teacher who  genuinely wants her students to excel in her class. Her lectures are  thorough and she reaches out to students to ensure they get the material. Another student said, Best online teacher Ive had. No other  teacher interacts or tries to help us stay on task like this one does. Yet rapport building has costs as well. As instructors read through  chapter 4 and the various rapportbuilding strategies, they may think  that some of the techniques coddle students too much and would  turn out lesswellprepared adults. Or they may think that the techniques sound like way too much work. Both of these reactions get at  a key question: We know that there are significant benefits to rapport  building in terms of student retention, but are those benefits worth  the potential costs to our students and the almost certain costs to ourselves? In other words, does rapport building ask too much of professors? Does it not ask enough of students? And does it distract us from  other, more technological, solutions that would be more efficient? In this chapter, I address these challenging questions head on; first,  taking the perspective of faculty and examining the additional burden  rapport building places on them. Rapport building has high payoffs,  but universities are not generally structured to facilitate and incentivize it. I present the results of the Minimum Rapport Experiment  to demonstrate how little rapport building it actually takes to have a  positive impact on students. Next, I take the perspective of students  to look at whether rapport building removes some important hardknock life lessons of college. Finally, I argue that, although technology might look like an easy fix to lighten the burden on everyone  involved, it wont save us. Real human connections are needed to  make a difference and reverse the online retention crisis.

The Tradeoffs   151 How Much Should We Ask of Instructors? Faculty are often overwhelmed and underpaid, with an increasing  number not even certain of employment from one academic year to  another Kezar, DePaola, and Scott 2019. The percentage of the faculty  workforce that is fulltime has steadily declined over the past 50 years  and just keeps fallingfrom 77 in 1970 to 64 in 1991 to only  52 in 2016 Snyder, de Brey, and Dillow 2019, 492, table 315.10.  Research by Kezar, DePaola, and Scott shows that, in 2019, nontenuretrack instructors made up 70 of college faculty 2019. This  insecure majority teaches a heavy instructional loadeight courses a  year at an average pay of 22,400, or less than the annual salary of  most fastfood workers Kezar, DePaola, and Scott 2019, 1. As the  COVID-19 pandemic raged in 2020, some universities announced an  even greater shift toward contingent faculty, as a costsaving measure.  The University of Colorado at Boulder announced plans to replace  50 tenured faculty with 25 lecturers Flaherty 2020c. Online faculty  are especially likely to be on the margins of their universities and are  more likely to be contingent Chapman 2011; Franklin 2015. Building real human relationships with online students takes emotional  energy and time, both of which are likely to be in short supply for this  faculty population. Are we asking too much of online instructors if we ask them to  build rapport with their students? Teaching online can be a heavy lift.   Faculty who teach online classes are already worn out by the online  workload, concerned about course evaluations, and missing the energy  of the in-person teaching experience. Asking them to dedicate additional time and effort to building rapport with their students is adding  a lot to an already full plate. Faculty who have taught both online and faceto-face can testify  that teaching online often takes more time and effort than teaching  in person, especially when a class is new Bolliger and Wasilik 2009;  Spector 2005. Even for online classes that are well designed and have  all the kinks worked out, teaching online can take more emotional  energy, even if the time spent per student is about the same Hislop 
wHAT IT wILL TAkE and Ellis 2004, because online students might expect greater responsiveness. One instructor in a faculty focus group commented, I had  to log in a couple of times a day, or sometimes more than that. I had  to respond to them immediately, otherwise they wouldnt have done  their assignments, they would have said, Oh, you didnt answer my  emails  Hiltz, Kim, and Shea 2007, 8. This need to be constantly  available for students can be draining. And online faculty may be worried about poor evaluations if they  arent always on their email. Evaluations for online courses tend to be  lower than evaluations for faceto-face courses, and low course evaluations can have negative consequences in terms of promotion, tenure, and merit raises Lowenthal, Bauer, and Chen 2015; Wingo, Ivankova, and Moss 2017. These downsides may lead some faculty to be  wary of teaching online classes at all Jaschik and Lederman 2018;  Lin 2002; Nelson 2003; Shattuck 2013; Shea, Pickett, and Li 2005. Even when faculty can be persuaded to teach online, many miss  the human element in online classes in the same way that students  do Shea, Pickett, and Li 2005. It is simply harder to connect with  students online. Many researchers have found that faculty feel disengaged from their students and dont find online communication tools  like discussion boards sufficient Arend 2009; Haber and Mills 2008;  Mazzolini and Maddison 2007; Ward, Peters, and Shelley 2010. Faculty concerns about online teaching became particularly acute when  virtually all college instructors were forced to suddenly move their  courses online as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Many  opinion pieces were published voicing the common complaint that  online classes just werent the same, for either faculty or students, recommending that we lower our collective expectations, and providing  advice on how to recover the joy of teaching after having to move  online Darby 2020; Lang 2020; Zimmerman 2020. According to a  survey of more than 3,500 faculty at over 1,500 institutions of higher  education in August 2020, the pandemic actually saw a 10 increase  in faculty who agreed that online learning is an effective method for  teaching 49 agreed Fox et al. 2020, 13, but many faculty 66  are rightly concerned about equity gaps Fox et al. 2020, 34.

The Tradeoffs   153 Even before adding the additional expectation of rapport building, many online faculty members are already bearing a lot of costs.  The good news is that rapport building can actually help. Taking a  rapportdriven approach to online teaching can improve the experience for both instructors and students Glazier 2020. When it comes  to missing the joy of teaching students in the classroom, building rapport can help faculty recover that and create something even more  rewarding as we make authentic connections with our students online. As we have seen in student comments throughout the book, our  students notice when their professors reach out. And a rapportfilled  course returns better course evaluations, as well. My course evaluations significantly improved when I started teaching with rapportbuilding techniques. When I compare the way students responded to  the rapport and nonrapport conditions from the experiment presented  in chapter 3, the scores from the rapport conditions are significantly  higher in terms of instructor accessibility, instructor engagement,  and instructor positivity, as presented in table 6.1 Glazier 2016. Having better course evaluations seems like a small thing in the  face of an online retention crisis but, even with persistent and documented problems with gender and racial biases in course evaluations MacNell, Driscoll, and Hunt 2015; Mitchell and Martin 2018;  Smith and Hawkins 2011, they remain important at many institutions for tenure and promotion decisions. It doesnt hurt to see our  additional efforts reflected back to us in higher evaluation scores and  comments like this one that I received: Professor who goes beyond  what is required to engage with her students, provide a positive learning environment and attitude, and consistently offer help to students.  She is actively engaged in this online course. Yet no matter how many heartwarming student comments we get  at the end of the semester, the fact remains: building rapport with students takes time and effort. Faculty are right to be skeptical that their   The accessibility six questions, M  26.16, SD  3.22, engagement ten questions,  M  45.27, SD  5.01, and positivity seven questions, M  29.28, SD  2.68 scores are  each aggregate scores made of up multiple survey questions, each of which was coded on  a 1 to 5 Likert scale. Their summary statistics are provided in parentheses.
wHAT IT wILL TAkE efforts will be recognized beyond the kind words of their appreciative students Hiltz, Kim, and Shea 2007; King and Alperstein 2014.  Chapter 7 contains specific recommendations for how administrators  can help change the culture of their campuses to incentivize and identify excellent online teaching so that great online teachers get the recognition they deserve. But as we are waiting for the powers that be to do their part in making structural changes, we can make a difference right now, as individual instructors, for the students who pass through our classes. Knowing that instructors almost always feel pressed for time, we should  make it our goal to maximize the effect of rapport, while minimizing the burden on faculty. In the next section, I demonstrate, through  the Minimum Rapport Experiment, how faculty can still have impact  even if they start with small rapportbuilding efforts. The Minimum Rapport Experiment Are we asking too much of online faculty if we ask them to build rapport  with their students? For many overworked, contingent, underpaid, or  junior facultyreading through the extensive rapportbuilding strategies outlined in chapter 4the answer may be a resounding yes! Recognizing that those rapportbuilding recommendations might be a bit  overwhelming for some, I partnered with my colleague Heidi Skurat  Harris to design an online course experiment to see if we could get  Table 6.1. Comparison of Student Course Evaluations across Rapport   and Non-rapport Online Sections of Introduction to Political Science Quantitative Questions

Non-rapport

Rapport Mean Instructor Accessibility Score 24.7 26.7 Mean Instructor Engagement Score 42.0 46.3 Mean Instructor Positivity Score 27.3 29.7 Student n 38 93 Response Rate 43.2 65.0 p  .05 

The Tradeoffs   155 positive results through minimum rapportbuilding effort. Essentially,  could we build rapport and retain students without putting in a whole  lot of work? We began our Minimum Rapport Experiment by creating two very  similar Google Classroom courses for a fake Philosophy 2000: Ethics  and Technology course that we invented. We wanted to present students with a course that was unlikely to be in their major sorry, philosophy professors but was the sort of course that might fulfill a core  requirement for the university. If a student had to take this Philosophy  2000 course to meet a requirement, and came upon our online course  setup, would some minimal efforts to build rapport make a difference  for retention? The fake course came complete with an initial lecture and reading  assignment. For the experiment, we wanted students to spend a little  bit of time in the course and let us know how likely they would be to  stay enrolled, if it was a real class they were taking. We wanted to give   them a taste of the experience of that course, so we asked them to  complete a series of tasks: 1. Read the syllabus and answer a question about the late work  policy. 2. Access the PowerPoint in Unit 1 and then take a short quiz on  the content. 3. Complete a short reading and then write a oneto twosentence summary of it. 4. Write an email to the professor asking about the date of the  final exam. Completing all of these tasks is pretty onerous sometimes we cant  even get students to do them in a course they are enrolled in for credit,  so each participant received a 10 gift card that they could spend at  the university bookstore. Students who participated in this experiment were recruited from  our own university campus, the University of Arkansas at Little Rock,  and were randomly assigned to either the rapport or the nonrapport  condition. In the nonrapport condition, we made no efforts to estab156   wHAT IT wILL TAkE lish an instructor presence, whereas in the rapport condition, we  invented a fake professor, Dr. Dave Smith, complete with a picture of  a middleaged white man because students tend to think that white  men are the most knowledgeable instructors MacNell, Driscoll, and  Hunt 2015; Mendez and Mendez 2018. In the rapport condition,  Dr. Smith welcomed students to the class, described the course a bit  in his own words, assured them it would be interesting and engaging,  and told them exactly what they needed to do to get started. The nonrapport course just listed the course description from the catalog and  told students to complete Unit One. Additional differences between the two courses, including immediate and encouraging feedback in the rapport condition, along with a  narrated PowerPoint, and email responses that are respectful and call  students by name, are laid out in table 6.2. The table illustrates the  many small ways instructors communicate to students that their success is important to us. Through class policies, through feedback, and  through personal interactions, we are either building rapport or sending students the message that they are a bother. Students participating in the experiment also completed a short  demographic and attitudinal survey before entering the online course  and then completed another short survey about the course afterward.  The average time it took our 218 participants to complete both surveys and the tasks in the course was about 27 minutes, meaning they  spent about 15 minutes or less in the course itself with the rest of the  time completing the preand postsurveys. Just to revisit, in chapter 3, I describe a rapportbuilding experiment in which I spent hours per student, for an entire semester, building personal relationships. These intensive efforts yielded a significant  increase in retention and inspired me to apply rapportbuilding techniques in all of my classes. But in this Minimum Rapport Experiment,  students completed tasks in a fake Philosophy and Technology course  for just 15 minutes. When we asked them whether they would stay  enrolled, if this was a real class they were taking, would we see a significant difference between the rapport and nonrapport conditions in  this short amount of time?

Table 6.2. Rapport vs. Non-rapport Conditions in the Minimum Rapport Experiment Course Element

Non-rapport Condition  Rapport Condition directions regarding  the syllabus Read the syllabus  to get started in the  class. Read the syllabus posted below. This  document will provide our required text list,  an overview of our assignments in the class,  and other helpful information and policies. directions regarding  Unit One Then complete the  assignments in Unit  One. Then, go to Unit One to see the activities for  the first week! To get to Unit One, click on  the menu in the top left of this page three  little lines in a box, and go to the Unit One  link. PowerPoint for Unit  One PowerPoint alone  with no voice over or  screen capture.  Video with screen capture of PowerPoint  and voiceover. welcome message  in the syllabus No welcome message  in the syllabus. welcome to this online course in ethics and  technology! If you own a smartphone or a  computer please do for this class!, have or  want to have a job, or interact with others  through any kind of digital technology, then  you should find this class will benefit you! Please read this syllabus to understand how  our class works! A few minutes of reading  now will prevent headaches later. Comment on the  course No additional  comment on the  course. I know that some of you are taking this class  because it is required, and you might not  be looking forward to studying something  as boring as ethics. But this class will  help to connect ethics to how you use  technology in your everyday life and your  future career. Feedback on quiz Your response has  been recorded. Thanks for completing this quiz! Timeliness of quiz  grade Quiz grade is not  released.  Quiz grade is released immediately. Feedback on reading  response Your response has  been recorded. You did it! Your first reading summary is  done! I will grade your answer by Friday. Late work policy All work should be  submitted by the  deadlines on the  syllabus. No late work  will be accepted.  I understand that life happens. You can  submit one assignment late for any reason  with the exception of the final because I  have to have final grades in on time!. Please  arrange alternative due dates for your late  submission with me in advance. I do not take  late work submitted after the deadline if you  have not contacted me in advance. continued
wHAT IT wILL TAkE With such a small exposure to rapportbuilding, we were honestly  surprised to find a statistically significant increase in students intent  to stay in the course for the rapport condition from 4.11 to 4.41, on  a fivepoint Likert scale, p  0.014. The greatest shift in attitudes is  from those who were unsure in the nonrapport condition to those  who were very likely to stay in the rapport condition, as the distribution in figure 6.1 illustrates. The openended responses students gave also indicate that the  instructor presence made a big impact in their evaluation of the course.  Students in the rapport condition said that they appreciated the good  communication from the professor: He seems to be very active with  students and willing to work with people in his class. Just hearing  the professors voice seemed to make a big difference for the students,  who left comments like this one, I like how Dr. Smith records himself talking about the content instead of just leaving the students to  read everything without any actual interaction. Other students comTable 6.2. continued Course Element

Non-rapport Condition  Rapport Condition Home page  instructor  accessibility No photo, listed email,  or prompt to contact  faculty member.  Photo, email, and message that reads:  Please email me at dxsmith33ualr .edu if  you have any questions. I generally respond  to emails the first week of class within 12  hours. Office hours Office Hours: MwF  8:00 9:00 a.m. I can meet with you online by appointment  through Skype, Google Hangouts, or Zoom.  Email me at dxsmith33ualr .edu to set up  an appointment. Email accessibility dxsmith33ualr .edu dxsmith33ualr .edu I respond to all emails  within 24 hours during the week and within  48 hours on weekends and holidays. If you  havent heard from me within these times,  please email again. Email response to  question about the  final exam See the syllabus for  information about  your final exam.  dr. Smith Hello, student name! Thank you for your  email. As you could tell from the syllabus,  the date for the final exam has not yet been  posted. I will have that information available  as soon as possible. Looking forward to a  great semester!  dr. Smith

The Tradeoffs   159 mented, Dr. Smith seemed very understanding and one wrote, The  instructor is responsive and willing to help. In the nonrapport condition, on the other hand, students left comments identifying the interaction or lack thereof with the professor as  a problem with the course. One student said, Not seeing the teacher  faceto-face to explain certain things a little better would be an issue  and another commented, There needs to be a more personal aspect  to it. Some direct teacher involvement via video chat or screencast lessons would be great at achieving this. In the nonrapport condition,  the automated response to the student email inquiry about the final  exam date was a very short reply telling them to check the syllabus.  One student commented that what they didnt like about the course  was the way he responded back to my email from what I could make  out. That if you ask a question if youre genuinely lost, hell get upset. Though online classes can be timeintensive to teach under any  circumstance, the Minimum Rapport Experiment shows that a few  simple rapportbuilding elements can make a surprising impact in a  very short amount of time. Students notice when our email responses  are abrupt or when our courses lack personality. They are grateful  when we communicate clearly and provide quick feedback. Even very  Figure 6.1. Students SelfReported Likelihood of Staying Enrolled in the Class,  by Condition
wHAT IT wILL TAkE simple efforts to build rapport can make a significant difference for  our students. For instance, in this case, even though the quiz was multiple choice and automatically graded, giving the students an encouraging automatic message along with their quiz grade i.e., Thanks for  completing this quiz! made a difference. An experiment that provided similar automated feedback found that students who received  the feedback had significantly higher final exam scores Wallace et al.  2006. That kind of change requires almost no effort of faculty, but it  sends a signal that matters to students. Thus, what the Minimum Rapport Experiment demonstrates is that  it doesnt take much extra effort to see statistically significant results.  The changes outlined in table 6.2 are the basics of rapportbuilding  that online instructors can adapt with a minimum amount of work. How Much Should We Ask of Students? There are a certain number of people I have encountered over the  years who, by this point in the conversation, have decided that rapport is synonymous with overprotecting students. They see building  rapport with students as doing them a disservice by not teaching them  how the real world works. They would like to see a more prominent  role for student responsibility. If we add rapport to our courses, are  we necessarily making a tradeoff for student responsibility? As each  professor contemplates the appropriate role of student responsibility  in the equation of their own online course, there are two key things I  would encourage them to consider. First, what are the goals of the course? If it is a course on calculus,  the main learning objectives may be to master certain equations and  their application. If it is a course on conversational Spanish, the main  learning objectives may be to give and receive information in Spanish.  If it is a course on professional and technical writing, the main learning objectives may include writing professional emails. Professionalism and responsibility may be more central to the learning objectives  in some courses than in others. Throughout the process of completing a college degree, students 

The Tradeoffs   161 learn a number of soft skills that employers particularly value. These  include things like professionalism, interpersonal skills, communicating well, even coming to work on time Robles 2012; Stewart, Wall,  and Marciniec 2016. Some faculty members and administrators may  fear that, by implementing the rapportbuilding strategies proposed  in chapter 4, like sending email reminders or allowing deadline extensions, students will lose out on these soft skills and will be less prepared to succeed in the real world. The question each instructor must consider for each course is: How  central is this to the learning objectives of my course? For instance, is  deadline management a key course learning objective? I would venture that for most courses, most of the time, the answer would be no.  There are far more important things that the students are meant to be  learning, and they wont be able to learn those things if they miss an  assignment, get discouraged, and drop the class altogether. Deadline  management and professionalization may be an underlying part of the  curriculum, but mastering those skills shouldnt overtake everything  else a student is trying to learn. This leads directly to the second question to consider: How can we  best help students learn? Strict policies that kick students out of class  at the first infraction, or put them in such a deep hole as to make passing the class impossible, are unlikely to foster an environment where  they can learn. Instructors who want to help students learn by exposing them to what life is like in the real world might say that your boss  wont send you an email to remind you that the report is due, offer to  answer your questions, or be willing to cut you a break if you have a  crisis and need to turn something in late. Thus, they would conclude,  we shouldnt do so now. The world is full of hard knocks and the  sooner our students learn that, the better. There is some truth in these  critiques. Sometimes failure is the best teacher. If we dont let our students fail, by missing an assignment deadline, for instance, they may  not develop the skills it takes to keep track of deadlines themselves. But if the assumption is that our job is to prepare students for the  harsh real world some professors describe, then what we should do is  prepare them for it, not replicate it. We can best prepare them by giv162   wHAT IT wILL TAkE ing them the tools to succeed, and for many of our students that starts  with helping them not fail out of our classes. In fact, I would gently suggest that the real world is not always as  harsh and cruel as some instructors describe. Although there are some  bosses who are jerks, there are also many who do send emails reminding employees that they need the report by Friday. Almost all supervisorsvirtually by definitionshould be willing to provide information that their subordinates dont have. Most human beings are  understanding when crises arrive. To draw on a concept from rational  choice theory, in most work environments, the employees are playing  an iterated game, meaning they are going to be interacting with one  another repeatedly. It doesnt make for a productive work environment or for positive social interactions to impose harsh penalties at  the slightest mistake. For most companies, even when we are talking  about entrylevel hourly employees, hiring and training an employee is  an investment OConnell and Kung 2007. There is a strong incentive  not to fire someone the first time they turn in a report late. In short,  the real world is not always as unforgiving as some instructors are. When we compare the way we treat our online students to the  way we treat our faceto-face students, the issue of equity comes up  as well. Rapport is often easier to build in person; humans just connect better that way Kock 2005; MarnLpez et al. 2019. We heard  a student in chapter 5 describe being more likely to get the disability  accommodations they need in faceto-face classes, compared to online  classes, because professors are more understanding in person. This is  a question we should all ask ourselves: Are we more compassionate  and understanding with our faceto-face students? Are we more likely  to give extensions, allow make-up exams, or share our lecture notes  when a student makes the request in person? This may be yet another  way our online students are treated as secondclass students. Its important to remember that rapport and responsibility are not  zerosum. We dont necessarily give up student responsibility when we  introduce rapport. Instead, we can thoughtfully consider how best to  help our students learn while also taking into account the constraints  they are facing and our own privilege as professors. In chapter 5, we 

The Tradeoffs   163 tried to put ourselves in the shoes of our online students to understand  what their experiences in our classes might be like and why it might  be a good idea to give second and third chances when students falter. When we think about opportunities to try again as opportunities  to learn, building rapport becomes a way to encourage responsibility  that also supports students. Thus, building rapport is not coddling students; it is creating relationships to support their learning, which in turn helps professionalize  them for the world beyond college. In a sense, building rapport with  disadvantaged students in particular is one way to try to give them  some of the preparationover the course of a single classthat other  students may have received over the course of a lifetime. That may seem  like a high bar. But, if by the end of an online class that uses rapportbuilding techniques, the students in the class feel like they are important enough to the instructor that they arent wasting the instructors  time by asking a question, we will have made a positive difference for  those students. Technology without Humanity Because faculty and universities all have limited time, money, and  agenda space when it comes to online teaching, if we choose to prioritize rapport building and focus on human relationships, we must necessarily trade off something else. Currently, a great deal of the online  teaching energy in higher education is focused on technology. If we  instead invest in people and relationships, will we be giving up something better and more efficient in technology? When Skurat Harris and I asked students at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock about the worst online classes they had ever taken  for our Best Worst Study, they rarely complained about technology or  course navigation. Instead, they told us about classes where they felt  totally disconnected from the professor and felt like they werent getting a full learning experience. As one student put it: The teacher did  not provide any instruction. It was basically selftaught through the  publishers website. There was no need for a professor. Another stu164   wHAT IT wILL TAkE dent similarly said, I dont feel that the professor was very present  in this course. While the class was easy, I dont think I took anything  from my experience that I couldnt have gained just simply buying a  book and reading it on my own. Given these kinds of experiences,  students may even go into online classes expecting that they will have  to teach themselves through technology with very little human contact Jaggars 2014; Woodyard and Larson 2018. In faceto-face classes, technology is viewed as a helpful addon,  but in online classes, it is the means by which the class is communicated and so it can sometimes overshadow the class itself. The result  is that technology can become the focusteacher training centers on  how best to utilize the Learning Management System, and advice to  students is all about course navigation King and Alperstein 2014, 68.  But when the technology is the center of attention, the importance  of the relationship between the professor and student falls by the  wayside. While Learning Management Systems and EdTech are busy  focusing on design and technology, students are hungry for human  connection. When Jaggars and Xu 2016 systematically studied online course  elements in order to create a rubric of quality online instruction, they  concluded that, although wellorganized courses with wellspecified  learning objectives are certainly desirable, these design features do  not significantly predict student learning outcomes p. 271. In fact,  out of all of the factors they examined, the only one to have a positive  and significant impact on student grades was the quality of instructorstudent interaction in a course. A wellorganized course that links  assignments and learning objectives is great, and it is certainly helpful if an online instructor knows how to upload videos, but once you  master the basics of online literacy and organization, you will get  much further with an engaged instructor that students believe truly  cares about them than you will with more technological knowhow. At many institutions, there is a gap between the models and their  application Huang et al. 2019. For instance, when in 2015, California Community Colleges implemented selfdirected learning support services for math, the intervention had no significant impact on 

The Tradeoffs   165 retention in math classes Chatteinier 2016, because math students  werent looking for an electronic interfacethey wanted real human  connection. Similarly, when college classes suddenly moved to emergency remote teaching in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in  2020, many professors tried to replicate the in-person classroom environment with synchronous video lectures via platforms like Zoom.  But both professors and students soon found that watching hours of  lectures on a computer screen was not particularly edifying Supiano  2020; students joined the class from noisy kitchens, while wearing  their pjs, or they just turned their cameras off entirely. For many, it  didnt feel like a community at all Hogan and Sathy 2020. Theres  nothing wrong with a noisy kitchen, pjs, or taking a class with your  camera off. But its not the same thing as a faceto-face meeting on  campus. Thats why we need to change our expectations. We need to  stop searching for a technological tool that will replicate the physical  experience of being together in a faceto-face class and realize that the  most important element is the pedagogical tool of human connection,  which can exist in online, hybrid, faceto-face, or hyflex formats. Anywhere you have professors caring about their students you can have  highrapport classes and successful students. The solution is not technologicalits human. Just increasing interaction in an online class is not going to increase  retention Stavredes and Herder 2013. We are social beingsconnecting with other humans makes us want to stay around them. Technological solutions are tempting. Every university administrator would  love to buy a shiny new piece of software if it could solve their retention problems. But technology without human connection wont solve  the problem although it will cost a lot!. A robot responding systematically to every student post will not make students feel seen and  cared about. What matters is not the number of interactions but that  the interactions communicate a deeper message about the value of  each student to the class and the instructor. That can only be achieved  by real human connection. Making students turn on their cameras or berating students or faculty about oncamera professionalism will not create connection and 
wHAT IT wILL TAkE engagement in online classes. Cameras should be optional any time  we hold synchronous class Davidson 2020, but if we are going to  ask students to be in the same place at the same time, we should do it  with a purpose. Make it a time when students can contribute, interact,  and connect with the professor and with each other. If the instructor  is the only one who is going to be talking, that does not need to be a  synchronous event. That can be a video or even a written lecture. Students have busy, complicated lives, just like we do. If we are going to  ask them to be available for our classes at a specific time, make that  a time when they are active in learning and participating through discussions, questions, activities, office hours, and so on. Or, because  students dont actually use office hours all that often Cho and Kim  2013; Hrastinski 2006; Jaasma and Koper 1999; Nadler and Nadler  2000, cut them out all together and add semistructured small group  meetings where students ask questions instead Nadler and Nadler  2000. The key is to use synchronous time to connect, not to talk at  students, or to sit in an empty Zoom room waiting for students who  never drop by. We can sometimes become blinded by technology when it comes to  online teaching and forget that what really matters is human connection. When technology mediates virtually every aspect of communication Allen and Seaman 2011, the technology can become primary  and the communication becomes secondary. Under these circumstances, the critical relationship between faculty and student drops  off the radar. If we want to retain students, we need to focus less on  technology and more on relationships.

 SEVEN  Building a Support Network T he picture presented here, through the data and the stories of students taking online classes, can be a challenging one to look at  straight on. Although more students than ever before are now able to  access college through online classes, the retention gap between online  and faceto-face courses bears witness to the fact that we are not doing  enough to help them succeed. Changing the way instructors approach  online teaching and the way students experience online classes on a  large scale is going to require a culture shift. In the last chapter, we  looked at how this shift can start with very simple changes instructors can implement right now. This chapter pans out to a much larger  scale. When we bring everyone in to contribute to structural changes  in online higher education, we will enable it to live up to its promises. So far, this book has focused on the critical role that online instructors play in building rapport with students and closing the online  retention gap. But this is not the entire solution. The retention crisis  in online higher education is a major problem, and instructors cant  solve it alone. Building rapport in online courses can significantly  improve retention, but if the impact is going to be more than piecemeal, we need to put together a coalition of people to support online  teaching and learning. This practical chapter presents concrete recom168   wHAT IT wILL TAkE mendations for a rapportcentric approach to student retention for all  those who care about student successfrom the students themselves  all the way to university presidents. In this final chapter, I first describe how students, parents, teachers, mentors, and university administrators can each contribute to an  online higher education revolution that puts human connection at  the center of learning and prioritizes students over technology. I then  present three short case studies of different institutions that are each  having success through policies that center rapportbuilding, human  connection, and student learning on a broad scale. Because these may  feel like ambitious efforts to individuals who are just starting down  the path of rapport building at their own institutions, I conclude with  a series of increasingly involved recommendations for those who want  to start building rapport and improving retention from the ground up. Students Perhaps it is almost too obvious to say, but students are the key to  their own success. All too often, I find myself reaching out to a student  who has stopped logging in to our online course, isnt participating  in discussions, and isnt turning in assignments. When a student disappears like this, and doesnt respond to emails or even phone calls,  professors hit a brick wall in terms of what we can do to help. When  a student turns in a poorly written paper, I can give them feedback, an  opportunity to revise, and work with them in office hours to improve.  But when they dont turn in a paper at all, I have no choice but to give  them a zero. Similarly, when a student just doesnt respond, theres not  much professors can do to help them. Sometimes, students have very legitimate reasons for ghosting on  our classesjust disappearing with no notice. They may be going  through something so traumatic that the class has fallen completely  off their priority list. But most of the time, I have found that they are  simply overwhelmed and dont think that asking for help is an option.  For many firstgeneration or lowerincome students especially, their  life experience may have taught them that second chances just arent 

Building a Support Network   169 a thing. So, if they make a mistake in the class, they may think they  have blown their shot and they have to take the F Jack 2016. The  goal of all of the other players in this equationprofessors, parents,  mentors, staff, and administratorsshould be to equip students with  the tools, skills, and resources they need to succeed in online classes so  that just disappearing never seems like the best alternative. Students  need to know that asking for help is always an option. So, if you are a student reading this book, I have to say that you  have interesting taste in reading material. I am guessing maybe a parent or mentor handed you this section. I am glad you have someone  looking out for you. If you are a faculty member or someone who  cares about a college student, hopefully there will be something in the  following pages that you may find useful enough to pass along. Here  is my very best advice to students for what you can do to contribute  to your own success in online classes. Treat your online class like a faceto-face class. The most important way to do this is to schedule time to work on each of your online  classes. This is especially important if you are taking an asynchronous  online class, one that doesnt have set meeting times for the whole  class. Every single semester, I lose students because they forget to  check in to our online class, get behind, and then get too discouraged  to try to find a way out of the hole they are in. Look at your schedule and decide when you want your online class to bemaybe every  Tuesday and Thursday night from 8 to 10? Put it on your calendar  and make sure you make it to class. Put all the class due dates on your  calendar, too, so you are sure not to miss them. You are using a calendar, right? If not, get on that. You can even use an electronic one that  syncs to your phone and dings at you when class is about to start and  alerts you when your assignments are due. Pro tip: if you set those  alerts the day before the assignment is actually due, you may have a  better chance of getting it in on time. If you havent taken an online class before, know that your fellow  students have told my colleagues and me in surveys that online is  very hard to keep up with. One student wrote, For some classes I  do not need the structure of a faceto-face classroom but for others I 
wHAT IT wILL TAkE do need it and it helps me get my work done on time. If you can replicate the structure of a faceto-face class yourself, you will be a step  ahead of the game. Try to take a few classes on campus. I know this can be difficult,  but research shows that once you cross a threshold of about 40 of  your course load online, the more online courses you take, the less  likely you will be to graduate Glazier et al. 2019b; Johnson and Mejia  2014; Shea and Bidjerano 2018; Wavle and Ozogul 2019. Online  classes are challenging in a unique way, and there is a cumulative  effect of taking a lot of them. If you are able to add a couple of faceto-face classes to your course load, it will probably increase your success in the end. I know there are a lot of reasons why you may not be  able to take classes on campus. A student who lived far from campus  once said in a survey, I would hate to have to drive an hour and a  half each way just for one or two classes, and another who was taking an online class wrote, This class was a great fit for me due to my  kids and my health. It may not be possible to take a class on campus.  If not, think carefully about how many classes you are enrolling in. A  full load of five online classes is very challenging for anyone to complete successfully. Read the syllabus very carefully. No really, read every word. Professors spend a shocking amount of time crafting those documents, and  they tend to think of each syllabus as a detailed plan for that course.  They really schedule out exactly what you need to do to be successful  in the class, what assignments you will need to turn in, when they will  be due, what you will be required to read, when the final will be, and  so on. It is like a snapshot of the whole semester in one handy document. Take it seriously and refer back to it often. If you want to stay  on your professors good side, always check the syllabus first before  asking a question. Connect with other students in the class. Making friends in college  can be one of the highlights of the experience, so get to know the other  students in the class. Research shows that it not only makes the class  more enjoyable, but it can actually help you do better academically, as  well Bernard et al. 2009; McCabe 2016. You dont have to wait for 

Building a Support Network   171 the professor to assign a dreaded group project; you can reach out to  some of the other students in the class and get together for a virtual  study session before an exam. If there is an introductions thread in the  early weeks of your online class, use that as an opportunity to look  for similarities and connections with other students. Maybe there is  some one who has the same major as you do? Or lives in the same city?  Maybe another student in the class also wants to study environmental  law or hopes to work for a nonprofit? Send them a message and start  a conversation! Connecting with other students can help you do better  in the class, but it can also help you build a web of relationships that  will make your college experience richer Felten and Lambert 2020. Ask your professor for help when you need it. And dont be afraid to  ask early and often. I know that it might be intimidating to approach  the person who is the expert teaching your class, but it is literally  their job to answer your questions. You may run into the occasional  grumpy professor, but I think this advice will serve you well with  most of them. If you want them to give you the most helpful response  and have a positive opinion of you, I suggest first looking in the syllabus for the answer to your question see my recommendation about  reading the syllabus above and, if you dont find it there, try crafting a polite email that begins with Dear Professor last name here.  You may also want to try posting a question in an online discussion  board or chatting with some of the other students you have connected  withyou could even use your question as an opportunity to make  some connections and meet some of your fellow students in the class!  Many classes have general QA discussion boards and, if you have a  question, it is probably a safe bet that other students in the class have  the same question. Posting your question where the whole class can  see it can be a helpful way to clear up confusion for everyone. Another thing you might try is visiting your professor during office  hours. Professors are generally happy to see students and answer sincere questions during office hours. This time is specifically set aside  to talk to students! But professors are also generally overworked and  very busy, so if you pop by outside of office hours just to shoot the  breeze, it is possible they may get annoyed. I would come with a spe172   wHAT IT wILL TAkE cific question in mind. If you cant come to campus, you can always  suggest a meeting via Zoom or Google Meet, or even a phone call. Getting to know your professor will help you do better in the class  and will make it so you are less scared to ask for help if something  comes up. You dont have to take my word for it. A student volunteered this advice in a research study we did on online classes: I have  found that it is SO important to communicate with your professors  as a student. By communicating, you get to know your professor well,  and it seems to help learn information better. Its almost never too late to turn things around. It can be all too  easy for online classes to get away from you. If you put the deadline  in your calendar wrong, or do next weeks assignment this week, or  just forget to check in to the class because life gets busy, you may find  yourself behind before you know it. This is the time to reach out to  your professor, apologize, and ask if you can make a plan with them to  turn your assignment in and get back on track. Mathematically, turning in an assignment late and getting even 50 of the points is SO  much better than getting 0 of the points. Really, getting any points is  better than getting zero points. I hate giving students zero points. Even  the most unfriendly of professors might write you a cranky email, but  they will probably give you partial credit for late assignments, and  that can help you get back on track in the class. It is always better to  ask instead of thinking that its too late. The earlier you ask, the better.  The further past the original deadline you wait to turn something in,  the more likely it is that the professor will write you a cranky email.  Avoid cranky emails and stay on track by reaching out early if you  think you are in troubleor even just a little bit off course. Parents, Friends, and Mentors Generally speaking, by the time a student gets to college, there have  been a lot of people helping, encouraging, teaching, mentoring, cajoling, and even browbeating to get them there. These supporters are  a critical part of a students network and can also play a key role in  reversing the retention crisis. Unfortunately, online students may find 

Building a Support Network   173 themselves with fewer of these supporters than students in traditional  faceto-face classes. Many online students are categorized as nontraditional students, usually defined as over the age of 24 National  Center for Education Statistics 2020. They may have delayed enrollment and may have fulltime jobs and kids of their own. They may  feel like solid adults who dont require the nurturing support of a network of people that college students fresh out of high school might.  But if you know and care about a college student, especially one who  is taking online classes, there are things you can do to help support  their success, whether or not they think they need your support. It  doesnt matter if a student is 18 or 38 or 78, having a community of  people to cheer them on and support them will make their graduation  more likely. Ask students how their classes are going. And really listen to the  answer. It is easy to forget about or fall behind in online classes. Ask  them about whats going on in their online classes, what assignments  they have, when they are due, if they know their professor, what they  think of their classmates, what the course material is like, and so on.  Make sure that their online class stays on their mind and they cant  forget about it. One student respondent told my colleagues and me  in a survey, I was a new mom and didnt know what to expect with  online class. I had too many online courses and could not keep up  with the work load. Online classes are more work. Taking online  classes, especially for the first time, can be overwhelming. Check in  with the students you care about and see how they are doing. Help  them stay accountable. But just because online classes are challenging,  doesnt mean students should be discouraged. Another student survey respondent said, In any online class it really pulls out a persons  capability to do the work on their own, with some help of the instructor. For me, online classes make me feel more responsible and more  in charge of my grades. Online classes can be a great opportunity for  growth and learning, but only if students stay engaged. Take something off their plate. Rapport is a twoway street. Professors can try to connect with students, but students have to be willing  to respond. Making sure students have the resources to stay engaged 
wHAT IT wILL TAkE so that rapport building is possible is a task that supporters can really  help with. The students who enroll in online classes usually choose  them because they have a lot of other things going on in their lives.  The flexibility of online classes allows these students to maintain a  fullor parttime job, an unpredictable work schedule, or balance a  family while still going to college. We heard this time and again from  students, like the student who told us, I enjoy face to face classes  because I learn faster I think, but I am working full time and it is really  convenient to manage your own schedule with online classes. Data from my own university, the University of Arkansas at Little  Rock shared in figure 2.1 in chapter 2, indicates that when students  take a small number of online classesbut less than 50 of their  course loadtheir retention actually increases. For our student population, and many others, online classes add flexibility and help students  be more successful. Even for students who may be defined as traditional and live on campus, online classes can be helpful. One student  athlete wrote, I love faceto-face classes but sometimes you need to  take online classes. For me as an athlete I get overwhelmed with taking a lot of credit hours and having one or two online classes helps  me with time management and getting them done in my own time. These busy students are balancing work, family, athletics, and  school. They definitely have a lot going on! If you want to help them  do well in college, try to take something off their plate. Could you  watch the kids for the afternoon while they catch up on homework?  Are they taking on the bulk of the caretaker role for a sick or aging  relative that you could help with? Could you schedule them for more  accommodating work hours? It might make all the difference in the  world if you bring over dinner one night during midterms. Help students get access to a computer. This may come as a shock,  but online students may not have regular access to a computer. Eighty  percent of the students at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock are  firstgeneration college students, meaning neither of their parents have  college degrees Quick Facts 2019. Data from the American Community Survey reveals that in households where the parents have a bachelors degree or higher, 97 have a desktop or laptop computer. This 

Building a Support Network   175 number is only 70 for households where the parents have a high  school degree and 54 where the parents did not graduate from high  school Snyder, de Brey, and Dillow 2019, 767, figure 30. Some of our  students are growing up in homes without computers and are trying  to take online classes without consistent access to a computer. Data  from community college students indicate only about 85 of these  students have access to a laptop Gierdowski 2019. Indeed, for many students, the main way that they access their online  classes is through their smartphones. In 2018, 67 of college students reported doing some of their online coursework on their mobile  phones, and 20 of those students said that they did all of their online  coursework on their phones Magda and Aslanian 2018. In 2020,  74 of students reported that they want to use their mobile device for  online classes Magda, Capranos, and Aslanian 2020. This is our students preferred way of accessing online classes. Using a smartphone  is manageable for some course content, like posting on discussion  boards or watching videos, but there are students who are typing out  research papers on their phones. That is a highly inefficient and ineffective way to write a research paper, and they are unlikely to do well  on that assignment. Just imagine trying to add citations, connect back  to ideas earlier in the paper, or insert a table comparing data, all using  a smartphone. University campuses have computer labs, but students  in online classes may live far away from campus. Public libraries may  be a good resource for those needing to access computers, but reaching them takes time and gas, and sometimes the wait time for computers is long or the library closes before the student gets off work. If a student is going to take online classes, I strongly recommend  that they use a computer, preferably one that works well. Many of our  lowerincome students are working with older technology that breaks  down, doesnt hold a charge, or has trouble connecting Gonzales,  McCrory Calarco, and Lynch 2020. Relying on poorly functioning  laptops is associated with lower GPAs Gonzales, McCrory Calarco,  and Lynch 2020, and that effect can only be exacerbated when more  of the coursework is online. Students should also be socialized to back  up their work in online storage, like Google Drive or Dropbox, as fac176   wHAT IT wILL TAkE ulty are less likely to be understanding of computer crashes as latework excuses in the age of cloud storage. There are barebones laptops available for a few hundred dollars, which may be an extravagant  holiday or graduation gift for some families but may be out of reach  for many others. If you as a parent, friend, or mentor are able to gift,  hand down, or share a computer with a student taking online classes,  it can make a big difference. Help students get access to highspeed internet. In addition to  muddling through on a smartphone, many students are taking online  classes using inadequate or inconsistent internet access. Some of these  students are using data plans on their smartphones, with no consistent  WiFi connection at home. Some students may only have highspeed  internet while at work. Some students may stop at the local public  library to get access to the internet, or Starbucks, or McDonalds. The  limitations of our students WiFi access became startlingly and abundantly clear in the rush to move all of our classes online in response  to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. A survey of 1,764 students at  the University of Arkansas at Little Rock in March 2020 revealed  that only 85 of our student population had access to the internet  at home. The rest used the internet on campus, at work, or somewhere else. Not surprisingly, nearly 20 of our students were concerned about being able to access technology needed to complete their  schoolwork during the pandemic. Other surveys conducted during  the pandemic showed that up to 44 of students had difficulty with  internet connectivity when trying to access course materials or participate in course activities online Clark 2020; Means, Neisler, and with  Langer Research Associates 2020. Students who live in rural communities are especially at a disadvantage here Church and Prieger 2016; Perrin 2019; Rosenboom and  Blagg 2018. Many of my students in rural Arkansas simply dont  have the option of having highspeed internet in their homes. This is a  problem that individuals cant solve alonewe need the help of policy  makers to tackle it. When rural students do get internet access, they  often suffer from poor service or long outages in case of storms or  other problems. What can family and friends do to help? Well, if you 

Building a Support Network   177 have good internet at your place, invite online students over to use it  while they study. Give them a quiet room to work in and dont bother  them. If you dont have good internet either, offer to drive them to the  public library or the local McDonalds. If you are in a position to help,  consider assisting with a monthly WiFi bill. If they are running out of  data at the end of the month, consider letting them hotspot off your  phone if you have data to spare. Online students shouldnt be worried about whether they have enough data to stream a lecture video.  If and when it is clear that individuallevel fixes wont be enough, student advocates can contact elected representatives and ask about universal broadband. Administrators There are many wonderful and inspiring online teachers who, right  now, are changing lives and doing a great deal of good. And there are  many others who are talking with their colleagues, seeing the needs  of their students, and even reading this book, and thinking, I bet I  can make some adjustments. There is more I can do for our students.  But if we want to see the kind of change that will reverse the terrible  retention gaps that have been the norm of online higher education,  it is going to take more than individual teachers. It is going to take  leadership. Colleges and universities are in an online retention crisis. Because  online enrollments have continued to go up, administrators havent  had to confront this crisis head on. It has been possible for entire universities to bury their metaphorical heads in the sand and pretend it  isnt happening. But the online retention crisis is happening, and it  wont be reversed by individual faculty members picking up this book  and deciding to connect with their students. Individual instructors  can move the needle in their own classes, but college and university  administrators are the ones in the best position to help make institutional change to reverse a structural retention gap between online and  faceto-face classes. University administrators set priorities for budgets, create fac178   wHAT IT wILL TAkE ulty incentives, and determine what counts for teaching, professional  development, and service Jenkins 2011. Administrative leadership  is key to closing the retention gap between online and faceto-face  classes. The data presented in the previous chapters provides compelling evidence that the best and quickest way to close the online retention gap is to build rapport in online classes. How can administrators  support that effort? Provide opportunities for faculty training in how to teach with rapport. Although the vast majority of faculty who teach online classes at  colleges and universities in the United States right now have had training in online teaching Allen and Seaman 2011, most campuses focus  on the technical aspects of delivering online courses with little or no  attention paid to the pedagogical aspects Cox 2005; King and Alperstein 2014; Millward 2008; Xu and Jaggars 2011b. As one instructor said of their experience with campus training, It was glaringly  obvious from the moment I walked in that the course was taught by  someone who knew the technology inside out and backwards, but  had no sense of how to communicate that material Xu and Jaggars  2011b, 1780. It is no wonder most professors feel overwhelmed and unprepared  when they start teaching online Lichoro 2015; Shattuck 2013.  Whereas all professors have been in classrooms before and may have  an idea about what good teaching in a faceto-face class looks like,  many have never been online students before and have no idea what  good teaching in an online class looks like Schmidt, Tschida, and  Hodge 2016. The training most universities provide is almost entirely  logistical and technical, which means student relationships fall by  the wayside. In fact, what makes many instructors hesitant to teach  online, or feel insecure about their abilities to do so, is a lack of training Paechter, Maier, and Macher 2010. Faculty regularly dont feel prepared or supported sufficiently for  online teaching Shattuck 2013; Wray et al. 2008. But once faculty  are shown that it is possible to connect with students online, they generally want to do it. As faculty were preparing to teach another pandemic term in the fall of 2020, a major survey of more than 3,500 

Building a Support Network   179 faculty showed 71 said their top priority was increasing student  engagement in class, up from 57 just three months earlier Fox et al.  2020, 17. The same survey also showed that 91 of responding faculty said that they had engaged with professional development at their  institution in preparation for the fall Fox et al. 2020, 28, so if you  want to prioritize rapport and train your faculty on it, you are likely  to find some takers! Faculty want to be there for their students. Talking and brainstorming with other online teachers about rapportbuilding strategies, like  those shared in chapter 4, can be invigorating and inspirational. When  I lead faculty workshops on rapport building, faculty leave excited to  make adjustments in their courses right away, giving comments like I  hadnt realized just how many places I could add communication that  might reassure and engage students and I cant wait to learn how  to use the Mail Merge with Attachments addon. Its going to save  me so much time and still enable me to send personalized feedback  to students. Once faculty have these opportunities, and learn about  what an impact they can have by building rapport, they often want to  continue to connect with their online students. As one faculty member who completed the humanizing training conducted by Michelle  PacanskyBrock and her colleagues put it, My presence matters so  much more than I thought. I was guilty of trying to be a neutral voice  with a professional aka sterile presentation of content. I see now  that being active, responsive, present, and empathetic is so vital to . . .  my students PacanskyBrock, Smedshammer, and VincentLayton  2020, 23. When faculty start making real human connections in their  classes, it is hard to see teaching online any other way. Training and mentorship can thus make online teaching much  more appealing to faculty Chapman 2011, but this training needs  to go beyond just the technicalities of navigating Learning Management Systems. When it comes to familiarizing new online instructors  with how online courses are organized, technologyfocused programs  may be helpful, but they teach faculty nothing about actually interacting with students online. A checklist approach that focuses solely  on design can actually end up making courses feel like impersonal 
wHAT IT wILL TAkE cookiecutter replicas to the students who take them. Faculty can  also get bogged down in learning the intricacies and latest features of  the newest Blackboard add-on or Canvas app and not stop to think  about what pedagogical goal it might meet. When researchers talk to  new online faculty, they quickly find out that faculty are desperate to  learn about online pedagogythey want to see more focus on course  design and pedagogy and less on technology Schmidt, Tschida, and  Hodge 2016, 5. A training approach like the Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge Framework TPACK that integrates technical  knowledge e.g., recording and uploading videos with pedagogy e.g.,  building rapport or designing engaging assignments and fieldspecific  content e.g., political science or biology is likely to be more effective  Herring, Koehler, and Mishra 2016; Koehler et al. 2014. Instead of  an end in itself, technology is the medium through which teaching and  learning happen. An increasing number of faculty voices, like those of Sean Michael  Morris and Jesse Stommel of the Digital Pedagogy Lab, are coming  forward to argue that we should emphasize teaching over technology  Morris and Stommel 2018. Moore and Fetzner 2009, 8 similarly  find that programs that are closing the retention gap are separating  pedagogy and technologyteaching centers emphasize pedagogy and  work with faculty, while specific support staff are assigned to handle  the tedious technology management tasks of checking course links and  uploading files. Xu and Jaggars 2011b argue that faculty need training beyond just how to use the Learning Management System; faculty  need training opportunities that allow them to delve more deeply  into issues of online quality and pedagogy p. 23. Others argue that  technology, pedagogy, and content are inextricably linked Herring,  Koehler, and Mishra 2016, 1 and faculty professional development is  critically important in each area Rapanta et al. 2020. Pedagogical training is especially important for faculty because students arent the only ones who feel the interpersonal distance in online  education. Faculty may be reluctant to teach online because they miss  interacting with students Lin 2002; Nelson 2003; Shattuck 2013.  They may see online classes as cold and boringwho would want to 

Building a Support Network   181 teach there when they could teach a faceto-face seminar filled with  smart students engaging in thoughtful discussion? Teaching online can  be downright isolating for instructors Duncan and Barnett 2009.  They dont have many opportunities to reflect and share best practices with one another Capra 2011. This is one reason why training  can be so helpful. Good administrators will provide their online faculty with opportunities to engage in meaningful pedagogical training,  where they can learn and share ideas with fellow faculty members  about how to build rapport with their students. In short, administrators need to offer, incentivize, and even require  rapportbased training for online instructors. Administrators help  set the culture of their campus when it comes to online teaching  and learning. This expectationsetting role leads directly to the next  rec om men dation. Create a campus culture that values good online teaching. Administrators cant dictate caring about students from the top down, and  they cant request the faculty senate pass legislation to do so either. But  administrators can have a major impact on the culture of a university,  and they can help foster a culture that values and rewards faculty who  genuinely care about their students. Vincent Tinto, one of the leading  voices in the scholarship of college student success since the 1970s,  has not held back in his criticism of institutionallevel deficiencies, saying, Most institutions do not align their reward systems to the goal  of enhanced student retention. It is one thing to talk about the importance of increasing student retention, it is another to invest scarce  resources and adopt institutional faculty and staff reward systems that  promote the behaviors that would reinforce that goal Tinto 2006,  9. If administrators care about reversing the online retention crisis,  they have to invest resourcestime, money, and agenda spaceto  address it by creating a campus culture that centers relationships and  rapport. The key to creating a campus culture that values good online teaching is having faculty who value good online teaching. Creating a new  culture begins by hiring faculty members who have prioritized teaching in their graduate work. If you want to have the kind of faculty 
wHAT IT wILL TAkE who will voluntarily attend training sessions about building rapport  to help retain their online students, you need to hire faculty who care  about teaching. The elephant in the room is the question of who teaches online  courses. At many universities, online classes are taught by overworked  and underpaid parttime faculty Mandernach, Register, and ODonnell 2015. These contingent faculty are often either teaching across  multiple campuses or teaching in addition to their day job. For  these faculty members, who likely dont participate in departmental  peer reviews and dont go up for tenure, the structural incentives to  improve online retention through the resourceintensive processes of  building rapport are simply not there, although the personal incentives may be. Faculty who are teaching exclusively online, who arent  on campusand possibly not even in the same city as the universitywill be less able to connect with and help students who are taking a mix of faceto-face and online classes Arnsparger and Drivalas  2016; Kezar, DePaola, and Scott 2019. They are also more likely to  be teaching large introductory and prerequisite classes, often known  for low retention rates, further compounding the problem Kezar,  DePaola, and Scott 2019; Wladis, Conway, and Hachey 2014. There is a solid argument to be made that the treatment of contingent faculty in higher education today is unethical Kezar and Maxey  2014b. This treatment matters not just for contingent faculty but  also for students. Research suggests that courses taught by contingent faculty can harm student learning by limiting the ability of faculty to invest in relationships with students and build community in  their classes Kezar, DePaola, and Scott 2019, 97. When students are  taught by contingent faculty, the research indicates that it has negative effects on their retention and success, including lower graduation  rates Ehrenberg and Zhang 2005; Jaeger and Eagan 2009, reduced  yearto-year retention Jaeger and Eagan 2011, reduced likelihood  of subsequent course enrollments Ran and Xu 2019, and particularly negative outcomes for lowerincome, firstgeneration, and students of color Kezar, DePaola, and Scott 2019, 99. Programs should 

Building a Support Network   183 not rely solely or primarily on parttime and adjunct faculty to teach  their online classes. If administrators want faculty who are going to invest in building relationships with students to facilitate their success, they need to  invest in fulltime, tenuretrack faculty to teach in online programs.  Underpaid adjuncts who are stretched thin across multiple campuses  with little job security do not have the institutional incentives to invest  in rapport like tenuretrack faculty do. Of course, if those institutional  incentives dont exist for tenuretrack faculty either, you are unlikely  to see a difference. At some research universities, where new faculty  are told to focus their energies on securing as many publications as  possible in order to build a strong tenure case and to aim for satisfactory teaching, the incentive structure is clearly not aligned toward student success. Research even suggests an additional, gender dynamic  at play: women are more likely to win teaching awards, but only in  institutional contexts where research is valued more than teaching  Butcher and Kersey 2014. Some studies indicate that contingent faculty are actually better teachers because they are not systematically  incentivized to minimize the time they spend on teaching, as some  of their researchintensive tenuretrack colleagues areand student  evaluation data tend to support that argument Figlio, Schapiro, and  Soter 2015; Lowenthal, Bauer, and Chen 2015. If administrators  want good online teaching, they have to incentivize it. My intent is not to malign either the overworked adjunct faculty  member teaching at multiple colleges or the harried junior faculty  member feeling the pressure to publish or perish. My intent is to  point out the importance of instructors in online classes. The more  present and engaged instructors can be to build rapport with students,  the more likely students will be to pass the class and stay enrolled. Any  system that makes building rapport between faculty and students difficultwhether because of an increasing reliance on adjuncts who are  rushing from one campus to another to make ends meet, or because of  tenuretrack faculty who are necessarily putting more of their attention on research as tenure expectations continue to mountruns 
wHAT IT wILL TAkE counter to what students want and to what is most likely to help them  succeed, no matter the teaching medium Arnsparger and Drivalas  2016. The model we currently havewhat Kezar, DePaola, and Scott  2019 call the gig academyis not working. We need to reevaluate  how we view online teaching and learning, how we recruit and incentivize both contingent and tenured tenuretrack faculty, and how we  interact with online students. Administrators are uniquely positioned  to help shift their campus cultures. Institutions of higher education in the United States can be wildly  different from one another, but even major research universities are  offering more online classes. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic  changed higher education in ways that will likely be felt for years to  come. There are many things administrators can do to show that they  value teaching and that they value faculty members who care about  their students. Programs that are successfully closing the retention gap  between online and faceto-face classes have award and recognition  programs to honor excellent online teachers and to encourage innovation. They offer incentives to teach online, ongoing professional development, and support to make sure that faculty are happy teaching  online Bailey et al. 2018; Moore and Fetzner 2009. If administrators care about and prioritize teaching, their priorities will help shift  the culture of their institutions toward a more studentcentered ethic. Institutions can also offer support to help reduce the responsibility  of building rapport. It should not fall entirely on instructors. If administrators are helping to build a culture of rapport, students should feel  supported and connected all over campus. This is what the staff of  eCore at the University of Georgia did Zatynsk 2013. They reached  out to struggling students so that the entire burden wasnt on faculty  alone. Arizona State University provides 24 7 tech support, as well  as online tutoring and support from retention coaches Bailey et al.  2018. At my own university, the Department of Rhetoric and Writing has  sought to build a culture of rapport that involves both faculty and  students in collaborative mentoring relationships . . ., in which the  professors make an effort to get to know their students and also allow 

Building a Support Network   185 themselves to be known as people Thomas et al. 2020, 9. From the  time students reach out to the department to inquire about a class or  program, they receive individual attention from a faculty member and  advising that is tailored to their needs, creating what Dr. Heidi Skurat Harris, the graduate coordinator in the department, calls a continuum of rapport from recruitment through matriculation Skurat  Harris 2020. Although administrators tend to think that only more money will  get their faculty to teach online, faculty dont rank pay particularly  high in importance as a reason for teaching online classes Allen and  Seaman 2008. Instead, most faculty are motivated to teach online for  intrinsic reasonsthey want to be flexible in helping to meet students  needs and reach diverse students, and they also enjoy the challenge  of working in a new medium Orr, Williams, and Pennington 2009;  Shattuck 2013; Shea, Pickett, and Li 2005. Thus, administrators will  likely not have to dedicate a great deal of resources to incentivize faculty to be trained in methods to improve retention. A course release  is especially useful when developing an online class for the first time  Marek 2009 or significantly revising it to include rapport elements.  Other positive incentives could include faculty development grants,  a new laptop, support for conference attendance, explicit consideration in tenure and promotion, a small increase in salary for trained  faculty, or other benefits Bettinger and Long 2010; Xu and Jaggars  2011b. Keep in mind that contingent faculty need training and mentoring opportunities as well Kezar, DePaola, and Scott 2019, which  are rarely available to them currently. Provide an orientation for online students. Beyond helping online  instructors do better at teaching online classes, administrators can  help online students get better at learning in online classes. There are  valuable technical skills and study strategies that can help students  succeed in online classes, which they may not develop in their faceto-face classes. The skills needed both to teach an online class and to  learn in an online class are different from the skills needed to teach  and learn in a faceto-face class. Simply moving faceto-face courses  online is not sufficient if we want to actually retain our online students 
wHAT IT wILL TAkE Cox 2006; Jaggars and Xu 2016; Xu and Xu 2019. Both instructors  and students need to adjust and treat online classes differently. Some universities have had success with requiring online students  to attend faceto-face orientations, as we saw in chapter 2. Making  personal contact through an orientation can help students connect  with the campus and the support resources there, but it may be a burden on students who live far from campus, dont have the resources to  take off work, or dont have reliable transportation to attend. Remember that the promise of online higher education is its ability to expand  access to students who would otherwise be unable to attend college.  Expecting those students to behave like traditional college students  and attend an in-person orientation may not be a fair expectation. An online orientation or an online readiness assessment is another  option Xu and Jaggars 2011b. Having students complete some kind  of online information program can ensure that every student taking  online courses has a baseline of knowledge about how to navigate the  Learning Management System, the importance of the course syllabus,  resources available to support them on campus, and the availability  of their professors should they need help. This should be paired with  rapport training for professors so that students arent unpleasantly  surprised when they start an online class and find a distant, unavailable instructor who doesnt answer questions. A selfassessment component to an online orientation program,  possibly coming around the time of registration, could be particularly  helpful for online students. It could provide students with data on  success rates at different online course loads, expected hourly workload commitments, and research on best practices for success. Students could then selfassess how many online classes they are prepared  to take, if any, without any automatic gatekeeping by the system. The  help of an academic advisor in the process could result in even more  informed choices. If the selfassessment included some questions  about selfregulation and study skills, as well as computer and internet access, it could help the student determine their level of readiness  for the particular challenges of online classes and, if they may not  be quite ready to succeed, point the student in the direction of speBuilding a Support Network   187 cific support systems at the university, like technology training, laptop  checkout, timemanagement classes, or advising help to find classes  that will work better for their schedule and learning style Xu and  Jaggars 2011b. This approach gives students autonomy over their educational decisions and sends them the message that we trust them to make those  decisions. At the same time, it lets students know that we are here with  support resources whenever they need them. That is the kind of message our online studentsand all of our studentsneed to hear over  and again: You can do this. If you need help, youve got backup. We  are on your side and well do whatever we can to help you succeed. Encourage online students to take some classes on campus. Through  the process of taking an online selfassessment, students should see the  data that show retention dropping when students take all of their  classes online. This will hopefully encourage them to take some classes  on campus, if they can. This may not be possible for every student, but  research I have published with colleagues from the University of Central Florida shows that any increase in faceto-face courses increases a  students success Glazier et al. 2019b; Hamann et al. 2020. Administrators can come in with creative solutions to enable students to take faceto-face classes and improve their chances of graduating. Some students may take all online classes because they live too  far away to regularly come to campus. It may be a long commute to  campus, but if there were a small scholarship available to pay for the  cost of that single faceto-face course, as well as the cost of gas and  an oncampus parking permit for the semester, you may be able to get  more students on campus. Perhaps a childcare scholarship would be  a helpful way to get some additional students on campus for one or  two classes. There havent been many initiatives like this, so there isnt  data on their impact on student success, but it may be that helping  students get on campus, meet and connect with at least one professor  faceto-face, connect with some of their classmates, and reach some  campus resources, may increase their chance of success through the  rest of their college career. It would be well worth the investment if the  payoff were a successfully retained and graduated student.
wHAT IT wILL TAkE What Success Looks Like: Case Studies of   Three Different Institutions As faculty and administrators contemplate how they might implement rapport at their own institutions, it might be helpful to consider  examples of specific cases where a rapportcentric focus has yielded  positive outcomes for students. Here, I briefly present three such cases,  from diverse institutions, as examples of the different ways that prioritizing rapport can benefit students and improve retention. Now,  as I noted in chapter 2, my scientific bias is toward peerreviewed  academic studies that control for as many potential intervening variables as possible. These case studies are not that. This book has been  filled with citations of those kinds of studies, as well as experimental and survey research I have conducted myself. These case studies  are intended to give readers an idea of what the actual application of  rapportbuilding looks like at real colleges and universities. The first two cases come from community colleges in California,  both of which have benefited from placing a strong emphasis on hu manizing in their online faculty trainings under the leadership of  Michelle PacanskyBrock. Southwestern College has seen a remarkable improvement in its retention numbers in just two short years.  And Modesto Junior College has focused its rapportbuilding efforts  on equity and dramatically improved online retention for Black and  Hispanic students. Unlike the two community college case studies, the third case study  is the University of Central Florida, a major research university with  a huge student population. Its early investment in rapportcentric  faculty development has led to a sustained elimination of the online  retention gap and online retention numbers over 90. Together, these  case studies illustrate that there is no one way to build rapport and no  single institutional model by which rapportbuilding improves retention. The strategy of building rapport with students can be implemented with whatever means and level of commitment you can convince your institution to put toward it.

Building a Support Network   189 Southwestern College More than 28,000 students attend Southwestern College, a regional  community college in southern California. In recent years, Southwestern has invested in its faculty, placing increased emphasis on training  online teachers, including through a fiveweek, fully online training  program called Distance Education Faculty Training DEFT. Faculty are required to undergo training before teaching online or hybrid  classes at Southwestern and the DEFT program in particular emphasizes the importance of humanizing the online classroom and connecting with students. What is unique about the DEFT program at Southwestern College  is that, through the program, faculty participate in a longterm online  training course as students. As Tracy Schaelen, the Distance Education  Faculty coordinator at Southwestern College, explained it, Facilitators of DEFT model the supportive, humanized approach to instruction that we are teaching our faculty, so participants experience a  humanized online course from a student perspective. They tell us that  this is eyeopening and leads to greater empathy Schaelen 2020.  Indeed, faculty who attend the training leave comments showing  just how much seeing the class through the eyes of a student changes  the way they teach. Schaelen shared some of these comments. For  instance, one instructor said, I am a very encouraging professor, usually, but I never realized how important it was to get those kudos! It  makes me feel special, important, valued, and worthy. Another professor who went through the training commented on how doing so  helped familiarize them with reaching out through technology: It  was a little nervewracking at first, but now I feel completely comfortable with reaching out electronically and seeing myself online through  videos and images Schaelen 2020. Faculty are not the only ones becoming better acquainted with  online learning at Southwestern College. Students are encouraged to  determine if they are ready for online classes through an online readiness quiz; they are invited to attend a free orientation to online learn190   wHAT IT wILL TAkE ing and Canvas, the Learning Management System the campus uses;  and they are encouraged to complete the selfpaced Quest for Online  Success microcourse to prepare for their first online class Southwestern College 2020. Since the DEFT program began, with its emphasis on humanizing online classrooms and seeing the online teaching and learning  process through the students eyes, Southwestern College has significantly improved the percentage of students who are successfully passing their online classes with a C or better, up from 62.1 to 67.8  in just two years Schaelen 2020. Retention rates in hybrid classes are  similarly up from 65.3 to 71.5. What is especially noteworthy about the case of Southwestern College is how quickly these numbers moved as a result of rapportcentric  faculty training in online teaching. The retention gap between faceto  face and online classes was nearly cut in half, shrinking from 8.1 to  4.6 percentage points, and the gap between faceto-face and hybrid  courses was virtually eliminated, dropping from 4.9 all the way to  0.9, in only two years. Not only does making real human connections  with students make a difference for their successit does so remarkably quickly. The positive impact this rapportfocused professional development  is having reaches beyond just the online classes the trained faculty go  on to teach. Tracy Schaelen says, Faculty regularly tell us that learning how to teach online has improved their in-person teaching, too,  and that really resonates with me; at its heart, good online teaching is  simply good teaching. And good teachers know that it all starts with  human connections Schaelen 2020. Modesto Junior College Modesto Junior College MJC is one of the oldest community colleges in California and today serves a diverse student body of over  18,000, only about 32 of whom identify as nonHispanic white,  and more than half of whom receive federal Pell Grants About MJC  2020. Like many community colleges, Modesto Junior College serves 

Building a Support Network   191 an increasing number of online studentsthe number of students taking at least one online class increased from 10 in 2013 to 28 in  2018 Smedshammer et al. 2018. Since 2012, nearly every faculty  member who has taught online at MJC has received training, including through the ONE Project at the California Community College  Online Education Initiative OEI, known for its rigor and focus on  humanizing ONE Online Network of Educators 2020. Additionally, since 2016, the online training program for faculty  at MJC has explicitly focused on equity, working with the Center for  Urban Excellence at USC to offer training, and with Professor Luke  Wood from San Diego State University to form the Minority Male  Collaborative and offer the open online course Black Minds Matter  Smedshammer et al. 2018, 7. These training programs have explicitly focused on connecting faculty and students, built around principles of humanizing the online classroom and intrusive instruction  Smedshammer et al. 2018, 7; Kaupp 2012; PacanskyBrock 2020;  Wood and Turner 2010. Between 2012 and 2017, the retention gap between online and  faceto-face classes at MJC shrank from 7 points down to 2. Even  more impressive are the gains that MJC has made in closing the racial  disparity gaps in online education. In 2010, white students in online  classes at MJC were successfully passing their classes with a grade of  C or better 56 of the time, while Hispanic students were only successfully passing about 44 of the time. By 2017, those numbers  were 68 and 64, respectively. Not only did MJC make doubledigit improvements in retention for both groups of students, but they  also narrowed the gap between them, from 12 to only 4. The  data for Black students at MJC are even more impressive. In 2015, the  year before their equity training program began, Black students successfully passed their online classes only 30 of the time. Only two  years later, in 2017, that number had increased an impressive 25,  to 55. The dedicated faculty and staff at MJC arent stopping there,  saying, Training efforts will continue to focus on this area, as more  work needs to be done Smedshammer et al. 2018, 6. Although this  was not a controlled study, the focused equity training and immedi192   wHAT IT wILL TAkE ate equity gains indicate the work these faculty are doing is having a  positive impact. Modesto Junior College is a great example of how building rapport  with underserved students can lead to immediate and positive results.  The research is clear: when Black and Hispanic students talk with  faculty, have informal conversations with them, and are mentored by  them, they are significantly more likely to be successful Kaupp 2012;  Wood 2014a; Wood and Turner 2010; Wood and Williams 2013.  And we know faculty contact and relationships are especially important for students of color in online classes Merrills 2010; Palacios and  Wood 2016; Rovai and Wighting 2005. We see this playing out in  a very real way at Modesto Junior College. Dr. Michael Smedshammer, the distance education coordinator at MJC, says of their rapportfocused training and approach to online teaching, Humanizing is our  best opportunity to reach the most vulnerable students Smedshammer 2020. The University of Central Florida With an enrolled student population of nearly 70,000 in 2020, the  University of Central Florida UCF is one of the largest universities in  the United States UCF Facts 2020. Because UCF has faced the challenge of having more students than classroom space, it invested early  on in online classes and online faculty. Today, many students at UCF  take a mix of online, hybrid, and faceto-face classes. UCF is a major research university that attracts an elite student  bodyand its students are very successful. In spring 2019, 89 of  students in faceto-face classes successfully passed with a C or better.  Even more impressive, that same semester, 92 of students in hybrid  classes and 91 of students in online classes passed with a C or better Moskal 2020. That means that, at UCF, online and hybrid retention is actually higher than faceto-face retention. UCF has not only  closed the retention gap; its online students are succeeding at higher  rates than its faceto-face students. This is not a new development at UCF. Thanks to a longterm investBuilding a Support Network   193 ment in faculty professional development, a robust datacollection  effort, and an emphasis on learning from rigorous scholarship on  online teaching, UCF has had a very small or nonexistent online retention gap for nearly a decade Dziuban et al. 2012, all while enrolling  tens of thousands of students in online classes each semester. The faculty online training and support infrastructure at UCF  is extensive and reflects the universitys decision to prioritize highquality online teaching. All faculty who teach online, whether fully  online or through hybrid courses, are required to complete an 80-hour  boot camp on digital learning. An administrator there says that this  level of training and commitment sets a cultural expectation Bailey  et al. 2018, 42. As Dr. Patsy D. Moskal, the director of Digital Learning Impact Evaluation at UCF told me, The faculty development  focuses not only on learning the digital learning tools to teach, but  more importantly on quality pedagogy Moskal 2020. At UCF, its  not just about moving your course online, but about rethinking the  best way to teach in the online medium. Faculty members are individually paired up with instructional designers, and they also work  with graphic artists, video teams, animators, and game designers in  the Center for Distributed Learning to create engaging and innovative  online courses Center for Distributed Learning 2020a. The Office of Digital Learning Impact Evaluation at UCF also works  with faculty to evaluate the impact of their pedagogical innovations  and to publish peerreviewed articles. Dozens of academic articles on  the scholarship of teaching and learning have come out of this office  Center for Distributed Learning 2020b, reflecting a commitment to  rigorous scholarship and learning best practices. The University of Central Florida also pays close attention to the  data generated from all of those students, faculty, and classes. Using  a proprietary datamining platform developed by the Center for Distributed Learning, the Executive Information System EIS, it brings  together data from many disparate information streams across campus to inform decision makers Dziuban et al. 2012. But, as Chuck  Dziuban, the director of UCFs Research Initiative for Teaching Effectiveness, and colleagues write in a 2012 publication on the use of data 
wHAT IT wILL TAkE to inform university decision making, Data do not make decisions,  people do Dziuban et al. 2012, 27. Its the personal touch that really  makes a difference at UCF. UCF uses its data to improve programs, to help determine which  programs might be ready to go fully online, and to alert faculty and  mentors to personally reach out to students who may be struggling.  Faculty who have highrapport relationships with their students are  critical to the success of the datacollection effort. As Dziuban and  colleagues write, Engaged faculty are much more likely to use analytics for helping students achieve success, in some cases, by additional  personal intervention when possible Dziuban et al. 2012, 27. This  approach capitalizes on an institutional culture that values personal  connections and rewards engaged faculty. The model at UCF may represent an ideal that seems almost  un achievablean online retention rate over 90, a completely eliminated online retention gap, and significant, longterm investments in  highquality professional development for online faculty. UCF began  with a problem of classroom space and decided that it was going to  provide its students with excellent online courses. It got there through  a focus on people and pedagogy. Although the scale of the online program at UCF is one that most institutions dont even dream of, the  notion that administration sets the cultural expectations for the campus holds, even if the budgetary and time constraints are different. It  is imminently possible to scale UCFs rapportcentric approach down  to the size and budget of your own institution. Where to Begin? If you are ready to change the culture of your institution and move  toward a greater focus on building rapport with students, but you  arent sure where to begin, here are a series of increasingly involved  steps to get you started. 1. Start a faculty rapport group. Get a group of faculty together it could be just a few friends or it could be your entire collegeand  talk about some of the ideas in this book. You could read the whole 

Building a Support Network   195 book together. But, if you are short on time, you could get a faculty  rapport group together just to discuss chapter 4, or even just table 4.1  the one with the ideas about building rapport. Share what you are  already doing in your online classes to build rapport and brainstorm  new ideas together. Come back together after you have tried a few  things in your classes and talk about how they went. Share some of  the nice emails you get from students and talk about how to support  the students who are struggling. Beyond discussing a single book, creating a faculty book group can be a useful professional development  resource, bringing together diverse faculty for what can be powerful experiences learning and sharing Burbank, Kauchak, and Bates  2010; White 2016. Some have even had success with asynchronous  online book groups Porath 2018. Administrators can use professional development funds to buy copies of the book for faculty, supply  refreshments for group meetings, and even provide a small stipend for  the discussion leaders. As an added bonus, faculty in a rapport group  will be building rapport with each other, while they learn about building rapport with their students, and they exchange ideas about how to  build rapport. Its like the rapport trifecta! 2. Find the rapport builders on your campus. There are already faculty on your campus who are making real human connections with  students and helping them succeed. Maybe you are one of them! If  you dont know who they are, ask the students. They can tell you. And  there are likely other people on campus e.g., your university might  have instructional design staff or other administrators focused on pedagogy, online andor offline who have already been thinking about  rapport building in its many forms. Once you find them, invite these  rapport builders to share what they are doing in their classes. This can  be at informal brown bag lunches or roundtable conversations. These  lessformal professional development opportunities can be really valuable to faculty Schmidt, Tschida, and Hodge 2016. Administrators  should be looking for the rapport builders on their own campuses and  drawing on their expertise. Use professional development funds to  support them in providing formal online teacher trainings. Consider  sending them to more advanced trainings and then teaching others 
wHAT IT wILL TAkE what they learned when they come back. Value the time and expertise  of your faculty. Bake them cookies or give them a small gift card. Use  professional development funds to pay them an honorarium for training or for taking on new or challenging online classes. 3. Look at your data. Nearly every campus has internal datacollection operations, usually through an office of institutional research, or something similar. Talk to your data office about where your   online retention numbers are the lowest. Where are you losing the  most students? There are probably some large firstyear courses being  taught online that have low retention rates, but the retention gap may  be the widest in upperdivision classes Mensch 2017; Wladis, Conway, and Hachey 2017. Consider putting some highrapport teachers into those courses andor prioritize training the faculty who are  teaching those classes in how to teach with rapport. Talk to faculty  about how to access their own retention data. They will probably be  shocked to see how much lower their numbers are for their online  classes compared to their faceto-face classes. As you make changes,  either on an individual or an institutional level, collect data! That way,  you can know what effect your rapportbuilding efforts are having,  faculty can publish in peerreviewed journals, and you can appeal for  more funding for rapportbased initiatives based on the evidence of  your success. 4. Start a campuswide rapportbuilding movement. If you really  want to change things for the better for your students and see significant improvements in retention across the board, you likely need  a culture shift. You need a campuswide movement toward building rapport. This is bigger than any single professor and can include  all kinds of creative ways of getting the entire campus excited about  making connections and building rapport. Your movement might  include things like: a studentselected online rapport builder award,  departmentlevel retention improvement grants, a campuswide big  read, holding trainings, bringing in speakers, funding travel to teaching conferences, publicizing kind student comments about online professors who went the extra mile, and so on. A movement like that  would likely take a big investment and a commitment from leaderBuilding a Support Network   197 shipthe funding and organization for many of these ideas would  need to come from administratorsbut it could result in a campus  with an entirely different attitude about online education. Living Up to the Promise of Online Higher Education There is a great deal of promise in online higher education, but we will  miss our opportunity to realize this promise if we allow our online  students to keep failing and dropping out at such high rates. It is  unacceptable to continue to see such a yawning gap between online  and faceto-face retention rates as the norm. We owe it to our online  students to do better. Even if it takes more work on our part. Even if  its hard. The higher education system we have now is suffering from an  online retention crisis, but the system we can createthrough prioritizing facultystudent relationships in online classes and building rapportcan lead to more students graduating and improving life for  themselves and their families, more fulfilling teaching experiences for  online instructors, and more stable enrollment numbers for colleges  and universities. This is a future we can start creating right now. Every  professor teaching an online course has the ability to connect with  their students and let them know that we are pulling for them. It will  make a real, measurable difference in their success.

This page intentionally left blank 

APPENDIX A: PreSemester Survey  1.  First Name  2.  Last Name  3.  Preferred Namewhat do you like to go by?  4.  Preferred pronouns multiple choice: she her hers, he him his, they  them theirs  5.  What are you most looking forward to about this class?  6.  Is there anything that worries you about this class?  7.  Do you have anything going on this semester that might make it difficult for you to succeed in this class?  8.  What show are you binge watching right now?  9.  If you had 10,000 and two weeks that you had to spend traveling,  where would you go?  10.  What is your major?  11.  How do you feel about online classes?  12.  Is there anything else you want me to know?

APPENDIX B: Rapport Emails 1. Welcome emailsent about one week before classes start This is the unmerged version: Hi First Name, Welcome to Introduction to International Politics POLS 2303! First  Term I hope that you had a great winter break and are looking forward  to an exciting class. There are all kinds of interesting political things going  on in the world, so we are going to have a lot to talk about. Our class will officially start with the semester on Tuesday, January 21.  Until then, you cant get into Blackboard, but I wanted to write now to  touch base and give you a heads up about what to expect. I have attached  the course syllabus here for you. It is a really important document, so I  wanted to make sure you got a look at it as soon as possible. Also, I wanted to make sure you know about our totally online course  textbook, which will be available from our course Blackboard site. I have  attached a document here letting you know how this whole online textbook thing works. The textbook is really important because you have two textbook sec tions and short quizzes due by Monday, January 27. Feel free to get  started as soon as the Blackboard course opens so you are sure to have  them done before the due date. Also, First Name, Major If you ever need anything at all, just ask! If you have a preferred name  or pronouns you would like me to use, please just let me know that and  some other important stuff in this short survey: survey link. I want you  to succeed in our class, so please say the word if I can do anything to help  you. Looking forward to a great semester! Take care, Dr. Glazier

Rapport Emails   201 This is a version that has been merged in Gmail mail merge: Hi Jaelyn, Welcome to Introduction to International Politics POLS 2303! And  welcome back to another semester at UA Little Rock! I hope that you had  a great winter break and are looking forward to an exciting class. There  are all kinds of interesting political things going on in the world, so we are  going to have a lot to talk about. Our class will officially start with the semester on Tuesday, January 21.  Until then, you cant get into Blackboard, but I wanted to write now to  touch base and give you a heads up about what to expect. I have attached  the course syllabus here for you. It is a really important document, so I  wanted to make sure you got a look at it as soon as possible. Also, I wanted to make sure you know about our totally online course  textbook, which will be available from our course Blackboard site. I have  attached a document here letting you know how this whole online textbook thing works. The textbook is really important because you have two textbook   sections and short quizzes due by Monday, January 27. Feel free to get  started as soon as the Blackboard course opens so you are sure to have  them done before the due date. Also, Jaelyn, I just wanted to let you know even though political science  is not your major and this class is probably just a core requirement for you,  I will still do my best to make the class interesting, engaging, and helpful for your life in general. If everything goes as planned, you will develop  some research, writing, and critical thinking skills that will serve you well.  And you can always declare a political science major if you want to! If you ever need anything at all, just ask! If you have a preferred name  or pronoun you would like me to use, please just let me know that and  some other important stuff in this short survey: Intro to International Politics Survey. I want you to succeed in our class, so please say the word if I  can do anything to help you. Looking forward to a great semester! Take care, Dr. Glazier
APPENdIx B 2. A checkin email after 3 weeks of a 15week semester This is the unmerged version: Hi First Name, I hope that you are doing well and that your semester is going  smoothly. I know that using a totally online textbook can take some getting used to, so I wanted to check in with you and see how it is going. I just took a look at the scores and it looks like you are score comment Your average grade for the first three reading assignments is  score. Additional comment The textbook readings and quizzes make up 15 of your total grade,  so definitely pay attention to these assignments! Your next reading assignment is due on Monday, February 17. It is the last one before your first  exam, so definitely pay close attention! Do you have any concerns or is there anything I can do to help you  succeed? Please let me know! All the best, Dr. Glazier This is a version that has been merged in Gmail mail merge: Hi Cole, I hope that you are doing well and that your semester is going  smoothly. I know that using a totally online textbook can take some   getting used to, so I wanted to check in with you and see how it is   going. I just took a look at the scores and it looks like you are struggling a  bit, mostly because you missed this weeks deadline. If you need an extension, just let me know. I would hate for you to have a zero. Your average  grade for the first three reading assignments is 45. I dont think that score  reflects your abilities, so get those quizzes in on time and lets see some  higher scores! The textbook readings and quizzes make up 15 of your total grade,  so definitely pay attention to these assignments! Your next reading assignment is due on Monday, February 17. It is the last one before your first  exam, so definitely pay close attention! Do you have any concerns or is there anything I can do to help you  succeed? Please let me know! All the best, Dr. Glazier

Rapport Emails   203 3. An assignment reminder email about their satire assignment This is the unmerged version: Hi First Name, I hope that you are doing well and your semester is going smoothly.  I am writing to remind you that your satire presentation is coming up.  You are scheduled to share your satire with the class after your satire   discussion thread opens on Satire Thread Opens. I am really looking  forward to seeing what you find! Be sure to turn in your onepage critical analysis through the link in  the Assignments folder by Friday, Satire Critical Analysis Due at 11:59  p.m. I have attached the assignment here for you, in case you need to  review it. This little assignment makes up 10 of your grade, so read the  assignment carefully and give me some insightful analysis. Please let me know if you have any questions! I would be happy to chat  with you about it over email or in a phone call or video call. All the best, Dr. Glazier This is a version that has been merged in Gmail mail merge: Hi Spencer, I hope that you are doing well and your semester is going smoothly. I  am writing to remind you that your satire presentation is coming up. You  are scheduled to share your satire with the class after your satire discussion thread opens on April 20. I am really looking forward to seeing what  you find! Be sure to turn in your onepage critical analysis through the link in the  Assignments folder by Friday, April 24 at 11:59 p.m. I have attached the  assignment here for you, in case you need to review it. This little assignment makes up 10 of your grade, so read the assignment carefully and  give me some insightful analysis. Please let me know if you have any questions! I would be happy to chat  with you about it over email or in a phone call or video call. All the best, Dr. Glazier
APPENdIx B 4. An assignment reminder email about their discussion leadership  assignment This is the unmerged version: Hi First Name, I am just writing to touch base and remind you that we are discussing  Topic next week. This should be a really interesting discussion! And, as  you know, you are scheduled to be one of our discussion leaders. You are  assigned to Side Side for the discussion, so you will be defending the  position: Side Description. The discussion thread opens at 8:00 a.m. on Monday, Date and you  are responsible for leading the discussion through the close of the thread  on Sunday night at 11:59 p.m. I would love to give you feedback on your  discussion outline per the attached assignment detailsjust to be clear,  this isnt optional so please send it to me as soon as possible 48 hours in  advance is ideal for me to give you feedback. There is an example discussion outline in the Assignments folder you can check out to get some ideas. Dont forget that your annotated bibliography on the same topic of  Topic is due on Friday, April 17. This is a really big part of your grade, so take the time to do a good job  on it and let me know if there is anything I can do to help you along the  way. You are going to do great! All the best, Dr. Glazier This is a version that has been merged in Gmail mail merge: Hi Jasmine, I am just writing to touch base and remind you that we are discussing  Is Terrorism Ever a Justifiable Form of Political Violence? next week.  This should be a really interesting discussion! And, as you know, you are  scheduled to be one of our discussion leaders. You are assigned to Side 2  for the discussion, so you will be defending the position: All Terrorism Is  Indefensible. The discussion thread opens at 8:00 a.m. on Monday, April 27 and you  are responsible for leading the discussion through the close of the thread  on Sunday night at 11:59 p.m. I would love to give you feedback on your  discussion outline per the attached assignment detailsjust to be clear,  this isnt optional so please send it to me as soon as possible 48 hours  in advance is ideal for me to give you feedback. There is an example 

Rapport Emails   205  discussion outline in the Assignments folder you can check out to get  some ideas. Dont forget that your annotated bibliography on the same topic of Is  Terrorism Ever a Justifiable Form of Political Violence? is due on Friday,  April 17. This is a really big part of your grade, so take the time to do a good job  on it and let me know if there is anything I can do to help you along the  way. You are going to do great! All the best, Dr. Glazier 5. A check in email around week 9 of a 15week semester. This is the unmerged version: Hi First Name, I hope that this email finds you well. I just wanted to check in with you  now that we are about 2 3 of the way through the semester. You have had  two exams now. You scored a Exam 1 on the first one and a Exam 2  on the second one. Exam Comment We have one more Exam and then  the final, so there are plenty of points left in the semester. Speaking of points, doing the textbook readings and comprehension  quizzes are an easy way to earn pointsit makes up 15 of your total  grade for the class! Right now, your Online Textbook score is Online  Textbook Score. Textbook Comment Your next textbook reading  assignment is due by Monday, so be sure to get it turned in! But the easiest points of all come from participating in discussions.  Your discussion grade is Discussion. Discussion Comment Our new  discussion starts on Monday, so you just need to post on two days next  week to earn full points. Please also make sure that you are putting the time you need to into  your annotated bibliography, which is due Friday, April 17. There is an  example in the Assignments folder to help you get there. Keep working hard as we turn the corner on the last 1 3 of our class  together! Just let me know if there is anything I can do to help you. Take care, Dr. Glazier
APPENdIx B This is a version that has been merged in Gmail mail merge: Hi Jake, I hope that this email finds you well. I just wanted to check in with you  now that we are about 2 3 of the way through the semester. You have had  two exams now. You scored a 85 on the first one and a 91 on the second  one. You improved on the second exam. Nice work! I hope you are using  the study guide and please feel free to email me if you have any questions.  We have one more Exam and then the final, so there are plenty of points  left in the semester. Speaking of points, doing the textbook readings and comprehension  quizzes are an easy way to earn pointsit makes up 15 of your total  grade for the class! Right now, your Online Textbook score is 82.29. You  are doing pretty good here, but make sure you arent missing out on any  of these easy points. If for some reason you cant make the deadline one  week, just email me and let me know and I can extend it. I want to see  you do well here, so please let me know how I can help. Your next textbook reading assignment is due by Monday, so be sure to get it turned in! But the easiest points of all come from participating in discussions.  Your discussion grade is 44.70. I am pretty concerned with how low your  score is here. I think you can do a lot better. You can earn more points by  posting early and oftenat least twice on at least two different days in  each thread. That will get you 10 10 points every time. Our new discussion starts on Monday, so you just need to post on two days next week to  earn full points. Please also make sure that you are putting the time you need to into  your annotated bibliography, which is due Friday, April 17. There is an  example in the Assignments folder to help you get there. Keep working hard as we turn the corner on the last 1 3 of our class  together! Just let me know if there is anything I can do to help you. Take care, Dr. Glazier

REFERENCES ONE Online Network of Educators. 2020. Humanizing Online Teaching    Learning. California Virtual CampusOnline Education Initiative   CVCOEI. https: onlinenetworkofeducators .org coursecards humanizing  onlineteachinglearning. About MJC. 2020. About MJC. Last modified February 25, 2020. https:  www .mjc .edu general aboutmjc .php. Ackerman, David S., Curt J. Dommeyer, and Barbara L. Gross. 2017. The  Effects of Source, Revision Possibility, and Amount of Feedback on Marketing Students Impressions of Feedback on an Assignment. Journal of   Marketing Education 39 1:17 29. Doi: 10.1177 0273475316628293. Ackerman, David S., and Barbara L. Gross. 2010. Instructor Feedback: How  Much Do Students Really Want? Journal of Marketing Education 32  2:172 81. Doi: 10.1177 0273475309360159. Alessio, Helaine M., Nancy Malay, Karsten Maurer, A. John Bailer, and Beth  Rubin. 2017. Examining the Effect of Proctoring on Online Test Scores.  Online Learning 21 1:146 61. Alexander, Austin. 2014. Fixing ForProfit Failures: Why Student Loans for  ForProfit Schools Should Be Dischargeable in Bankruptcy. Mississippi Law  Journal 83 189 210. Alfred State. 2020. How Online Classes Work. Alfred State College. Accessed  July 29, 2020. https: www .alfredstate .edu academics online onlinelearning. Alfred State News. 2017. Alfred State Online Recognized for Quality. Alfred  State  College. Accessed July 29, 2020. https: www .alfredstate .edu news  2017-08-09 alfredstateonlinerecognizedquality. Ali, Radwan, and Elke M. Leeds. 2009. The Impact of Faceto-Face Orientation on Online Retention: A Pilot Study. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration 12 4. Allen, I. Elaine, and Jeff Seaman. 2008. Staying the Course: Online Education in  the United States, 2008. Newburyport, MA: Sloan Consortium. . 2011. Going the Distance: Online Education in the United States. Newburyport, MA: Sloan Consortium. . 2012. Conflicted: Faculty and Online Education, 2012. Babson Park,  MA: Babson Survey Research Group and Inside Higher Ed. . 2016. Online Report Card: Tracking Online Education in the United  States. Babson Park, MA: Babson Survey Research Group. Allen, Walter. 1992. The Color of Success: AfricanAmerican College Student  Outcomes at Predominantly White and Historically Black Public  Colleges  
REFERENCES and Universities. Harvard Educational Review 62 1:26 45. Doi: 10.17763   haer.62.1.wv5627665007v701. Alman, Susan W., Barbara A. Frey, and Christinger Tomer. 2012. Social and  Cognitive Presence as Factors in Learning and Student Retention: An Investigation of the Cohort Model in an iSchool Setting. Journal of Education for  Library and Information Science 53 4: 290 302. Alpert, William T., Kenneth A. Couch, and Oskar R. Harmon. 2016. A Randomized Assessment of Online Learning. American Economic Review 106  5:378 82. Doi: 10.1257 aer.p20161057. Altman, Irwin. 1990. Conceptualizing Rapport.  Psychological Inquiry 1  4:294 97. Amelink, Catherine T. 2005. Predicting Academic Success among FirstYear,  First  Generation Students. PhD diss., Educational Leadership and Policy  Studies, Virginia Tech. Amsberry, Dawn. 2009. Deconstructing Plagiarism: International Students  and Textual Borrowing Practices. Reference Librarian 51 1:31 44. Doi:  10.1080 02763870903362183. Anaya, Guadalupe, and Darnell G. Cole. 2001. Latina o Student Achievement:  Exploring the Influence of StudentFaculty Interactions on College Grades.  Journal of College Student Development 42 1:3 14. Andrejevic, Mark, and Neil Selwyn. 2020. Facial Recognition Technology in  Schools: Critical Questions and Concerns. Learning, Media and Technology  45 2:115 28. Doi: 10.1080 17439884.2020.1686014. Ang, Desmond. 2020. The Effects of Police Violence on InnerCity Students.  Quarterly Journal of Economics. Doi: 10.1093 qje qjaa027. Angelino, Lorraine M., Frankie Keels Williams, and Deborah Natvig. 2007.  Strategies to Engage Online Students and Reduce Attrition Rates. Journal  of Educators Online 4 2:1 14. Angulo, A. J. 2016. Diploma Mills: How ForProfit Colleges Stiffed Students,  Taxpayers, and the American Dream. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Appel, Hannah, and Astra Taylor. 2015. Education with a Debt Sentence: ForProfit  Colleges as American Dream Crushers and Factories of Debt. New  Labor Forum 24 1:31 36. Doi: 10.1177 1095796014562860. Aragon, Steven R., and Elaine S. Johnson. 2008. Factors Influencing Completion and Noncompletion of Community College Online Courses. American  Journal of Distance Education 22 3:146 58. Arbaugh, J. Ben. 2001. How Instructor Immediacy Behaviors Affect Student  Satisfaction and Learning in WebBased Courses. Business Communication  Quarterly 64 4:42 54. Arbaugh, J. Ben, and Raquel BenbunanFich. 2005. Contextual Factors that  Influence ALN Effectiveness. In Learning Together Online: Research on  Asynchronous Learning Networks, edited by Starr Roxanne Hiltz and Ricki  Goldman, 123 44. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Arend, Bridget. 2009. Encouraging Critical Thinking in Online Threaded Discussions. Journal of Educators Online 6 1:n1. Arnold, Kimberly E., and Matthew D. Pistilli. 2012. Course Signals at Purdue: 

References   209 Using Learning Analytics to Increase Student Success. Proceedings of the  2nd International Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge, New  York. Arnsparger, Arleen, and Joanna Drivalas. 2016. Students Speak about Faculty:  What Students Need, What They Want, and What Helps Them Succeed. In  Envisioning the Faculty for the TwentyFirst Century: Moving to a MissionOriented and LearnerCentered Model, edited by Adrianna Kezar and Daniel  Maxey. New York: Rutgers University Press. Artino, Anthony, and Andri Ioannou. 2008. Promoting Academic Motivation  and SelfRegulation: Practical Guidelines for Online Iinstructors. Society for  Information Technology  Teacher Education International Conference, Las  Vegas, NV, March 3, 2009. Ashong, Carol Y., and Nannette E. Commander. 2012. Ethnicity, Gender, and  Perceptions of Online Learning in Higher Education. MERLOT Journal of  Online Learning and Teaching 8 2. Aslanian, Carol B., and David L. Clinefelter. 2012. Online College Students  2012: Comprehensive Data on Demands and Preferences. Louisville, KY:  The Learning House, Inc. Astleitner, Hermann. 2000. A Review of Motivational and Emotional Strategies  to Reduce Dropout in WebBased Distance Education. In Neue Medien in  Unterricht, Ausund Weiterbildung, edited by Detlev Leutner, 17 24. Mnster: Waxmann. ASU Online. 2020. A Look at Todays College Student: The Growth of Online  Learning. Accessed September 4, 2020. https: asuonline.asu .edu newsroom   onlinelearningtips looktodayscollegestudentgrowthonlinelearning. Atchley, Thomas Wayne, Gary Wingenbach, and Cynthia Akers. 2013. Comparison of Course Completion and Student Performance through Online and  Traditional Courses. International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning 14 4. Aversa, Elizabeth, and Steven MacCall. 2013. Profiles in Retention Part 1:  Design Characteristics of a Graduate Synchronous Online Program. Journal  of Education for Library and Information Science 54 2:147 61. Bacchini, Fabio, and Ludovica Lorusso. 2019. Race, Again: How Face Recognition Technology Reinforces Racial Discrimination. Journal of Information, Communication and Ethics in Society 17 3. Bacow, Lawrence S., William G. Bowen, Kevin M. Guthrie, Matthew P. Long,  and Kelly A. Lack. 2012. Barriers to Adoption of Online Learning Systems  in US Higher Education. New York: Ithaka SR Consulting. Bahr, Peter Riley. 2010. Making Sense of Disparities in Mathematics Remediation: What Is the Role of Student Retention? Journal of College Student  Retention: Research, Theory  Practice 12 1:25 49. Doi: 10.2190  CS.12.1.c. Bailey, Allison, Nithya Vaduganathan, Tyce Henry, Renee Laverdiere, and Lou  Pugliese. 2018. Making Digital Learning WorkSuccess Strategies from Six  Leading Universities and Community Colleges. Boston, MA: Boston Consulting Group. Bailey, Thomas, Dong Wook Jeong, and SungWoo Cho. 2010. Referral, 
REFERENCES Enrollment, and Completion in Developmental Education Sequences in Community Colleges. Economics of Education Review 29 2:255 70. Baker, Credence. 2010. The Impact of Instructor Immediacy and Presence for  Online  Student Affective Learning, Cognition, and Motivation. Journal of  Educators Online 7 1:1 30. Baker, Rachel, Thomas Dee, Brent Evans, and June John. 2018. Bias in Online  Classes: Evidence from a Field Experiment. Stanford Center for Education  Policy Analysis. CEPA Working Paper No. 18 03. Baker, Rachel, Brent Evans, Qiujie Li, and Bianca Cung. 2019. Does Inducing  Students to Schedule Lecture Watching in Online Classes Improve Their Academic Performance? An Experimental Analysis of a Time Management Intervention. Research in Higher Education 60 4:521 52. Doi: 10.1007  s11162-018-9521-3. Bali, Maha, Maureen Crawford, Rhonda Jessen, Paul Signorelli, and Mia  Zamora. 2015. What Makes a cMOOC Community Endure? Multiple Participant Perspectives from Diverse cMOOCs. Educational Media International 52 2:100 115. Doi: 10.1080 09523987.2015.1053290. Bambara, Cynthia S., Clifford P. Harbour, Timothy Gray Davies, and Susan  Athey. 2009. Delicate Engagement: The Lived Experience of Community  College Students Enrolled in HighRisk Online Courses. Community College Review 36 3:219 38. Barnett, Elisabeth. 2018. Faculty Leadership and Student PersistenceA Story  From Oakton Community College. Community College Research Center.  Last modified May 9, 2018. https: ccrc.tc.columbia .edu easyblog faculty  leadershipstudentpersistenceoaktoncommunitycollege .html. Bassett, Penny. 2011. How Do Students View Asynchronous Online Discussions as a Learning Experience? Interdisciplinary Journal of E-Learning and  Learning Objects 7 1:69 79. Bawa, Papia. 2016. Retention in Online Courses: Exploring Issues and SolutionsA  Literature Review. SAGE Open 6 1:1 11. Doi: 10.1177  2158244015621777. Bayne, Sian, Peter Evans, Rory Ewins, Jeremy Knox, and James Lamb. 2020.  The Manifesto for Teaching Online. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Beer, Colin, and Celeste Lawson. 2017. The Problem of Student Attrition  in Higher Education: An Alternative Perspective. Journal of Further and  Higher Education 41 6:773 84. Bell, Paul D., and Duane Akroyd. 2006. Can Factors Related to SelfRegulated  Learning Predict Learning Achievement in Undergraduate Asynchronous  WebBased Courses? International Journal of Instructional Technology and  Distance Learning 3 10:5 16. Bennett, Doris, Cynthia McCarty, and Shawn Carter. 2019. Teaching Graduate  Economics: Online vs. Traditional Classroom Instruction. Journal for Economic Educators 11 2:1 11. Bennett, Sue, and Lori Lockyer. 2004. Becoming an Online Teacher: Adapting  to a Changed Environment for Teaching and Learning in Higher Education.  Educational Media International 41 3:231 48. Benson, Trisha A., Andrew L. Cohen, and William Buskist. 2005. Rapport: Its 

References   211 Relation to Student Attitudes and Behaviors toward Teachers and Classes.  Teaching of Psychology 32 4:237 70. Bernacki, Matthew L., Lucie Vosicka, and Jenifer C. Utz. 2020. Can a Brief,  Digital Skill Training Intervention Help Undergraduates Learn to Learn and  Improve Their STEM Achievement? Journal of Educational Psychology 112  4:765 81. Doi: 10.1037 edu0000405. Bernard, Robert M., Philip C. Abrami, Eugene Borokhovski, C. Anne Wade,  Rana M. Tamim, Michael A. Surkes, and Edward Clement Bethel. 2009. A  MetaAnalysis of Three Types of Interaction Treatments in Distance Education. Review of Educational Research 79 3:1243 89. Doi: 10.3102  0034654309333844. Berzenski, Sara R. 2019. The When and Who of Graduation and Dropout Predictors: A Moderated Hazard Analysis. Journal of College Student Retention: Research,  Theory  Practice. Doi: 10.1177 1521025119875104. Bettinger, Eric P., and Bridget Terry Long. 2010. Does Cheaper Mean Better?  The Impact of Using Adjunct Instructors on Student Outcomes. Review of  Economics and Statistics 92 3:598 613. Blackner, Deborah M. 2000. Prediction of Community College Students Success  in Developmental Math with Traditional Classroom, ComputerBased OnCampus and ComputerBased at a Distance Instruction Using Locus of Control, Math Anxiety and Learning Style. PhD diss., University of North Texas. Blankstein, Melissa, Jennifer K. Frederick, and Christine WolffEisenberg. 2020.  Student Experiences during the Pandemic Pivot. New York: Ithaka SR  Consulting. Blocher, J. Michael, L. Sujo De Montes, Elizabeth M. Willis, and Gary Tucker.  2002. Online Learning: Examining the Successful Student Profile. Journal  of Interactive Online Learning 1 2:1 12. Blum, Susan D., ed. 2020. Ungrading: Why Rating Students Undermines Learning and What to Do Instead. Morgantown: West Virginia University Press. Bolliger, Doris U., and Oksana Wasilik. 2009. Factors Influencing Faculty Satisfaction with Online Teaching and Learning in Higher Education. Distance  Education 30 1:103 16. Bond, Niya. 2019. Pedagogies of Online Welcome. Faculty Focus, December 18. https: www .facultyfocus .com articles onlineeducation pedagogies  of-welcome ?stFFdaily;sFF191218;utmtermFF191218utmsource  ActiveCampaignutmmediumemailutmcontentPedagogiesof  OnlineWelcomeutmcampaignFF191218. Bonnel, Wanda, Charlene Ludwig, and Janice Smith. 2008. Providing Feedback  in Online Courses: What Do Students Want? How Do We Do That? Annual  Review of Nursing Education 6:205. Boston, Wally, Sebastin R. Daz, Angela M. Gibson, Phil Ice, Jennifer Richardson, and Karen Swan. 2009. An Exploration of the Relationship between  Indicators of the Community of Inquiry Framework and Retention in Online  Programs. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 13 3:67 83. . 2014. An Exploration of the Relationship between Indicators of the  Community of Inquiry Framework and Retention in Online Programs. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 13 3:67 83.
REFERENCES Boston, Wally, Phil Ice, and Melissa Burgess. 2012. Assessing Student Retention  in Online Learning Environments: A Longitudinal Study. Online Journal of  Distance Learning Administration 15 2:1 6. Boston, Wally, Phil Ice, and Angela M. Gibson. 2010. Comprehensive Assessment of Student Retention in Online Learning Environments. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration 14 1:1593 99. Botsch, Robert E., and Carol S. Botsch. 2012. Audiences and Outcomes in  Online and Traditional American Government Classes Revisited. PS: Political Science  Politics 45 3:493 500. Doi: 10.1017 S104909651200042X. Boucher, Ellen. 2016. Its Time to Ditch Our Deadlines: Why You Should Stop  Penalizing Your Students for Submitting Work Late. Chronicle of Higher  Education. Last modified August 22, 2016. https: 0-wwwchroniclecom  .library.ualr .edu article itstimeto-ditchourdeadlines. Bowen, William G., Matthew M. Chingos, Kelly A. Lack, and Thomas I.  Nygren. 2014. Interactive Learning Online at Public Universities: Evidence  from a SixCampus Randomized Trial. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 33 1:94 111. Doi: https: doi .org 10.1002 pam.21728. Bowen, William G., Matthew M. Chingos, and Michael S. McPherson. 2009.  Crossing the Finish Line: Completing College at Americas Public Universities. Princeton, NJ: Prince ton University Press. Bowers, James, and Poonam Kumar. 2015. Students Perceptions of Teaching   and Social Presence: A Comparative Analysis of Faceto-Face and Online  Learning Environments. International Journal of WebBased Learning and  Teaching Technologies 10 1:27 44. Boyette, Marie Adele. 2008. An Investigation of the Online Learning Environment in Higher Education through the Observations and Perceptions of Students of Color. PhD diss., Adult, Career, and Higher Education, University  of South Florida. Boyington, Briana, and Emma Kerr. 2019. 20 Years of Tuition Growth at  National Universities. US News  World Report, September 19. https:  www .usnews .com education bestcolleges payingforcollege articles 2017  -09-20 see20-yearsof-tuitiongrowthatnationaluniversities. Bozarth, Jane, Diane D. Chapman, and Laura LaMonica. 2004. Preparing for  Distance Learning: Designing an Online Student Orientation Course. Journal of Educational Technology  Society 7 1:87 106. Braxton, John M., Nathaniel J. Bray, and Joseph B. Berger. 2000. Faculty  Teaching Skills and Their Influence on the College Student Departure Process. Journal of College  Student Development 41 2:215. Burbank, Mary D., Don Kauchak, and Alisa J. Bates. 2010. Book Clubs as Professional Development Opportunities for Preservice Teacher Candidates and  Practicing Teachers: An Exploratory Study. New Educator 6 1:56 73. Burke, Alison. 2011. Group Work: How to Use Groups Effectively. Journal of  Effective Teaching 11 2:87 95. Bush, Edward C., and Lawson V. Bush. 2010. Calling Out the Elephant: An  Examination of African American Male Achievement in Community Colleges. Journal of African American Males in Education 1 1. Butcher, Charity, and Timothy Kersey. 2014. When Winning Is Really Losing: 

References   213 Teaching Awards and Women Political Science Faculty. PS: Political Science   Politics 48 1:138 41. Doi: 10.1017 S104909651400167X. BuzzettoHollywood, Nicole, Kathy Quinn, Wendy Wang, and Austin Hill.  2019. Grit in Online Education. Journal of Education, Society and  Behavioural Science 30 4:1 11. Calarco, Jessica McCrory. 2014. Coached for the Classroom: Parents Cultural Transmission and Childrens Reproduction of Educational Inequalities.  American Sociological Review 79 5:1015 37. . 2018. Negotiating Opportunities: How the Middle Class Secures  Advantages in School. New York: Oxford University Press. . 2020. A Field Guide to Grad School: Uncovering the Hidden Curriculum. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Campbell, Nittaya. 2007. Bringing ESL Students Out of Their Shells: Enhancing Participation Through Online Discussion. Business Communication  Quarterly 70 1:37 43. Doi: 10.1177 108056990707000105. Cano, Alberto, and John D. Leonard. 2019. Interpretable Multiview Early  Warning  System Adapted to Underrepresented Student Populations. IEEE  Transactions on Learning Technologies 12 2:198 211. Doi: 10.1109  TLT.2019.2911079. Capra, Theresa. 2011. Online Education: Promise and Problems. Journal of  Online Learning and Teaching 7 2:288 293. Carini, Robert M., George D. Kuh, and Stephen P. Klein. 2006. Student  Engagement and Student Learning: Testing the Linkages. Research in Higher  Education 47 1:1 32. Carnevale, Anthony P., and Jeff Strohl. 2013. Separate  Unequal: How Higher  Education Reinforces the Intergenerational Reproduction of White Racial  Privilege. Georgetown University: Georgetown Public Policy Institute: Center  on Education and the Workforce. Carnevale, Dan. 2000.  Boot Camp Helps New Online Students at Boise   State U. Chronicle of Higher Education 46 24:A48. CarrChellman, Alison, and Philip Duchastel. 2000. The Ideal Online Course.  British Journal of Educational Technology 31 3:229 41. Carrell, Scott E., and Michal Kurlaender. 2020. My Professor Cares: Experimental Evidence on the Role of Faculty Engagement. Working Paper No.  27312. Washington, DC: National Bureau of Economic Research. Doi:  10.3386 w27312. Carron, Albert V., and Kevin S. Spink. 1993. Team Building in an Exercise Setting. Sport Psychologist 7 1:8 18. Cataldi, Emily Forrest, Christopher T. Bennett, and Xianglei Chen. 2018. FirstGeneration Students: College Access, Persistence, and Postbachelors Outcomes.  Statistics in Brief. Washington, DC: National Center for Education  Statistics. Cavanaugh, Terence W., and Cathy Cavanaugh. 2008. Interactive Maps for  Community in Online Learning. Computers in the Schools 25 3 4:235 42. Center for Distributed Learning. 2020a. Instructional Design Services. University of Central Florida. Accessed July 28, 2020. https: cdl.ucf .edu services   instructional instructionaldesign.
REFERENCES . 2020b. Our Publications. University of Central Florida. Accessed  July 28, 2020. https: cdl.ucf .edu about cdl publications. Chamberlin, Lisa, and Tracy Parish. 2011. MOOCs: Massive Open Online  Courses or Massive and Often Obtuse Courses? Elearn 2011 8. Chambers, Timothy E. 2002. Internet Course Student Achievement: In Ohios  TwoYear Community and Technical Colleges, Are Online Courses Less  Effective Than Traditional Courses? PhD diss., Bowling Green State  University. Chambliss, Daniel F., and Christopher G. Takacs. 2014. How College Works.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Chapman, Diane D. 2011. Contingent and Tenured TenureTrack Faculty:  Motivations and Incentives to Teach Distance Education Courses. Online  Journal of Distance Learning Administration 14 3. Chatelain, Marcia. 2018. We Must Help FirstGeneration Students Master  Academes Hidden Curriculum.  Chronicle of Higher Education. Accessed   April 23, 2020. https: www .chronicle.com article wemusthelpfirst  generationstudentsmasteracademeshiddencurriculum. Chatteinier, Nancy. 2016. SelfRegulated Learning and Success in an Online  Develop mental Math Community College Course. PhD diss., Education,  Northcentral University. Chen, PuShih Daniel, Amber D. Lambert, and Kevin R. Guidry. 2010. Engaging Online Learners: The Impact of WebBased Learning Technology on College Student Engagement. Computers  Education 54 4:1222 32. Doi:  https: doi .org 10.1016 j .compedu.2009.11.008. Chickering, Arthur W., and Zelda F. Gamson. 1987. Seven Principles for Good  Practice in Undergraduate Education. AAHE Bulletin, March:3 7. Chingos, Matthew M., Rebecca J. Griffiths, Christine Mulhern, and Richard R.  Spies. 2017. Interactive Online Learning on Campus: Comparing Students  Outcomes in Hybrid and Traditional Courses in the University System of  Maryland. Journal of Higher Education 88 2:210 33. Cho, MoonHeum, and B. Joon Kim. 2013. Students SelfRegulation for Interaction with Others in Online Learning Environments. The Internet and  Higher Education 17:69 75. Choy, Susan P. 2001. Students Whose Parents Did Not Go to College: Postsecondary Access, Persistence, and Attainment. The Condition of Education:  xviii xliii. U.S. Department of Education. Washington, DC: National Center  for Education Statistics. Church, Thomas V., and James E. Prieger. 2016. An Update on Mobile Broadband  Availability in the United States. In Encyclopedia of E-Commerce  Development, Implementation, and Management, edited by In Lee, 1518 31.  Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Clark, Ashley. 2020. Todays Students Need Access to Affordable and Reliable  Broadband Services. Last modified May 11, 2020. https: medium .com  higherlearningadvocates todaysstudentsneedaccessto-affordableand  reliablebroadbandservicesf9c39068a96b. Classes  Careers. 2011. Student Demographics. Last modified May 26, 

References   215 2011. https: blog.classesandcareers .com education infographics student  demographicsinfographic. Clay, Melanie N., Stacey Rowland, and Abbot Packard. 2008. Improving  Undergraduate Online Retention through Gated Advisement and Redundant  Communication. Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory   Practice 10 1:93 102. Doi: 10.2190 CS.10.1.g. Clinefelter, D. L., and C. B. Aslanian. 2016. Online College Students: Comprehensive Data on Demands and Preferences. Louisville, KY: The Learning  House. Cluskey Jr., G. R., Craig R. Ehlen, and Mitchell H. Raiborn. 2011. Thwarting  Online Exam Cheating without Proctor Supervision. Journal of Academic  and Business  Ethics 4 1. Cochran, Justin D., Stacy M. Campbell, Hope M. Baker, and Elke M. Leeds.  2014. The Role of Student Characteristics in Predicting Retention in Online  Courses. Research in Higher Education 55 1:27 48. Cokley, Kevin. 2000. Perceived Faculty Encouragement and Its Influence on  College Students. Journal of College Student Development 31 3:348 52. Cole, Darnell. 2007. Do Interracial Interactions Matter? An Examination of  StudentFaculty Contact and Intellectual SelfConcept. Journal of Higher  Education 78 3:249 81. Doi: 10.1080 00221546.2007.11772316. College Board. 2019. Trends in College Pricing 2019. In Trends in Higher  Education Series. New York: College Board. Collier, Peter J., and David L. Morgan. 2008.  Is That Paper Really Due  Today?: Differences in FirstGeneration and Traditional College Students  Understandings of Faculty Expectations. Higher Education 55 4:425 46. Contreras, Frances, and Gilbert J. Contreras. 2015. Raising the Bar for Hispanic Serving Institutions: An Analysis of College Completion and Success  Rates. Journal of Hispanic Higher Education 14 2:151 70. Doi: 10.1177  1538192715572892. Cooper, Katelyn M., Brian Haney, Anna Krieg, and Sara E. Brownell. 2017.  Whats in a Name? The Importance of Students Perceiving that an Instructor Knows Their Names in a HighEnrollment Biology Classroom. CBE Life Sciences Education 16 1:ar8. Costa, Karen. 2020. 99 Tips for Creating Simple and Sustainable Educational  Videos: A Guide for Online Teachers and Flipped Classes. Sterling, VA:   Stylus Publishing. Cottom, Tressie McMillan. 2017. Lower Ed: The Troubling Rise of ForProfit  Colleges in the New Economy. New York: The New Press. Cox, Rebecca. 2005. Online Education as Institutional Myth: Rituals and Realities at Community Colleges. Teachers College Record 107 8:1754 87. . 2006. Virtual Access. In Defending the Community College Equity  Agenda, edited by Thomas Bailey and Vanessa Smith Morest, 110 31. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. . 2009. The College Fear Factor. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University  Press. Craig, Ryan. 2019. Prelude to a Pricing Paradigm Shift. Inside Higher Ed. 
REFERENCES Last modified October 4, 2019. https: www .insidehighered .com digital  learning views 2019 10 04 whyhasnE28099ttuitiononline  educationtumbledandwhatwillittake. Creasey, Gary, Patricia Jarvis, and Daniel Gadke. 2009. Student Attachment  Stances, Instructor Immediacy, and StudentInstructor Relationships as Predictors of Achievement Expectancies in College Students. Journal of College  Student Development 50 4:353 72. Crook, Anne, Alice Mauchline, Stephen Maw, Clare Lawson, Robyn Drinkwater, Karsten Lundqvist, Paul Orsmond, Stephen Gomez, and Julian Park.  2012. The Use of Video Technology for Providing Feedback to Students:  Can It Enhance the Feedback Experience for Staff and Students? Computers   Education 58 1:386 96. Doi: https: doi .org 10.1016 j .compedu  .2011.08.025. Crosling, Glenda, Margaret Heagney, and Liz Thomas. 2009. Improving Student Retention in Higher Education: Improving Teaching and Learning.  Australian Universities Review 51 2:9. Crosson, Patricia H. 1991. Environmental Influences on Minority Degree  Attainment. Equity  Excellence in Education 25 2 4:5 15. Cuba, Lee J. 2016. Practice for Life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Czaplewski, Andrew J. 2009. ComputerAssisted Grading Rubrics: Automating  the Process of Providing Comments and Student Feedback. Marketing Education Review 19 1:29 36. Doi: 10.1080 10528008.2009.11489057. Daft, Richard L., and Robert H. Lengel. 1986. Organizational Information  Requirements, Media Richness and Structural Design. Management Science  32 5:554 71. Daigle, Delton T., and Aaron Stuvland. 2020. Teaching Political Science  Research Methods across Delivery Modalities: Comparing Outcomes  between Faceto-Face and DistanceHybrid Courses. Journal of Political   Science Education May 13:1 23. Doi: 10.1080 15512169.2020.1760105. Daniel, John. 2012. Making Sense of MOOCs: Musings in a Maze of Myth,  Paradox and Possibility. Journal of Interactive Media in Education 2012 3. Darby, Flower. 2020. How to Recover the Joy of Teaching after an Online   Pivot. Chronicle of Higher Education, March 24. https: 0-wwwchronicle  com.library.ualr .edu article howto-recoverthejoyof-teachingafteran  onlinepivot. Darby, Flower, and James M. Lang. 2019. Small Teaching Online: Applying  Learning  Science in Online Classes. San Francisco, CA: Wiley. Davidson, Cathy. 2020. Cameras Optional, Please! Remembering Student   Lives as We Plan Our Online Syllabus. HASTAC: Changing the Way We   Teach  Learn. Last  modified July 22, 2020. https: www .hastac .org blogs   cathydavidson 2020 07 22 camerasoptionalpleaseremembering  studentlivesweplanouronline. Davidson, Cody, and Kristin Wilson. 2013. Reassessing Tintos Concepts of  Social and Academic Integration in Student Retention. Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory  Practice 15 3:329 46. Doi:  10.2190 CS.15.3.b. Daymont, Thomas, Gary Blau, and Deborah Campbell. 2011. Deciding 

References   217 between Traditional and Online Formats: Exploring the Role of Learning  Advantages, Flexibility, and Compensatory Adaptation. Journal of Behavioral and Applied Management 12 2:156 75. De Castro e Lima Baesse, Deborah, Alexandra Monteiro Grisolia, and Ana  Emilia Figueiredo de Oliveira. 2016. Pedagogical Monitoring as a Tool to  Reduce Dropout in Distance Learning in Family Health. BMC Medical   Education 16 1:213. Doi: 10.1186 s12909-016-0735-9. De los Santos, Alfredo G., and Farah Sutton. 2012. Swirling Students: Articulation between a Major Community College District and a StateSupported  Research University. Community College Journal of Research and Practice  36 12:967 81. Doi: 10.1080 10668920903182641. Delaney, Anne Marie. 2008. Why FacultyStudent Interaction Matters in the  First Year Experience. Tertiary Education and Management 14 3:227 41.  Doi: 10.1080 13583880802228224. Deming, David J., Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2012. The ForProfit  Postsecondary School Sector: Nimble Critters or Agile Predators? Journal of  Economic  Perspectives 26 1:139 64. Doi: 10.1257 jep.26.1.139. Deming, David J., Claudia Goldin, Lawrence F. Katz, and Noam Yuchtman.  2015. Can Online Learning Bend the Higher Education Cost Curve?  American Economic Review 105 5:496 501. DeNavasWalt, Carmen, Robert W. Cleveland, and Marc I. Roemer. 2001.  Money Income in the United States: 2000. In Consumer Population  Reports. Washington, DC: US Census Bureau. Dhilla, Sarah J. 2017. The Role of Online Faculty in Supporting Successful  Online Learning Enterprises: A Literature Review. Higher Education Politics   Economics 3 1:3. Diaz, David P. 2002. Online Drop Rates Revisited. Technology Source 3   May June. Diaz, David P., and Ryan B. Cartnal. 1999. Students Learning Styles in Two  Classes: Online Distance Learning and Equivalent OnCampus. College  Teaching 47 4:130 35. Diep, Francie. 2020.  I Was Fed Up: How BlackInTheIvory Got Started,  and What Its Founders Want to See Next. Chronicle of Higher Education,  June 9. https: 0-wwwchroniclecom.library.ualr .edu article iwasfed-up  howblackintheivorygotstartedandwhatitsfounderswantto-seenext. Dowd, Alicia C., Misty Sawatzky, and Randi Korn. 2011. Theoretical Foundations and a Research Agenda to Validate Measures of Intercultural Effort.  Review of Higher Education 35 1:17 44. Duckworth, Angela L., Christopher Peterson, Michael D. Matthews, and Dennis R. Kelly. 2007. Grit: Perseverance and Passion for LongTerm Goals.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92 6:1087. Duncan, Heather E., and John Barnett. 2009. Learning to Teach Online:  What Works for PreService Teachers. Journal of Educational Computing  Research 40 3:357 76. Dunlap, Joanna C., and Patrick R. Lowenthal. 2009. Tweeting the Night Away:  Using Twitter to Enhance Social. Journal of Information Systems Education  20 2:129 35.
REFERENCES Dutton, John, Marilyn Dutton, and Jo Perry. 2001. Do Online Students Perform as Well as Lecture Students? Journal of Engineering Education 90  1:131 36. Dykman, Charlene A., and Charles K. Davis. 2008. Part One: The Shift toward  Online Education. Journal of Information Systems Education 19 1. Dziuban, Charles, Patsy Moskal, Thomas Cavanagh, and Andre Watts. 2012.  Analytics That Inform the University: Using Data You Already Have. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 16 3:21 38. Eby, Lillian T., Tammy D. Allen, Sarah C. Evans, Thomas Ng, and David L.  DuBois. 2008. Does Mentoring Matter? A Multidisciplinary Metaanalysis  Comparing Mentored and Nonmentored Individuals. Journal of Vocational  Behavior 72 2:254 67. Doi: https: doi .org 10.1016 j.jvb.2007.04.005. Ehrenberg, Ronald G., and Liang Zhang. 2005. Do Tenured and TenureTrack  Faculty Matter? Journal of Human Resources 40 3:647 59. Ehrman, Madeline. 1990. Psychology: Psychological Factors and Distance Education. American Journal of Distance Education 4 1:10 24. Eisenberg, Eli, and Tony Dowsett. 1990. Student Dropout from a Distance  Education Project Course: A New Method of Analysis. Distance Education  11 2:231 53. Eliasquevici, Marianne Kogut, Marcos Csar da Rocha Seruffo, and Snia  Nazar  Fernandes Resque. 2017. Persistence in Distance Education: A Study  Case Using  Bayesian Network to Understand Retention. International Journal of Distance Edu cation Technologies IJDET 15 4:61 78. Doi: 10.4018  IJDET.2017100104. Elliott, Jacquelyn D., and Rodney Parks. 2018. Latino Students and Degree  Attainment. College and University 93 1:10 18. Engle, Jennifer, and Vincent Tinto. 2008. Moving beyond Access: College Success for LowIncome, FirstGeneration Students. Washington, DC: Pell Institute for the Study of Opportunity in Higher Education. Eom, Sean B., H. Joseph Wen, and Nicholas Ashill. 2006. The Determinants of  Students Perceived Learning Outcomes and Satisfaction in University Online  Education: An Empirical Investigation. Decision Sciences Journal of Innovative Education 4 2:215 35. Erichsen, Elizabeth A., and Doris U. Bolliger. 2011. Towards Understanding  International Graduate Student Isolation in Traditional and Online Environments. Educational Technology Research and Development 59 3:309 26. Espinosa, Lorelle, Robert Kelchen, and Morgan Taylor. 2018. Minority Serving Institutions as Engines of Upward Mobility. Washington, DC: American  Council on Education. Espinosa, Lorelle L., Jonathan M. Turk, Morgan Taylor, and Hollie M. Chessman. 2019. Race and Ethnicity in Higher Education: A Status Report. Washington, DC: American Council on Education. Eyler, Joshua. 2018. How Humans Learn: The Science and Stories behind Effective College Teaching. Morgantown: West Virginia University Press. FaganWilen, Ruth, David W. Springer, Bob Ambrosino, and Barbara W. White.  2006. The Support of Adjunct Faculty: An Academic Imperative. Social  Work Education 25 1:39 51.

References   219 Felten, Peter, and Leo M. Lambert. 2020. RelationshipRich Education: How  Human Connections Drive Success in College. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Ferguson, Christopher J., and Moritz Heene. 2012. A Vast Graveyard of  Undead Theories: Publication Bias and Psychological Sciences Aversion to  the Null. Perspectives on Psychological Science 7 6:555 61. Fetzner, Marie. 2013. What Do Unsuccessful Online Students Want Us to  Know? Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 17 1:13 27. Figlio, David N., Mark Rush, and Lu Yin. 2013. Is It Live or Is It Internet?  Experimental Estimates of the Effects of Online Instruction on Student  Learning. Journal of Labor Economics 31 4:763 84. Figlio, David N., Morton O. Schapiro, and Kevin B. Soter. 2015. Are Tenure  Track Professors Better Teachers? Review of Economics and Statistics 97  4:715 24. Flaherty, Colleen. 2020a. Big Proctor. Inside Higher Ed, May 11, 2020.   https: www .insidehighered .com news 2020 05 11 onlineproctoringsurging  duringcovid19. . 2020b. Zoom Boom. Inside Higher Ed, April 29. Accessed July 31,   2020. https: www .insidehighered .com news 2020 04 29 synchronous  instructionhotrightnowitsustainable. . 2020c.  Never Waste a Good Pandemic.  Inside Higher Ed, December 4. Accessed December 11, 2020. https: www .insidehighered .com news  2020 12 04 boulderartsandsciencesdeanwantsbuildbackfacultypost  pandemiconenontenure. Flannery, Daniele D. 1995. Adult Education and the Politics of the Theoretical  Text. In Critical Multiculturalism: Uncommon Voices in a Common Struggle, edited by B. Kanpol and P. McLaren, 149 63. Westport, CT: Bergin and  Garvey. Folorunso, Orimolade Joseph, Oronti Iyabosola Busola, and Olopade Abdullah  Oluwatosin. 2019. A Control System for Assessing Commercial Face Recognition Software for Racial Bias. International Journal of Computer Applications 177 28. Fox, K., G. Bryant, N. Srinivasan, N. Lin, and A Nguyen. 2020. Time for Class COVID-19 Edition Part 2: Planning for a Fall Like No Other. Boston, MA:  Tyton Partners. Franklin, Mitchell. 2015. Keys to Success in the Online Accounting Classroom  to Maximize Student Retention. Journal of Higher Education Theory and  Practice 15 5:36. Frankola, Karen. 2001. Why Online Learners Drop Out. Workforce 80  10:52 61. Frisby, Brandi N., and Matthew M. Martin. 2010. InstructorStudent and  StudentStudent Rapport in the Classroom. Communication Education 59  2:146 64. Frisby, Brandi N., and Scott A. Myers. 2008. The Relationships among Perceived Instructor Rapport, Student Participation, and Student Learning Outcomes. Texas Speech Communication Journal 33 1. Fry, Richard, and Anthony Cilluffo. 2019. A Rising Share of Undergraduates 
REFERENCES Are from Poor Families, Especially at Less Selective Colleges. Washington,  DC: Pew Research Center. Frydenberg, Jia. 2007. Persistence in University Continuing Education Online  Classes. International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning 8 3:1 15. Gallien, Tara, and Jody OomenEarly. 2008. Personalized versus Collective  Instructor Feedback in the Online Courseroom: Does Type of Feedback  Affect Student Satisfaction, Academic Performance and Perceived Connectedness with the Instructor?  International Journal on E-Learning 7 3:463 76. GallupPurdue Index Report. 2014. Great Jobs, Great Lives: A Study of More  than 30,000 College Graduates across the US. Gallup, Purdue University,  Lumina Foundation. Gannon, Kevin M. 2018. How to Create a Syllabus. Chronicle of Higher Education. September 12, 2018. https: www .chronicle .com article howto-create  asyllabus. . 2020. Radical Hope: A Teaching Manifesto. Morgantown: West Virginia  University Press. Garrison, D. Randy, Terry Anderson, and Walter Archer. 1999. Critical Inquiry  in a TextBased Environment: Computer Conferencing in Higher Education.  The Internet and Higher Education 2 2 3:87 105. Garrison, D. Randy, and Marti ClevelandInnes. 2004. Critical Factors in Student Satisfaction and Success: Facilitating Student Role Adjustment in Online  Communities of Inquiry. In Elements of Quality Online Education: Into the  Mainstream, edited by J. Bourne, J. C. J. Bourne, and J. C. Moore. Needham,  MA: The Sloan Consortium. Gaytan, Jorge. 2015. Comparing Faculty and Student Perceptions Regarding  Factors that Affect Student Retention in Online Education. American Journal of Distance Education 29 1:56 66. Doi: 10.1080 08923647.2015  .994365. Gering, Carol S., Dani K. Sheppard, Barbara L. Adams, Susan L. Renes, and  Allan A. Morotti. 2018. StrengthsBased Analysis of Student Success in  Online Courses. Online Learning 22 3:55 85. Gierdowski, Dana C. 2019. ECAR Study of Community College Students and  Information Technology, 2019. Research Report. Louisville, CO: ECAR,  May 2019. https: tacc .org sites default files documents 2019 06 2018  commcollss .pdf. Gilmore, Melanie, and Evadna M. Lyons. 2012. Nursing 911: An Orientation  Program to Improve Retention of Online RNBSN Students. Nursing Education Perspectives 33 1:45 47. Glazier, Rebecca A. 2016. Building Rapport to Improve Retention and Success  in Online Classes. Journal of Political Science Education 12 4:437 56. . 2020. Making Human Connections in Online Teaching. PS: Political  Science  Politics:7 8. Doi: 10.1017 S1049096520001535. Glazier, Rebecca A., Kerstin Hamann, Philip H. Pollock, and Bruce M. Wilson.  2019a. Age, Gender, and Student Success: Mixing Faceto-Face and Online  Courses in Political Science. Journal of Political Science Education. 16:2,  142 57. Doi: 10.1080 15512169.2018.1515636.

References   221 2019b. What Drives Student Success? Assessing the Combined Effect  of Transfer Students and Online Courses. Teaching in Higher Education,  published online November 4, 2019. https: www .tandfonline .com doi abs  10.1080 13562517.2019.1686701. Glazier, Rebecca A., and Heidi Skurat Harris. 2020. Common Traits of the Best  Online and Faceto-Face Classes: Evidence from Student Surveys. American  Political Science Association Teaching and Learning Conference, Albuquerque, New Mexico, February 7 9. . 2021. How Teaching with Rapport Can Improve Online Student Success and Retention: Data from Two Empirical Studies. Quarterly Review of  Distance Education, 214. GoldrickRab, Sara. 2016. Paying the Price: College Costs, Financial Aid, and  the Betrayal of the American Dream. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago  Press. . 2020. Beyond the Food Pantry: When It Comes to Caring about Your  Students, a Little Can Go a Long Way. The Hope Center: Hope4College.  https: hope4college .com wpcontent uploads 2020 10 BFPMyProfessor  Cares .pdf. GoldrickRab, Sara, Christine BakerSmith, Vanessa Coca, Elizabeth Looker,  and Tiffani Williams. 2019. College and University Basic Needs Insecurity:  A National RealCollege Survey Report. Philadelphia, PA: The Hope Center,  Temple University. Gonzales, Amy L., Jessica McCrory Calarco, and Teresa Lynch. 2020. Technology Problems and Student Achievement Gaps: A Validation and Extension  of the Technology Maintenance Construct. Communication Research 47  5:750 70. Doi: 10.1177 0093650218796366. Goodman, Joshua, Julia Melkers, and Amanda Pallais. 2019. Can Online  Delivery Increase Access to Education? Journal of Labor Economics 37  1:1 34. Grajek, Susan. 2020. EDUCAUSE COVID-19 QuickPoll Results: Grading   and Proctoring. EDUCAUSE Review, April 10, 2020. https: er .educause  .edu blogs 2020 4 educausecovid19-quickpollresultsgradingand  proctoringfn1. Granitz, Neil A., Stephen K. Koernig, and Katrin R. Harich. 2009. Now Its  Personal: Antecedents and Outcomes of Rapport between Business Faculty  and Their Students. Journal of Marketing Education 31 1:52 65. Graunke, Steven S., and Sherry A. Woosley. 2005. An Exploration of the Factors that Affect the Academic Success of College Sophomores. College Student Journal 39 2. Grawe, Nathan D. 2018. Demographics and the Demand for Higher Education.  Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press. Greene, Thomas G., C. Nathan Marti, and Kay McClenney. 2008. The EffortOutcome Gap: Differences for African American and Hispanic Community  College Students in Student Engagement and Academic Achievement. Journal of Higher Education 79 5:513 39. Guglielmino, Lucy M., and Paul J. Guglielmino. 2003. Identifying Learners  Who Are Ready for E-Learning and Supporting Their Success. In Preparing 
REFERENCES Learners for E-Learning, edited by G. Piskurich, 18 33. San Francisco, CA:  JosseyBass. Gunawardena, Charlotte N., and Frank J. Zittle. 1997. Social Presence as a  Predictor of Satisfaction within a ComputerMediated Conferencing Environment. American Journal of Distance Education 11 3:8 26. Gustafson, Patricia, and Donna Gibbs. 2000. Guiding or Hiding? The Role  of the Facilitator in Online Teaching and Learning. Teaching Education 11  2:195 210. Doi: 10.1080 713698967. Gtl, Christian, Rocael Hernndez Rizzardini, Vanessa Chang, and Miguel  Morales. 2014. Attrition in MOOC: Lessons Learned from Dropout   Students. International Workshop on Learning Technology for Education in  Cloud, Santiago, Chile, September 2 5, 2014. Guzman, Gloria G. 2019. Household Income: 2018. In American Community  Survey Briefs. Washington, DC: United States Census Bureau. Haber, Jennifer, and Michael Mills. 2008. Perceptions of Barriers Concerning  Effective Online Teaching and Policies: Florida Community College Faculty.  Community College Journal of Research and Practice 32 4 6:266 83. Hachey, Alyse C., Claire W. Wladis, and Katherine M. Conway. 2013. Balancing Retention and Access in Online Courses: Restricting Enrollment . . . Is It  Worth the Cost? Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory   Practice 15 1:9 36. Doi: 10.2190 CS.15.1.b. Hagedorn, Linda Serra. 2012. How to Define Retention: A New Look at an  Old Problem. In College Student Retention: Formula for Student Success,  edited by Alexander W. Astin, Joseph B. Berger, Erin W. Bibo, Kurt R. Burkum, Alberto F. Cabrera,  Gloria Crisp, Ann GansemerTopf, Linda Serra  Hagedorn, Steven M. LaNasa, and Susan Lyons, 81 100. Lanham, MD:  Rowman  Littlefield Publishers. Hamann, Kerstin, Rebecca A. Glazier, Bruce M. Wilson, and Philip H. Pollock.  2020. Online Teaching, Student Success, and Retention in Political Science  Courses. European Political Science, published online July 30, 2020. Doi:  10.1057 s41304-020-00282-x. Hammond, Danielle E., and Candice Shoemaker. 2014. Are there Differences  in Academic and Social Integration of College of Agriculture Masters Students in Campus Based, Online and Mixed Programs? NACTA Journal 58  3:180. Hannans, Jaime, Jill Leafstedt, and Michelle PacanskyBrock. 2017. The  Power of Choice: Why Online Classes Matter to Students. Digital Learning  in Higher Ed. Last modified July 14, 2017. https: www .edsurge .com news  2017-07-14-thepowerof-choicewhyonlineclassesmatterto-students. Hannay, Maureen, and Tracy Newvine. 2006. Perceptions of Distance Learning: A Comparison of Online and Traditional Learning. Journal of Online  Learning and Teaching 2 1:1 11. Harmon, Oskar R., James Lambrinos, and Judy Buffolino. 2010. Assessment  Design and Cheating Risk in Online Instruction. Online Journal of Distance  Learning Administration 13 3. Hart, Carolyn. 2012. Factors Associated with Student Persistence in an Online 

References   223 Program of Study: A Review of the Literature. Journal of Interactive Online  Learning 11 1. Harwell, Drew. 2020. Mass School Closures in the Wake of the Coronavirus  Are Driving a New Wave of Student Surveillance. Washington Post. April 1,  Technology. https: www .washingtonpost .com technology 2020 04 01   onlineproctoringcollegeexamscoronavirus. Hayes, Niall, and Lucas D. Introna. 2005. Cultural Values, Plagiarism, and  Fairness: When Plagiarism Gets in the Way of Learning. Ethics  Behavior  15 3:213 31. Herbert, Michael. 2006. Staying the Course: A Study in Online Student Satisfaction and Retention. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration  9 4:300 317. Herring, Mary C., Matthew J. Koehler, and Punya Mishra. 2016. Handbook of  Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge TPACK for Educators. New  York: Taylor  Francis. Hiltonsmith, Robert. 2017. Small Loans, Big Risks: Major Consequences for  Student Debtors. New York: Demos. Hiltz, Starr Roxanne, Eunhee Kim, and Peter Shea. 2007. Faculty Motivators  and Demotivators for Teaching Online: Results of Focus Group Interviews  at One University. 2007 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on  System Sciences HICSS07. Hirschheim, Rudy. 2005. The InternetBased Education Bandwagon: Look  Before You Leap. Communications of the ACM 48 7:97 101. Hislop, Gregory W., and Heidi J. C. Ellis. 2004. A Study of Faculty Effort in  Online Teaching. The Internet and Higher Education 7 1:15 31. Doi:  https: doi .org 10.1016 j.iheduc.2003.10.001. Hodges, Charles, Stephanie Moore, Barb Lockee, Torrey Trust, and Aaron Bond.  2020. The Difference between Emergency Remote Teaching and Online   Learning. EDUCAUSE Review. March 27, 2020. Accessed September 1,   2020. https: er .educause .edu articles 2020 3 thedifferencebetween  emergencyremoteteachingandonlinelearning. Hoeschler, Peter, and Uschi BackesGellner. 2019. Shooting for the Stars and  Failing: College Dropout and SelfEsteem. Economics of Education Working Paper Series 100. Hogan, Kelly A., and Viji Sathy. 2020. 8 Ways to Be More Inclusive in Your  Zoom Teaching. Chronicle of Higher Education, April 7. https: 0-www  chroniclecom.library.ualr .edu article 8-waysto-bemoreinclusivein-your  zoomteaching. Hollins, Nancy, and Alan R. Foley. 2013. The Experiences of Students with  Learning Disabilities in a Higher Education Virtual Campus. Educational  Technology Research and Development 61 4:607 24. Holmberg, Borje. 2003. A Theory of Distance Education Based on Empathy.  In Handbook of Distance Education, edited by Michael Grahame Moore  and William G. Anderson, 79 86. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Horn, Laura. 1998. Stopouts or Stayouts? Undergraduates Who Leave   College in Their First Year. Edited by Project Officer: C. Dennis Carroll. 
REFERENCES Washington, DC: US Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. Hoyt, Jeff E. 1999. Remedial Education and Student Attrition. Community  College Review 27 2:51 72. Hrastinski, Stefan. 2006. Introducing an Informal Synchronous Medium in a  Distance Learning Course: How Is Participation Affected? The Internet and  Higher Education 9 2:117 31. Huang, Qing, Nilupulee Nathawitharana, KokLeong Ong, Susan Keller, and  Damminda Alahakoon. 2019. Mind the Gap: From Analytics to Action in  Student Retention. In Applying Business Intelligence Initiatives in Healthcare and Organizational Settings, edited by Shah J. Miah and William Yeoh,  218 36. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Humiston, Jon P., Sarah M. Marshall, Nicole L. Hacker, and Luis M. Cantu.  2020. Intentionally Creating an Inclusive and Welcoming Climate in the  Online Learning Classroom. In Handbook of Research on Creating Meaningful Experiences in Online Courses, edited by Lydia KyeiBlankson, Esther  Ntuli, and Joseph Blankson, 173 86. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. HuntingtonKlein, Nick, James Cowan, and Dan Goldhaber. 2017. Selection  into Online Community College Courses and Their Effects on Persistence.  Research in Higher Education 58 3:244 69. Hurt, Joyce. 2008. The Advantages and Disadvantages of Teaching and Learning Online. Delta Kappa Gamma Bulletin 74 4. Hurtado, Sylvia, M. Kevin Eagan, Minh C. Tran, Christopher B. Newman,   Mitchell J. Chang, and Paolo Velasco. 2011.  We Do Science Here: Underrepresented Students Interactions with Faculty in Different College Contexts. Journal of Social Issues 67 3:553 79. Doi: 10.1111 j.1540-4560  .2011.01714.x. Huss, John A., and Shannon Eastep. 2013. The Perceptions of Students toward  Online Learning at a Midwestern University: What Are Students Telling Us  and What Are We Doing About It? ie: inquiry in education 4 2:5. Hutchins, Holly M. 2003. Instructional Immediacy and the Seven Principles:   Strategies for Facilitating Online Courses. Online Journal of Distance  Learning Administration 6 3:1 11. Huun, Kathleen, and Andreas Kummerow. 2018. Student Presence and Faculty Availability in Fully Online Courses: Is Alignment Requisite? Journal of  Educators Online 15 2:n2. Ishitani, Terry T. 2006. Studying Attrition and Degree Completion Behavior  among FirstGeneration College Students in the United States. Journal of  Higher Education 77 5:861 85. Ishiyama, John. 2002. Does Early Participation in Undergraduate Research  Benefit Social Science and Humanities Students? College Student Journal 36  September. Ivankova, Nataliya V., and Sheldon L. Stick. 2005. Collegiality and  CommunityBuilding as a Means for Sustaining Student Persistence in the  ComputerMediated Asynchronous Learning Environment. Online Journal  of Distance Learning Administration 8 3. Jaasma, Marjorie A., and Randall J. Koper. 1999. The Relationship of Student

References   225 Faculty OutofClass Communication to Instructor Immediacy and Trust and  to Student Motivation. Communication Education 48 1:41 47. Jack, Anthony Abraham. 2016. No Harm in Asking: Class, Acquired Cultural  Capital, and Academic Engagement at an Elite University. Sociology of Education 89 1:1 19. Jaeger, Audrey J., and M. Kevin Eagan. 2009. Unintended Consequences:  Examining the Effect of PartTime Faculty Members on Associates Degree  Completion. Community College Review 36 3:167 94. . 2011. Examining Retention and Contingent Faculty Use in a State System of Public Higher Education. Educational Policy 25 3:507 37. Jaggars, Shanna Smith. 2013. Online Learning in Community Colleges. In  Handbook of Distance Education, edited by Michael G. Moore, 612 26.  New York: Routledge. . 2014. Choosing between Online and Faceto-Face Courses: Community College Student Voices. American Journal of Distance Education 28  1:27 38. Jaggars, Shanna Smith, and Thomas R. Bailey. 2010. Effectiveness of Fully  Online Courses for College Students: Response to a Department of Education MetaAnalysis. Teachers College, Columbia University: Community   College Research Center. https: academiccommons.columbia .edu doi  10.7916 D85M63SM. Jaggars, Shanna Smith, and Di Xu. 2010. Online Learning in the Virginia   Community College System. Community College Research Center, Teachers  College: Columbia University. https: ccrc.tc.columbia .edu publications   onlinelearningvirginia .html. . 2014. Adaptability to Online Learning: Differences across Types of Students and Academic Subject Areas. American Journal of Distance Education  28 1. . 2016. How Do Online Course Design Features Influence Student Performance? Computers  Education 95 April:270 84. James, Scott, Karen Swan, and Cassandra Daston. 2016. Retention, Progression and the Taking of Online Courses. Online Learning 20 2:75 96. Jaschik, Scott, and Doug Lederman. 2018. Faculty Attitudes on Technology.  Washington, DC: Gallup and Inside Higher Education. https: www .inside  highered .com booklet 2018-surveyfacultyattitudestechnology. Jenkins, Davis. 2011. Redesigning Community Colleges for Completion:   Lessons from Research on HighPerformance Organizations. In Community College Research Center Brief, Number 48. New York, NY: Columbia  University. Johnson, Hans P., and Marisol Cuellar Mejia. 2014. Online Learning and Student Outcomes in Californias Community Colleges. San Francisco, CA: Public Policy Institute of California. Johnson, Judith L. 1997. Commuter College Students: What Factors Determine Who Will Persist and Who Will Drop Out? College Student Journal  31:323 32. Johnson, W. Brad. 2015. On Being a Mentor: A Guide for Higher Education  Faculty. New York: Routledge.
REFERENCES Johnson, Wendy, Caroline E. Brett, and Ian J. Deary. 2010. The Pivotal Role of  Education in the Association between Ability and Social Class Attainment: A  Look across Three Generations. Intelligence 38 1:55 65. Jones, Patrice W. Glenn, and Elizabeth K. Davenport. 2018. Resistance to  Change: HBCUs and Online Learning. Thought  Action Summer:59. Journell, Wayne. 2007. The Inequities of the Digital Divide: Is E-Learning a  Solution? ELearning and Digital Media 4 2:138 49. Doi: 10.2304 elea  .2007.4.2.138. Juillerat, S. 2000. Assessing the Expectations and Satisfactions of Sophomores.  In Visible Solutions for Invisible Students: Helping Sophomores Succeed,  edited by L. A. Schreiner and J. Pattengale, 19 29. Columbia: University of  South Carolina, National Resource Center for the FirstYear Experience and  Students in Transition. Karp, Melinda Mechur. 2011. Toward a New Understanding of NonAcademic  Student Support: Four Mechanisms Encouraging Positive Student Outcomes  in the Community College. Community College Research Center, Working  Paper No. 28, Assessment of Evidence Series, New York. Katsinas, Steven, Nathaniel Bray, Linda Hagedorn, Skip Dotherow, and Mike  Malley. 2019. From Vertical to Dynamic Transfer: Recognizing Continuous Swirl in American Higher Education. Change: The Magazine of Higher  Learning 51 3:44 51. Doi: 10.1080 00091383.2019.1606607. Kaupp, Ray. 2012. Online Penalty: The Impact of Online Instruction on the  LatinoWhite Achievement Gap. Journal of Applied Research in the Community College 19 2:3 11. Kearsley, Greg. 2002. Is Online Learning for Everybody? Educational Technology 42 1:41 44. Kemp, Nenagh, and Rachel Grieve. 2014. Faceto-Face or Faceto-Screen?  Undergraduates Opinions and Test Performance in Classroom vs. Online  Learning. Frontiers in Psychology 5 1278. Doi: 10.3389 fpsyg .2014  .01278. Kezar, Adrianna, Tom DePaola, and Daniel T. Scott. 2019. The Gig Academy:  Mapping Labor in the Neoliberal University. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins  University Press. Kezar, Adrianna, and Daniel Maxey. 2014a. Faculty Matter: So Why Doesnt  Everyone Think So. Thought  Action 2014:29 44. . 2014b. Troubling Ethical Lapses: The Treatment of Contingent Faculty. Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning 46 4:34 37. Doi: 10.1080  00091383.2014.925761. Kilburn, Ashley, Brandon Kilburn, and Tommy Cates. 2014. Drivers of Student  Retention: System Availability, Privacy, Value and Loyalty in Online Higher  Education. Academy of Educational Leadership Journal 18 4:1. Killion, Cheryl M., Susan GallagherLepak, and Janet Reilly. 2015. Are Virtual  Classrooms Colorblind? Journal of Professional Nursing 31 5:407 15.  Doi: https: doi .org 10.1016 j.profnurs.2015.03.006. Kinder, Molly, and Martha Ross. 2020. Reopening America: LowWage Workers Have Suffered Badly from COVID-19 So Policymakers Should Focus on  Equity. Washington, DC: Brookings Institute. https: www .brookings .edu 

References   227 research reopeningamericalowwageworkershavesufferedbadlyfrom  covid19-sopolicymakersshouldfocusonequity. King, Elliot, and Neil Alperstein. 2014. Best Practices in Online Program Development: Teaching and Learning in Higher Education. New York: Routledge. KingSears, Margaret. 2009. Universal Design for Learning: Technology and  Pedagogy. Learning Disability Quarterly 32 4:199 201. Kirp, David L. 2019. The College Dropout Scandal. Chronicle Review 65 38. Kleinman, Joan, and Eileen B. Entin. 2002. Comparison of InClass and  DistanceLearning Students Performance and Attitudes in an Introductory  Computer Science Course. Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges 17  6:206 19. Knight, Ethan J. H. 2020. The Syllabus as Establishing Tone. Syllabus 9 1. Knowles, Malcolm S. 1990. The Adult Learner: A Neglected Species. Houston:  Gulf Publishing Company. Kock, Ned. 2005. Media Richness or Media Naturalness? The Evolution of  Our  Biological Communication Apparatus and Its Influence on Our Behavior  toward ECommunication Tools. IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication 48 2:117 30. Doi: 10.1109 TPC.2005.849649. Koehler, Matthew J., Punya Mishra, Kristen Kereluik, Tae Seob Shin, and  Charles R. Graham. 2014. The Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge Framework. In Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and Technology, edited by J. Michael Spector, M. David Merrill, Jan  Elen, and M. J. Bishop, 101 11. New York: Springer New York. Kolodner, Meredith. 2016. Fewer than One in Seven Community College Students Transfer and Get a Bachelors DegreeBut There Is New Hope. The  Hechinger Report, January 19, 2019. https: hechingerreport .org howoften  docommunitycollegestudentswhogettransfergetbachelorsdegrees. Komarraju, Meera, Sergey Musulkin, and Gargi Bhattacharya. 2010. Role of  StudentFaculty Interactions in Developing College Students Academic SelfConcept, Motivation, and Achievement. Journal of College Student Development 51 3:332 42. Kramarae, Cheris. 2001. The Third Shift: Women Learning Online. Michigan:  American Association of University Women Educational Foundation. Krieg, John M., and Steven E. Henson. 2016. The Educational Impact of  Online Learning: How Do University Students Perform in Subsequent  Courses? Education Finance and Policy 11 4:426 48. Doi: 10.1162  EDFPa00196. Kronk, Henry. 2017. The Most Diverse U.S. Universities Are Online. Elearning Inside. Last modified September 19, 2017. https: news.elearninginside  .com diverseusuniversitiesonline. Kugelmass, Heather, and Douglas D. Ready. 2011. Racial Ethnic Disparities in  Collegiate Cognitive Gains: A Multilevel Analysis of Institutional Influences  on Learning and Its Equitable Distribution. Research in Higher Education  52 4:323 48. Kuh, George D. 1995. The Other Curriculum: Outof-Class Experiences Associated with Student Learning and Personal Development. Journal of Higher  Education 66 2:123 55.
REFERENCES Kuh, George D., and Shouping Hu. 2001. The Effects of StudentFaculty Interaction in the 1990s. Review of Higher Education 24 3:309 32. Kuh, George D., Jillian Kinzie, Jennifer A. Buckley, Brian K. Bridges, and John  C. Hayek. 2006. What Matters to Student Success: A Review of the Literature. In ASHE Higher Education Report. San Francisco: JosseyBass. Kuh, George D., Jillian Kinzie, John H. Schuh, and Elizabeth J. Whitt. 2010.   Student  Success in College: Creating Conditions that Matter. San Francisco,  CA: John Wiley  Sons. Lang, James M. 2013. Cheating Lessons. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University  Press. . 2016. Small Teaching: Everyday Lessons from the Science of Learning.  San Francisco, CA: Wiley. . 2020. On Not Drawing Conclusions about Online Teaching Now  or Next Fall. Chronicle of Higher Education, May 18. https: 0-www  chroniclecom.library.ualr .edu article onnotdrawingconclusionsabout  onlineteachingnowornextfall. Lareau, Annette. 2011. Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life.  Berkeley:  University of California Press. Lassitter, Stefanie A. 2009. Establishing a Relationship between Virtual Instructor and Student in the Online Classroom. Distance Learning 6 1:53. Layne, Melissa, Wallace E. Boston, and Phil Ice. 2013. A Longitudinal Study  of Online Learners: Shoppers, Swirlers, Stoppers, and Succeeders as a Function of Demographic Characteristics. Online Journal of Distance Learning  Administration 16 2:1 12. Lee, Sang Joon, Sandhya Srinivasan, Trudian Trail, David Lewis, and Samantha Lopez. 2011. Examining the Relationship among Student Perception of  Support, Course  Satisfaction, and Learning Outcomes in Online Learning.  The Internet and Higher Education 14 3:158 63. Lee, Wynetta Y. 1999. Striving toward Effective Retention: The Effect of Race  on Mentoring African American Students. Peabody Journal of Education 74  2:27 43. Doi: 10.1207 s15327930pje74024. Lee, Youngju, and Jaeho Choi. 2013. A Structural Equation Model of Predictors of Online Learning Retention. The Internet and Higher Education  16:36 42. Doi: http: dx.doi .org 10.1016 j.iheduc.2012.01.005. Lee, Youngju, Jaeho Choi, and Taehyun Kim. 2013. Discriminating Factors between Completers of and Dropouts from Online Learning Courses.  British Journal of Educational Technology 44 2:328 37. Doi: 10.1111  j.1467 8535.2012.01306.x. Leeds, Elke, Stacy Campbell, Hope Baker, Radwan Ali, Dorothy Brawley, and  John Crisp. 2013. The Impact of Student Retention Strategies: An Empirical  Study. International Journal of Management in Education 7 1 2:22 43. Leibold, Nancyruth, and Laura Marie Schwarz. 2015. The Art of Giving  Online Feedback. Journal of Effective Teaching 15 1:34 46. Leidman, Mary Beth, Mark Piwinsky, and Matthew McKeague. 2010. FacultyStudent Interaction in the Technological Age: The Perpetual Professor? Society for Information Technology  Teacher Education International Conference 2010, San Diego, CA.

References   229 Leonhardt, David, and Sahil Chino. 2019. The College Dropout Crisis. New  York Times, May 23. https: www .nytimes .com interactive 2019 05 23  opinion sunday collegegraduationratesranking .html. Levy, Yair. 2007. Comparing Dropouts and Persistence in E-Learning Courses.  Computers  Education 48 2:185 204. Lichoro, David Muturia. 2015. Faculty Preparedness for Transition to Teaching Online Courses in the Iowa Community College Online Consortium.  PhD diss., Education, Iowa State University. Light, Richard J. 2004. Making the Most of College. Cambridge, MA: Harvard  University Press. Lin, HsiaoPing. 2002. Motivating and Inhibiting Factors that Affect Faculty  Participation in Distance Education at Idaho State University. PhD diss.,  Idaho State University. Lindt, Suzanne Fischer, and Stacia Celeste Miller. 2018. Understanding Factors  Leading to College Classroom Engagement for Millennials: Development  of the College Classroom Engagement Scale. Higher Education Research 3  3:38 44. Liu, Simon Y., Joel Gomez, and C. Yen. 2009. Community College Online  Course Retention and Final Grade: Predictability of Social Presence. Journal  of Interactive Online Learning 8 2:165 82. Loepp, Eric D. 2020. Introduction: COVID-19 and Emergency e-Learning in  Political Science and International Relations. PS: Political Science  Politics  54 1: 1 3. Doi: 10.1017 S1049096520001511. Long, Mark C., and Nicole A. Bateman. 2020. LongRun Changes in Underrepresentation after Affirmative Action Bans in Public Universities. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 42 2:188 207. LongwellGrice, Rob, and Hope LongwellGrice. 2008. Testing Tinto: How  Do Retention Theories Work for FirstGeneration, WorkingClass Students? Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory  Practice 9  4:407 20. Lowenthal, Patrick R. 2010. The Evolution and Influence of Social Presence  Theory on Online Learning. In Social Computing: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications, edited by Patrick R. Lowenthal, 113 28. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Lowenthal, Patrick R., Christine Bauer, and KenZen Chen. 2015. Student  Perceptions of Online Learning: An Analysis of Online Course Evaluations. American Journal of Distance Education 29 2:85 97. Doi: 10.1080  08923647.2015.1023621. Lumina Foundation. 2019. Todays Student. Indianapolis, IN: Lumina  Foundation. Lundberg, Carol A., and Laurie A. Schreiner. 2004. Quality and Frequency of  FacultyStudent Interaction as Predictors of Learning: An Analysis by Student  Race Ethnicity. Journal of College Student Development 45 5:549 65. Lundquist, Cara, Rebecca J. Spalding, and R. Eric Landrum. 2002. College Students Thoughts about Leaving the University: The Impact of Faculty Attitudes and Behaviors. Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory  Practice 4 2:123 33. Doi: 10.2190 flal7am5-q6k3-l40p.
REFERENCES Ma, Jennifer, Matea Pender, and Meredith Welch. 2016. Education Pays 2016:  The Benefits of Higher Education for Individuals and Society. In Trends in  Higher Education Series. New York: College Board. MacNell, Lillian, Adam Driscoll, and Andrea N. Hunt. 2015. Whats in a  Name: Exposing Gender Bias in Student Ratings of Teaching. Innovative  Higher Education 40 4:291 303. Magda, Andrew J., and Carol B. Aslanian. 2018. Online College Students 2018:  Comprehensive Data on Demands and Preferences. Louisville, KY: The  Learning House. Magda, Andrew J., David Capranos, and Carol B. Aslanian. 2020. Online College Students 2020: Comprehensive Data on Demands and Preferences.  Louis ville, KY: Wiley Education Services. Malesky, L. Alvin, John Baley, and Robert Crow. 2016. Academic Dishonesty:  Assessing the Threat of Cheating Companies to Online Education. College  Teaching 64 4:178 83. Doi: 10.1080 87567555.2015.1133558. Mandernach, Jean, Lexi Register, and Carrie ODonnell. 2015. Characteristics  of Adjunct Faculty Teaching Online: Institutional Implications. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration 18 1:1 17. Marek, Kate. 2009. Learning to Teach Online: Creating a Culture of Support  for Faculty. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 50  4:275 92. MarnLpez, Inmaculada, Izabela Zych, Claire P. Monks, and Rosario OrtegaRuiz. 2019. Empathy, Morality and Social and Emotional Competencies  in Interpersonal Interactions Online. In Thriving in Digital Workspaces:  Emerging Issues for Research and Practice, edited by Melinde Coetzee, 217  33. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing. Martinez, Margaret. 2003. High Attrition Rates In E-Learning: Challenges,  Predictors, and Solutions. The E-Learning Developers Journal 14:1 8. Maxfield, R. Jeffery. 2008. Online Education for Nontraditional Adult Students: Perceptions and Attitudes of Emergency Services Workers in Asynchronous Learning Environments. Doctor of Education, Utah State University. Mazzolini, Margaret, and Sarah Maddison. 2007. When to Jump In: The Role  of the Instructor in Online Discussion Forums. Computers  Education 49  2:193 213. McCabe, Janice. 2009. Racial and Gender Microaggressions on a  PredominantlyWhite Campus: Experiences of Black, Latina o and White  Undergraduates. Race, Gender  Class 16 1 2:133 51. . 2016. Connecting in College: How Friendship Networks Matter for  Academic and Social Success. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. McCabe, Margaret Foley, and Patricia GonzalezFlores. 2017. Essentials of  Online Teaching: A StandardsBased Guide. New York: Taylor  Francis. McCarthy, Sally A. 2009. Online Learning as a Strategic Asset. Volume I: A  Resource for Campus Leaders. A Report on the Online Education Benchmarking Study Conducted by the APLUSloan National Commission on  Online Learning. Association of Public and Landgrant Universities.   https: eric.ed .gov ?idED517308.

References   231 McCarty, Cynthia, Doris Bennett, and Shawn Carter. 2013. Teaching College  Micro economics: Online vs. Traditional Classroom Instruction. Journal of  Instructional Pedagogies 11 May. McClendon, Cristie, Robin Massey Neugebauer, and Amanda King. 2017. Grit,  Growth Mindset, and Deliberate Practice in Online Learning. Journal of  Instructional Research 8:8 17. McEwen, Beryl C. 2001. WebAssisted and Online Learning. Business Communication Quarterly 64 2:98 103. McLaren, Constance H. 2004. A Comparison of Student Persistence and Performance in Online and Classroom Business Statistics Experiences. Decision Sciences Journal of Innovative Education 2 1:1 10. Doi: 10.1111  j.0011-7315.2004.00015.x. Means, B., J. Neisler, and with Langer Research Associates. 2020. Suddenly  Online: A National Survey of Undergraduates during the COVID-19 Pandemic. San Mateo, CA: Digital Promise. Mehta, Rohit, and Earl Aguilera. 2020. A Critical Approach to Humanizing  Pedagogies in Online Teaching and Learning. International Journal of Information and Learning Technology, published online April 12, 2020. https:  www .emerald .com insight content doi 10.1108 IJILT10 2019 0099 full  html. Mendez, Jeanette Morehouse, and Jesse Perez Mendez. 2018. Whats in a  Name . . . or a Face? Student Perceptions of Faculty Race. Journal of Political Science Education 14 2:177 96. Mensch, Scott. 2017. Improving Distance Education through Student Online  Orientation Classes. Global Education Journal 2017 1:1 6. Merrills, J. Maria Sweeney. 2010. Factors Affecting Nontraditional African  American Students Participation in Online World Literature Classes. PhD  diss., University of North Carolina at Greensboro. Meyer, Katrina Anne. 2014. Student Engagement Online: What Works and  Why. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley  Sons. Mikoajewska, Emilia, and Dariusz Mikoajewski. 2011. ELearning in the  Education of People with Disabilities. Advances in Clinical and Experimental Medicine 20 1:103 9. Miller, Michelle D. 2014. Minds Online. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University  Press. Millward, Jody. 2008. An Analysis of the National TYCA Research Initiative  Survey Section III: Technology and Pedagogy in TwoYear College English  Programs. Teaching English in the Two Year College 35 4:372. Minero, Emelina. 2017. Parent Engagement in the Digital Age. Edutopia,  November 22, 2017. https: www .edutopia .org article parentengagement  digitalage. Mitchell, Kristina M. W., and Jonathan Martin. 2018. Gender Bias in Student  Evaluations. PS: Political Science  Politics 51 3:648 52. Mondelli, Victoria, and Thomas J. Tobin. 2020. West Virginia University Press.  Pedagogies of Care. Accessed July 20, 2020. https: sabresmonkey.wixsite  .com pedagogiesofcare.
REFERENCES Moody, Josh. 2019. 10 Schools with the Most Online Students. US News   World Report, October 3. https: www .usnews .com highereducation online  education slideshows schoolswiththemostonlinestudents?slide10. Moore, Janet C., and Marie J. Fetzner. 2009. The Road to Retention: A Closer  Look at Institutions that Achieve High Course Completion Rates. Journal of  Asynchronous Learning Networks 13 3:3 22. Moore, Michael G. 1991. Distance Education Theory. American Journal of  Distance Education 5 3:1 6. Morris, Sean Michael, and Jesse Stommel. 2018. An Urgency of Teachers: The  Work of Critical Digital Pedagogy. Hybrid Pedagogy, Inc. Morris, Terry A. 2010. Anytime Anywhere Online Learning: Does It Remove  Barriers for Adult Learners? In Online Education and Adult Learning: New  Frontiers for Teaching Practices, edited by Terry T. Kidd, 115 23. Hershey,  PA: IGI Global. Mortenson, Thomas G. 2012. Measurements of Persistence. In College Student Retention: Formula for Student Success, edited by Alexander W. Astin,  Joseph B. Berger, Erin W. Bibo, Kurt R. Burkum, Alberto F. Cabrera, Gloria  Crisp, and Ann GansemerTopf, 35 60. Lanham, MD: Rowman  Littlefield  Publishers. Moskal, Patsy D. 2020. Director of Digital Learning Impact Evaluation, University of Central Florida. Personal communication, July 28, 2020. Muilenburg, Lin Y., and Zane L. Berge. 2005. Student Barriers to Online  Learning: A Factor Analytic Study. Distance Education 26 1:29 48. Muljana, Pauline S., and Tian Luo. 2019. Factors Contributing to Student  Retention in Online Learning and Recommended Strategies for Improvement: A Systematic Literature Review. Journal of Information Technology  Education: Research 18. Murphy, Elizabeth, and Mara A. RodrguezManzanares. 2012. Rapport in  Distance Education. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning 13 1:167 90. Murtaugh, Paul A., Leslie D. Burns, and Jill Schuster. 1999. Predicting the  Retention of University Students. Research in Higher Education 40  3:355 71. Nadal, Kevin L., Yinglee Wong, Katie E. Griffin, Kristin Davidoff, and Julie   Sriken. 2014. The Adverse Impact of Racial Microaggressions on College Students SelfEsteem. Journal of College Student Development 55  5:461 74. Nadler, Marjorie Keeshan, and Lawrence B. Nadler. 2000. Out of Class Communication between Faculty and Sudents: A Faculty Perspective. Communication Studies 51 2:176 88. Nate Evans, Tiffany. 2009. An Investigative Study of Factors that Influence the  Retention Rates in Online Programs at Selected State, StateAffiliated, and  Private Universities. PhD diss., Instructional Management and Leadership,  Robert Morris University. National Adult Learner Coalition. 2017. Strengthening Americas Economy by  Expanding Educational Opportunities for Working Adults: Policy Opportunities to Connect the Working Adult to Todays Economy through Education 

References   233 and Credentials. Newburyport: Online Learning Consortium. https: www  .voced .edu.au content ngv:76929. National Center for Education Statistics. 2020. Who Is Nontraditional?  National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed April 18, 2020. https:  nces.ed .gov pubs web 97578e .asp. National Science Board. 2020. Bachelors Degree Holders among Individuals 25 44 Years Old. National Science Foundation. April 29, 2020. https:  ncses.nsf .gov indicators states indicator bachelorsdegreeholdersper  25-44-yearolds. Nelson, Karen J., and Tracy A. Creagh. 2013. A Good Practice Guide: Safeguarding Student Learning Engagement. Brisbane: Queensland University of  Technology. Nelson, Susanne J. 2003. Perceptions of Agricultural Education Teacher Preparation Programs toward Distance Education. PhD diss., Oregon State  University. Nichols, Mark. 2010. Student Perceptions of Support Services and the Influence of Targeted Interventions on Retention in Distance Education. Distance Education 31 1:93 113. Doi: 10.1080 01587911003725048. Nilson, Linda. 2015. Specifications Grading: Restoring Rigor, Motivating Students, and Saving Faculty Time. Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishing. Nistor, Nicolae, and Katrin Neubauer. 2010. From Participation to Dropout:  Quantitative Participation Patterns in Online University Courses. Computers  Education 55 2:663 72. North Carolina General Assembly. 2010. University Distance Courses Cost  More to Develop Overall but the Same to Deliver as OnCampus Courses.  Raleigh, North  Carolina: Program Evaluation Division, North Carolina General Assembly. OConnell, Matthew, and MeiChuan Kung. 2007. The Cost of Employee  Turnover. Industrial Management 49 1. Ong, Anthony D., Anthony L. Burrow, Thomas E. FullerRowell, Nicole M. Ja,  and Derald Wing Sue. 2013. Racial Microaggressions and Daily WellBeing  among Asian Americans. Journal of Counseling Psychology 60 2:188. Orellana, Anymir. 2009. Class Size and Interaction in Online Courses. In The  Perfect Online Course: Best Practices for Designing and Teaching, edited by  Michael Simonson, Terry L. Hudgins, and Anymir Orellana, 117 35. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing. Orr, Robert, Mitchell R. Williams, and Kevin Pennington. 2009. Institutional  Efforts to Support Faculty in Online Teaching. Innovative Higher Education  34 4:257. Ortagus, Justin C. 2017. From the Periphery to Prominence: An Examination  of the Changing Profile of Online Students in American Higher Education.  The Internet and Higher Education 32:47 57. Doi: https: Doi .org 10.1016  j.iheduc.2016.09.002. Osei, Zipporah. 2019. LowIncome and Minority Students Are Growing   Share of Enrollments, and 2 Other Takeaways from New Study. Chronicle  of Higher Education, May 22. https: www .chronicle .com article Low  IncomeMinority 246346.
REFERENCES PacanskyBrock, Michelle. 2020. Humanizing. Accessed March 14, 2020.  https: brocansky .com humanizing. PacanskyBrock, Michelle, Michael Smedshammer, and Kim VincentLayton.  2020. Humanizing Online Teaching to Equitize Higher Education. Current  Issues in Education 12 2. Paechter, Manuela, Brigitte Maier, and Daniel Macher. 2010. Students  Expectations of, and Experiences in E-Learning: Their Relation to Learning Achievements and Course Satisfaction. Computers  Education 54  1:222 29. Palacios, Angelica M. G., and J. Luke Wood. 2016. Is Online Learning the Silver Bullet for Men of Color? An InstitutionalLevel Analysis of the California  Community College System. Community College Journal of Research and  Practice 40 8:643 55. Palmer, Michael S., Lindsay B. Wheeler, and Itiya Aneece. 2016. Does the  Document Matter? The Evolving Role of Syllabi in Higher Education.  Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning 48 4:36 47. Doi: 10.1080  00091383.2016.1198186. Parkes, Mitchell, Sue Gregory, Peter Fletcher, Rachael Adlington, and Nicolas Gromik. 2015. Bringing People Together while Learning Apart: Creating Online Learning Environments to Support the Needs of Rural and  Remote Students. Australian and International Journal of Rural Education  25 1:65. Parsad, Basmat, Laurie Lewis, and Peter Tice. 2008. Distance Education at  DegreeGranting Postsecondary Institutions: 2006 2007. Washington, DC:  National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences. Pascarella, Ernest T., Christopher T. Pierson, Gregory C. Wolniak, and Patrick T.  Terenzini. 2004. FirstGeneration College Students: Additional Evidence  on College Experiences and Outcomes. Journal of Higher Education 75  3:249 84. Pascarella, Ernest T., and Patrick T. Terenzini. 2005. How College Affects Students: A Third Decade of Research. Vol. 2. Indianapolis, IN: JosseyBass. Patel, Vimal. 2020. Covid19 Is a Pivotal Moment for Struggling Students: Can  Colleges Step Up? Chronicle of Higher Education, April 14. Patterson, Belinda, and Cheryl McFadden. 2009. Attrition in Online and Campus Degree Programs. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration  12 2. Pecorari, Diane, and Bojana Petric. 2014. Plagiarism in SecondLanguage Writing. Language Teaching 47 3:269 302. Perrin, Andrew. 2019. Digital Gap between Rural and Nonrural America Persists. Accessed April 24, 2020. https: www .pewresearch .org facttank 2019  05 31 digitalgapbetweenruralandnonruralamericapersists. Peterson, Cynthia L., and Nathan Bond. 2004. Online Compared to Faceto-Face Teacher Preparation for Learning StandardsBased Planning Skills.  Journal of Research on Technology in Education 36 4:345 60. Pew Research Center. 2019. Mobile Fact Sheet. Pew Research Center: Internet  and Technology. Last modified June 12, 2019. https: www .pewresearch .org   internet factsheet mobile.

References   235 Pinchbeck, Jessica, and Caroline Heaney. 2017. Case Report: The Impact of  a Resubmission Intervention on Level 1 Distance Learning Students. Open  Learning: The Journal of Open, Distance and e-Learning 32 3:236 42. Polatajko, Mark M., and Catherine H. Monaghan. 2017. Performance Funding  of United States Public Higher Education: Impact on Graduation and Retention Rates. In Handbook of Research on Administration, Policy, and Leadership in Higher Education, edited by Siran Mukerji and Purnendu Tripathi,  496 517. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Policar, Laura, Tracy Crawford, and Vita Alligood. 2017. Accessibility Benefits of E-Learning for Students with Disabilities. Last modified January 31,  2017. https: www .disabledworld .com disability education postsecondary  elearning .php. Porath, Suzanne L. 2018. A Powerful Influence: An Online Book Club for Educators. Journal of Digital Learning in Teacher Education 34 2:115 28.  Doi: 10.1080 21532974.2017.1416711. Putulowski, Joe R., and Robert G. Crosby. 2019. Effect of Personalized  InstructorStudent E-mail and Text Messages on Online Students Perceived  Course Quality, Social Integration with Faculty, and Institutional Commitment. Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory  Practice 21  2:184 201. Doi: 10.1177 1521025117696823. Qiu, Mingzhu, Jim Hewitt, and Clare Brett. 2012. Online Class Size, Note  Reading, Note Writing and Collaborative Discourse. International Journal  of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning 7 3:423 42. Quick Facts. 2019. University of Arkansas at Little Rock. Accessed July 15,  2019. https: ualr .edu administration fastfacts. Rabourn, Karyn E., Allison BrckaLorenz, and Rick Shoup. 2018. Reimagining  Student Engagement: How Nontraditional Adult Learners Engage in Traditional Postsecondary Environments. Journal of Continuing Higher Education 66 1:22 33. Doi: 10.1080 07377363.2018.1415635. Ramsdal, Gro Hilde, Svein Bergvik, and Rolf Wynn. 2018. LongTerm Dropout from School and Work and Mental Health in Young Adults in Norway:  A Qualitative InterviewBased Study. Cogent Psychology 5 1:1455365.  Doi: 10.1080 23311908.2018.1455365. Ran, Florence Xiaotao, and Di Xu. 2019. Does Contractual Form Matter? The  Impact of Different Types of NonTenureTrack Faculty on College Students  Academic Outcomes. Journal of Human Resources 54 4:1081 1120. Rapanta, Chrysi, Luca Botturi, Peter Goodyear, Lourdes Gurdia, and   Marguerite Koole. 2020. Online University Teaching during and After the  Covid19 Crisis: Refocusing Teacher Presence and Learning Activity. Postdigital Science and Education 2 3:923 45. Doi: 10.1007 s42438-020  -00155-y. Reason, Robert Dean, Patrick T. Terenzini, and Robert J. Domingo. 2007.  Developing Social and Personal Competence in the First Year of College.  Review of Higher Education 30 3:271 99. Richardson, Jennifer C., and Karen Swan. 2003. Examing Social Presence in  Online Courses in Relation to Students Perceived Learning and Satisfaction. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 7 1:68 88.
REFERENCES Roberts, James C. 2015. Evaluating the Effectiveness of Lecture Capture: Lessons Learned from an Undergraduate Political Research Class. Journal of  Political Science Education 11 1:45 60. Doi: 10.1080 15512169  .2014.985104. Roberts, Joseph W. 2020. Rapidly Moving Online in a Pandemic: Intentionality, Rapport, and the Synchronous Asynchronous Delivery Decision. PS: Political Science  Politics 54 1:183 85. Doi: 10.1017  S1049096520001596. Robles, Marcel M. 2012. Executive Perceptions of the Top 10 Soft Skills  Needed in Todays Workplace. Business Communication Quarterly 75  4:453 65. Doi: 10.1177 1080569912460400. Roche, Gerard R. 1979. Much Ado about Mentors. Harvard Business Review  57:135 56. Rodchua, Suhansa, George YiadomBoakye, and Ronald Woolsey. 2011. Student Verification System for Online Assessments: Bolstering Quality and  Integrity of Distance Learning. Journal of Industrial Technology 27 3. Roll, Ido, and Philip H. Winne. 2015. Understanding, Evaluating, and Supporting SelfRegulated Learning Using Learning Analytics. Journal of Learning  Analytics 2 1:7 12. Romero, Cristbal, and Sebastin Ventura. 2010. Educational Data Mining:  A Review of the State of the Art. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and  Cybernetics, Part C Applications and Reviews 40 6:601 18. Rosenbaum, James E., Regina DeilAmen, and Ann E. Person. 2007. After  Admission: From College Access to College Success. New York: Russell Sage  Foundation. Rosenboom, Victoria, and Kristin Blagg. 2018. Disconnected from Higher Education: How Geography and Internet Speed Limit Access to Higher Education. Education  Policy Program. Washington, DC: Urban Institute. https:  vtechworks.lib.vt .edu bitstream handle 10919 89125 Disconnectedfrom  highereducation.pdf?sequence1isAllowedy. Rovai, Alfred P. 2003. In Search of Higher Persistence Rates in Distance Education Online Programs. The Internet and Higher Education 6 1:1 16. Rovai, Alfred P., and James R. Downey. 2010. Why Some Distance Education Programs Fail while Others Succeed in a Global Environment. The  Internet and Higher Education 13 3:141 47. Doi: https: doi .org 10.1016  j.iheduc.2009.07.001. Rovai, Alfred P., and Louis B. Gallien Jr. 2005. Learning and Sense of Community: A Comparative Analysis of African American and Caucasian Online  Graduate Students. Journal of Negro Education 74 1:53 62. Rovai, Alfred P., and Michael K. Ponton. 2005. An Examination of Sense of  Classroom Community and Learning among African American and Caucasian Graduate Students. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 9  3:77 92. Rovai, Alfred P., and Mervyn J. Wighting. 2005. Feelings of Alienation and  Community among Higher Education Students in a Virtual Classroom. The  Internet and Higher Education 8 2:97 110. Russo, Tracy, and Spencer Benson. 2005. Learning with Invisible Others: PerReferences   237 ceptions of Online Presence and Their Relationship to Cognitive and Affective Learning. Educational Technology and Society 8 1:54 62. Sax, Linda J., Alyssa N. Bryant, and Casandra E. Harper. 2005. The Differential Effects of StudentFaculty Interaction on College Outcomes for Women  and Men. Journal of College Student Development 46 6:642 57. Schaarsmith, Amy Mcconnell. 2012. Growing Number of College Students  Choose Online Courses. Pittsburgh PostGazette, February 16. https: www  .postgazette.com news education 2012 02 16 Growingnumberof-college  studentschooseonlinecourses stories 201202161337. Schade, Sarah Ann. 2014. Reining in the Predatory Nature of ForProfit Colleges. Arizona Law Review 56:317. Schaelen, Tracy. 2020. Distance Education Faculty Coordinator, Southwestern  College. Personal communication, June 23, 2020. Schmidt, Steven W., Christina M. Tschida, and Elizabeth M. Hodge. 2016.  How Faculty Learn to Teach Online: What Administrators Need to Know.  Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration 19 1:1 10. Schrum, Lynne, and Sunjoo Hong. 2002. Dimensions and Strategies for Online  Success: Voices from Experienced Educators. Journal of Asynchronous  Learning Networks 6 1:57 67. ScottClayton, Judith. 2011. The Shapeless River: Does a Lack of Structure  Inhibit Students Progress at Community Colleges? In Community College  Research Center, Working Paper No. 25, Assessment of Evidence Series. New  York: Columbia University, Teachers College, Community College Research  Center. ScottClayton, Judith, and Jing Li. 2016. BlackWhite Disparity in Student  Loan Debt More than Triples after Graduation. Economic Studies 2 3. Seaman, Julia E., I. Elaine Allen, and Jeff Seaman. 2018. Grade Increase: Tracking Distance Education in the United States. Babson Survey Research Group.  https: files.eric.ed .gov fulltext ED580852 .pdf. Shattuck, Kay. 2013. Faculty Participation in Online Distance Education. In  Hand-book of Distance Education, edited by Michael G. Moore, 390 402.  New York: Routledge. Shea, Peter, and Temi Bidjerano. 2014. Does Online Learning Impede Degree  Completion? A National Study of Community College Students. Computers   Education 75:103 11. Doi: http: dx.doi .org 10.1016 j .compedu.2014  .02.009. . 2018. Online Course Enrollment in Community College and Degree  Completion: The Tipping Point. International Review of Research in Open  and Distributed Learning 19 2. Shea, Peter, Alexandra Pickett, and Chun Sau Li. 2005. Increasing Access to  Higher Education: A Study of the Diffusion of Online Teaching among 913  College Faculty. International Review of Research in Open and Distributed  Learning 6 2. Shevlin, Mark, Philip Banyard, Mark Davies, and Mark Griffiths. 2000. The  Validity of Student Evaluation of Teaching in Higher Education: Love Me,  Love My Lectures? Assessment  Evaluation in Higher Education 25  4:397 405.
REFERENCES Skurat Harris, Heidi. 2020. Graduate Coordinator, Department of Rhetoric and  Writing, University of Arkansas at Little Rock. Personal communication,  July 30, 2020. Slagle, Derek, Cassie Gehring, Samantha Wiley, Heidi Skurat Harris, and Reagan Little. 2020. May 2020 UA Little Rock COVID-19 Assessment of Students, Faculty,  Staff. Little Rock, AR: University of Arkansas at Little  Rock. Smedshammer, Michael. 2020. Distance Education Coordinator, Modesto  Junior College. Personal communication, July 23, 2020. Smedshammer, Michael, Jenni Abbott, Patrick Bettencourt, Iris Carroll, Amy  Duffy, and Steven Miller. 2018. MJC Online Education Plan 2018 2023.  Modesto, CA: Modesto Junior College. https: www .mjc .edu governance   distanceedcommittee documents mjcoeplan20182023final .pdf. Smith, Bettye P., and Billy Hawkins. 2011. Examining Student Evaluations of  Black College Faculty: Does Race Matter? Journal of Negro Education   80 2:149 62. Smith, Glenn G., Allen J. Heindel, and Ana T. TorresAyala. 2008. ELearning Commodity or Community: Disciplinary Differences between Online  Courses. The Internet and Higher Education 11 3 4:152 59. Smith, Samuel H., Robert Samors, and A. Frank Mayadas. 2008. Positioning Online Learning as a Strategic Asset in the Thinking of University Presidents and Chancellors. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks  12 2:91 100. Snyder, Thomas D., Cristobal de Brey, and Sally A. Dillow. 2019. Digest of Education Statistics 2017 NCES 2018 070. Washington, DC: National Center  for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, US Department of  Education. Song, Liyan, Ernise S. Singleton, Janette R. Hill, and Myung Hwa Koh. 2004.  Improving Online Learning: Student Perceptions of Useful and Challenging  Characteristics. The Internet and Higher Education 7 1:59 70. Southwestern College. 2020. Online Learning. Southwestern College. Accessed  July 27, 2020. https: www .swccd .edu locations onlinelearning index .aspx. Spector, J. Michael. 2005. Time Demands in Online Instruction. Distance  Education 26 1:5 27. Doi: 10.1080 01587910500081251. Sridharam, Vasanth. 2012. The Debt Crisis in ForProfit Education: How  the Industry Has Used Federal Dollars to Send Thousands of Students into  Default. Georgetown Journal on Poverty Law  Policy 19 2:331. Stanley, Bolling Craig. 2014. Online vs. Faceto-Face Instruction: A Comparison of Engagement and Gains for AfricanAmerican and White Students at  Predominantly White Institutions. PhD diss., Department of Educational  Leadership and Policy Studies, Florida State University. Stavredes, Tina M. 2011. Effective Online Teaching: Foundations and Strategies  for Student Success. San Francisco, CA: JosseyBass. Stavredes, Tina M., and Tiffany M. Herder. 2013. Student PersistenceAnd  Teaching Strategies to Support It. In Handbook of Distance Education,  edited by Michael G. Moore, 173 187. New York: Routledge. Stephens, Nicole M., Stephanie A. Fryberg, Hazel Rose Markus, Camille S. 

References   239 Johnson, and Rebecca Covarrubias. 2012. Unseen Disadvantage: How  American Universities Focus on Independence Undermines the Academic  Performance of FirstGeneration College Students. Journal of Personality  and Social Psychology 102 6:1178. Stewart, Carol, Alison Wall, and Sheryl Marciniec. 2016. Mixed Signals: Do  College Graduates Have the Soft Skills that Employers Want? Competition  Forum 14 2:276 83. Stommel, Jesse. 2020. Ungrading: An FAQ. Jesse Stommel, February 6, 2020.  https: www .jessestommel .com ungradinganfaq. Stover, Catherine. 2005. Measuringand UnderstandingStudent Retention.  Distance Education Report 9 16:1 7. Strayhorn, Terrell Lamont, and Melvin Cleveland Terrell. 2007. Mentoring and  Satisfaction with College for Black Students. Negro Educational Review 58  1 2:69 83. Sublett, Cameron. 2020. Distant Equity: The Promise and Pitfalls of Online  Learning for Students of Color in Higher Education. Washington, DC:  American Council on Education. Sullivan, Patrick. 2002.  Its Easier to Be Yourself When You Are Invisible:  Female College Students Discuss Their Online Classroom Experiences. Innovative Higher Education 27 2:129 44. Doi: 10.1023 A:1021109410893. Summerlin, James Adrian. 2004. A Comparison of the Effectiveness of OffLine Internet and Traditional Classroom Remediation of Mathematical  Skills. PhD diss., Department of Education, Baylor University. Supiano, Beckie. 2020. Why Is Zoom So Exhausting? Chronicle of Higher  Education, April 23. https: 0-wwwchroniclecom.library.ualr .edu article   whyiszoomsoexhausting. Swan, Karen. 2003. Developing Social Presence in Online Course Discussions.  In Learning and Teaching with Technology: Principles and Practices, edited  by Som Naidu, 147 64. London: Kogan Page. Swan, Karen, and Li Fang Shih. 2005. On the Nature and Development of  Social Presence in Online Course Discussions. Journal of Asynchronous  Learning Networks 9 3:115 36. Sweeney, Erica. 2015. Governor, ADHE Announce Draft Plan for Arkansas  Higher Education. Arkansas Money and Politics. September 1, 2015.   https: armoneyandpolitics .com governoradheannouncedraftplanfor  arkansashighereducation. Tai, HungCheng, WenChuan Lin, and Shu Ching Yang. 2015. Exploring the  Effects of Peer Review and Teachers Corrective Feedback on EFL Students  Online Writing Performance. Journal of Educational Computing Research  53 2:284 309. Doi: 10.1177 0735633115597490. Tajfel, Henri, and John C. Turner. 1979. An Integrative Theory of Intergroup  Conflict. In Organizational Identity: A Reader, edited by William G. Austin  and Stephen Worchel, 56 65. New York: Oxford University Press. Tanaka, Greg. 2002. Higher Educations SelfReflexive Turn: Toward an Intercultural Theory of Student Development. Journal of Higher Education 73  2:263 96. Tanis, Cynthia Janet. 2020. The Seven Principles of Online Learning: Feedback 
REFERENCES from Faculty and Alumni on Its Importance for Teaching and Learning.  Research in Learning Technology 28 0. Doi: 10.25304 rlt.v28.2319. Tello, Steven F. 2007. An Analysis of Student Persistence in Online Education.  International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education 3 3:47 62. Terry, Neil. 2001. Assessing Enrollment and Attrition Rates for the Online  MBA. The Journal 28 7:64 68. Therrien, William J., and Bryan G. Cook. 2018. Introduction to Special Issue:  Null Effects and Publication Bias in Learning Disabilities Research. Learning Disabilities Research  Practice 33 1:5 10. Thiry, Heather, Timothy J. Weston, Sandra L. Laursen, and AnneBarrie Hunter.  2012. The Benefits of MultiYear Research Experiences: Differences in  Novice and Experienced Students Reported Gains from Undergraduate  Research. CBELife Sciences Education 11 3:260 72. Doi: 10.1187  cbe.11 11 0098. Thomas, Lisa, James Herbert, and Marko Teras. 2014. A Sense of Belonging  to Enhance Participation, Success and Retention in Online Programs. International Journal of the First Year in Higher Education 5 2:69 80. Doi:  10.5204 intjfyhe.v5i2.233. Thomas, Rhonda, Karen Kuralt, Heidi Skurat Harris, and George Jensen. 2020.  Create, Support, and Facilitate Personal Online Writing Courses in Online  Writing Programs. Working Paper, Little Rock: University of Arkansas at  Little Rock. Thompson, Eileen, ed. 1997. Distance Education Dropout: What Can We  Do. Edited by R. Pospisil and L. Willcoxson. Proceedings of the 6th Annual  Teaching Learning Forum, Learning through Teaching. Perth, Australia:  Murdoch University. TickleDegnen, Linda, and Robert Rosenthal. 1990. The Nature of Rapport  and Its Nonverbal Correlates. Psychological Inquiry 1 4:285 93. Tinto, Vincent. 2006. Research and Practice of Student Retention: What Next?  Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory  Practice 8 1:1 19. . 2007. Taking Student Retention Seriously. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse  University. Tomei, Lawrence. 2006. The Impact of Online Teaching on Faculty Load:  Computing the Ideal Class Size for Online Courses. Journal of Technology  and Teacher Education 14 3:531 41. Tu, ChihHsiung. 2002. The Measurement of Social Presence in an Online  Learning Environment. International Journal on E-Learning 1 2:34 45. Tung, Lai Cheng. 2012. Proactive Intervention Strategies for Improving Online  Student Retention in a Malaysian Distance Education Institution. Journal of  Online Learning and Teaching 8 4:312. UCF Facts. 2020. UCF Facts 2019 2020. University of Central Florida.  Accessed July 28, 2020. https: www .ucf .edu aboutucf facts. UCLA First to Go. 2016. FirstGeneration Faculty Initiative. Accessed June 10,  2020. https: firsttogo.ucla .edu Programs FirstGenFacultyInitiative. Umbricht, Mark. 2016. Helping LowIncome and MiddleIncome Students: 

References   241 Pell Grants and the Higher Education Act. Higher Education in Review Special Issue 1:24 36. Urwin, Sharon, Robert Stanley, Malcolm Jones, Ann Gallagher, Paul Wainwright, and Andrew Perkins. 2010. Understanding Student Nurse Attrition:  Learning from the Literature. Nurse Education Today 30 2:202 7. US Department of Education. 2017. Education Department Releases Final Debtto-Earnings Rates for Gainful Employment Programs. Washington, DC. Veletsianos, George. 2020. Learning Online: The Student Experience. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Villano, Renato, Scott Harrison, Grace Lynch, and George Chen. 2018. Linking  Early Alert Systems and Student Retention: A Survival Analysis Approach.  Higher Education 76 5:903 20. Doi: 10.1007 s10734-018-0249-y. Virginia Community College System. 2001. Virginia Community College System Organizational Strategy for Distance Learning: Final Report. Richmond,  Virginia. Vonderwell, Selma. 2003. An Examination of Asynchronous Communication Experiences and Perspectives of Students in an Online Course: A Case  Study. The Internet and Higher Education 6 1:77 90. Wallace, Tary, Lynn Grinnell, Lou Carey, and James Carey. 2006. Maximizing  Learning from Rehearsal Activity in WebBased Distance Learning. Journal  of Interactive Learning Research 17 3:319 27. Wallis, Lynn. 2020. Growth in Distance Learning Outpaces Total Enrollment  Growth. Salem: State of Oregon Employment Department. https: www  .qualityinfo .org growthin-distancelearningoutpacestotalenrollment  growth. Wang, Huiming, and Judith Wilson Grimes. 2000. A Systematic Approach to  Assessing Retention Programs: Identifying Critical Points for Meaningful  Interventions and Validating Outcomes Assessment. Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory  Practice 2 1:59 68. Doi: 10.2190  hyy4-xtbhrjfdlu5y. Ward, Michael E., Gary Peters, and Kyna Shelley. 2010. Student and Faculty  Perceptions of the Quality of Online Learning Experiences. International  Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning 11 3:57 77. Waschull, Stefanie B. 2005. Predicting Success in Online Psychology Courses:  SelfDiscipline and Motivation. Teaching of Psychology 32 3:190 92. Doi:  10.1207 s15328023top320311. Watson, George R., and James Sottile. 2010. Cheating in the Digital Age: Do  Students Cheat More in Online Courses? Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration 13 1:n. Wavle, Sharon, and Gamze Ozogul. 2019. Investigating the Impact of Online  Classes on Undergraduate Degree Completion. Online Learning 23  4:281 95. Wei, ChunWang, and NianShing Chen. 2012. A Model for Social Presence in  Online Classrooms. Educational Technology Research and Development 60  3:529 45. What It Costs. 2020. Online Finish Strong: What It Costs. University of 
REFERENCES Arkansas at  Little Rock. Accessed September 1, 2020. https: ualr .edu online  whatitcosts. Whipp, Joan L., and Stephannie Chiarelli. 2004. SelfRegulation in a WebBased Course: A Case Study. Educational Technology Research and Development 52 4:5. Whistle, Wesley. 2020. College Graduates Are Less Likely to Become   Unemployed Due to The Coronavirus. Forbes. Last modified April 17,   2020. https: www .forbes .com sites wesleywhistle 2020 04 17 college  graduatesarelesslikelyto-becomeunemployeddueto-thecoronavirus  1ee1156261e4. White, Kelley Mayer. 2016. Professional Development that Promotes Powerful Interactions: Using Teacher Book Clubs to Reflect on Quality in TeacherChild Relationships. Dimensions of Early Childhood 44 3:28 34. Willging, Pedro A., and Scott D. Johnson. 2009. Factors that Influence Students Decision to Dropout of Online Courses. Journal of Asynchronous  Learning Networks 13 3:115 27. Wilson, Janie H. 2006. Predicting Student Attitudes and Grades from Perceptions of Instructors Attitudes. Teaching of Psychology 33 2:91 95. Doi:  10.1207 s15328023top33022. Wilson, Janie H., Rebecca G. Ryan, and James L. Pugh. 2010. ProfessorStudent Rapport Scale Predicts Student Outcomes. Teaching of Psychology  37 4:246 51. Wingo, Nancy Pope, Nataliya V. Ivankova, and Jacqueline A. Moss. 2017. Faculty Perceptions about Teaching Online: Exploring the Literature Using the  Technology Acceptance Model as an Organizing Framework. Online Learning 21 1:15 35. Wladis, Claire, Katherine M. Conway, and Alyse C. Hachey. 2014. The Role  of Enrollment Choice in Online Education: Course Selection Rationale and  Course Difficulty as Factors Affecting Retention. Online Learning 18 3:n3. . 2015. The Online STEM ClassroomWho Succeeds? An Exploration  of the Impact of Ethnicity, Gender, and Nontraditional Student Characteristics in the Community College Context. Community College Review 43  2:142 64. Doi: 10.1177 0091552115571729. . 2017. Using CourseLevel Factors as Predictors of Online Course Outcomes: A MultiLevel Analysis at a US Urban Community College. Studies in  Higher Education 42 1:184 200. Doi: 10.1080 03075079.2015.1045478. Wood, J. Luke. 2014a. Examining Academic Variables Affecting the Persistence  and Attainment of Black Male Collegians: A Focus on Academic Performance and Integration in the TwoYear College. Race Ethnicity and Education 17 5:601 22. Doi: 10.1080 13613324.2012.733687. . 2014b. Apprehension to Engagement in the Classroom: Perceptions of  Black Males in the Community College. International Journal of Qualitative  Studies in Education 27 6:785 803. Doi: 10.1080 09518398.2014.901575. Wood, J. Luke, Frank Harris III, and Khalid White. 2015. Teaching Men of  Color in the Community College: A Guidebook. San Diego, CA: Montezuma  Publishing. Wood, J. Luke, and Caroline S. Turner. 2010. Black Males and the Community 

References   243 College: Student Perspectives on Faculty and Academic Success. Community  College Journal of Research and Practice 35 1 2:135 51. Wood, J. Luke, and Ronald C. Williams. 2013. Persistence Factors for Black  Males in the Community College: An Examination of Background, Academic, Social, and Environmental Variables. Spectrum: A Journal on Black  Men 1 2:1 28. Wood, Kathryn A., Cary Moskovitz, and Theresa M. Valiga. 2011. Audio Feedback for Student Writing in Online Nursing Courses: Exploring Student and  Instructor Reactions. Journal of Nursing Education 50 9:540 43. Woods, Kathryn, and George Frogge. 2017. Preferences and Experiences of  Traditional and Nontraditional University Students. Journal of Continuing  Higher Education 65 2:94 105. Doi: 10.1080 07377363.2017.1318567. Woods, Robert H., and Jason D. Baker. 2004. Interaction and Immediacy in  Online Learning. International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning 5 2. Woodyard, LeBaron, and Erin Larson. 2018. California Community Colleges  2017 Distance Education Report. California Community Colleges Chancellors Office: Academic Affairs Division. Woosley, Sherry A., and Dustin K. Shepler. 2011. Understanding the Early Integration Experiences of FirstGeneration College Students. College Student  Journal 45 4:700 715. Wray, Michael, Patrick R. Lowenthal, Barbara Bates, and Ellen Stevens. 2008.  Investigating Perceptions of Teaching Online  F2F. Academic Exchange  Quarterly 12 4:243 48. Xenos, Michalis, Christos Pierrakeas, and Panagiotis Pintelas. 2002. A Survey  on Student Dropout Rates and Dropout Causes Concerning the Students in  the Course of Informatics of The Hellenic Open University. Computers   Education 39 4:361 77. Xu, Di, and Shanna Smith Jaggars. 2011a. The Effectiveness of Distance Education across Virginias Community Colleges: Evidence from Introductory  CollegeLevel Math and English Courses. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 33 3:360 77. Doi: 10.3102 0162373711413814. . 2011b. Online and Hybrid Course Enrollment and Performance in  Washington State Community and Technical Colleges. In Community College Working Paper. Community College Research Center, Teachers College:  Columbia University. . 2014. Performance Gaps between Online and Faceto-Face Courses:  Differences across Types of Students and Academic Subject Areas. Journal of  Higher Education 85 5:633 59. Doi: 10.1080 00221546.2014.11777343. Xu, Di, and Ying Xu. 2019. The Promises and Limits of Online Higher Education: Understanding How Distance Education Affects Access, Cost, and  Quality. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute. Zatynsk, Mandy. 2013. Calling for Success: Online Retention Rates Get Boost  From Personal Outreach. Arlington, VA: American Institutes for Research,  Education Sector. January 16, 2013. https: www .air .org edsectorarchives   publications callingsuccessonlineretentionratesgetboostpersonal  outreach.
REFERENCES Zavarella, Carol A., and Jan M. Ignash. 2009. Instructional Delivery in Developmental Mathematics: Impact on Retention. Journal of Developmental  Education 32 3:2. Zembylas, Michalinos. 2008. Engaging with Issues of Cultural Diversity and  Discrimination through Critical Emotional Reflexivity in Online Learning.  Adult Education Quarterly 59 1:61 82. Doi: 10.1177 0741713608325171. Zhang, ChingWen, Beth Hurst, and Annice McLean. 2016. How Fast Is Fast  Enough? Education Students Perceptions of Email Response Time in Online  Courses. Journal of Educational Technology Development and Exchange  JETDE 9 1:1. Zimmerman, Jonathan. 2020. Video Kills the Teaching Star: Remote Learning   and the Death of Charisma. Chronicle of Higher Education, April 24. https:  0-wwwchroniclecom.library.ualr .edu article videokillstheteachingstar.

Index Page cites followed by f or t are references to figures and tables, respectively. Academic Locus of Control, 40 accessibility of online classes, 18 20 administrators, recommendations for,  177 87 Adobe tools for feedback, 100 101 affordability of online classes, 14 17.  See also costs of online education African American students. See Black  students age, 28. See also nontraditional students Alfred State graduation rates, 52 53 Alpert, William T., 38 American Community Survey, 174 Americans with Disabilities Act 1990,  145 Ang, Desmond, 128 anonymity, 19 20 Aragon, Steven R., 27, 37 Arizona State University: EdPlus Action  Lab, 44; tech support and tutoring,  184 assignment reminder emails, 108, 203 5 assignments and deadlines: cheating and,  137 40; extensions of, 137, 141; flexibility of, 109, 142 43; instructors  reminding students of, 51, 108, 142,  161 62, 203 5; late submissions, 93,  172; research papers, 137 39, 175;  student work schedules, 103 4, 136;  ungrading, 121, 141 asynchronous classes: defined, 4;  employment and flexibility of, 38;  learning disabilities and limitations,  20; raceand genderbased outcomes  for, 80; recommendations for success  with, 169 70; skills needed for, 41;  synchronous interaction opportunities  in, 92 93, 166 atrisk students. See disadvantaged  students audio feedback, 100 audio messages, 89 92 Bailey, Allison, 67 Baker, Rachel, 47 Beer, Colin, 37, 53 Berge, Zane L., 69 Bernacki, Matthew L., 47 Best Worst Study: on best instructors,  150; on instructor feedback, 95, 99;  on instructor interaction and communication, 106 7, 163 64; results from,  64 67, 65t bias, 28, 138, 153 Bidjerano, Temi, 35 big data, 48 50 Blackboard LMS, 49, 102 3 BlackInTheIvory, 129 Black Lives Matter, 129 Black students: asynchronous class outcomes and, 80; college enrollment statistics, 19, 122 23, 123f, 128; instructor relationships, 61, 70; learning  outcomes for online classes, 19, 129;  online student retention rates, 28; as  percentage of students and instructors,  128; racism, 28, 129 Blagg, Kristin, 21 Boise State University online boot camp,  47 Boston, Wally, 43 budgets and budgeting, 5
INdEx California Community Colleges: case  studies of, 189 92; dropout rates, 28;  enrollment rates, 24; ONE Online  Network of Educators, 44, 191;  online classes and retention rates, 35  36; online math tutoring, 73, 164 65;  race and genderbased outcomes in,  70, 80 campus culture, 52, 181 82 campus support services, 4 case studies, 188 94 cell phone numbers, 114 16 Chambliss, Daniel F., 61 cheating, 137 40; surveillance systems,  138 39 check-in emails, 108 10, 202, 205 6 childcare, 17 Choi, Jaeho, 40 class sizes, 96 97 cloud storage, 175 76 colleges and universities: administrators, recommendations for, 177 87;  benefits of online classes, 23 25; case   studies of successful retention strategies, 188 94; costs of attending,  15 17, 16n, 25, 29, 33 34, 124 25;   culture of connection and, 52, 181  82;  diversity of students and instructors, 128; efforts to mitigate low  retention rates, 44 45; employment  outcomes and, 13, 21 22; enrollment  rates, 4, 14 15, 15n, 18 21, 23 24,  122 23, 123f, 128; graduation rates,  5, 28, 52, 75; institutional culture  change and, 194 97; performancebased  funding models for, 30. See also  community colleges; online higher  education; retention rates; specific  schools common mistakes document, 99 community colleges: affordability of  online classes, 15, 19; case studies of  successful retention strategies, 188  92; combining online and traditional  classes, 34 36; computer access of  students, 175; enrollment rates, 24;  instructor engagement, 66, 130; online  retention rates, 27 28, 32 33, 33f,  37 38; students of color, 19, 41 42,  80. See also online higher education;  specific schools Community of Inquiry framework, 42  43, 117 compassion, 137 39, 162 computer and internet access, 128, 138,  174 77. See also technology contingent instructors, 25, 65 66, 151,  182 85 copypastepersonalize feedback  method, 98 100 Costa, Karen, 91 costs of online education: failing grades  and dropping classes, 33 34; forprofit colleges and, 15, 124 25; hidden costs, 17; Pell Grants and, 124;  student loan debt, 29, 33 34, 125;   tuition fees, 14 17, 16n Couch, Kenneth A., 38 Course Signals, 49 coursework. See assignments and  deadlines COVID-19 pandemic: contingent  instructors, shift to, 151; emergency remote teaching, 25, 152, 165;  instructor adjustments and flexibility,  54, 80; pedagogies of care, 43; recession and unemployment, 22; student  crises and struggles, 142 44; technological inequalities and, 128, 176 crises of students: COVID-19 pandemic  and, 142 44; empathy and, 142 46;  instructors giving up, 140 42; instructors responding to, 133 40, 161 62;  rapportbuilding strategies and, 62,  71 73, 94 95 Crosby, Robert G., 73 Cuellar Mejia, Marisol, 35 Darby, Flower, 48 Daston, Cassandra, 124 Davenport, Elizabeth K., 116 deadlines. See assignments and deadlines De Castro e Lima Baesse, Deborah, 49 Deming, David J., 16 demographic changes, 24 De Oliveira, Ana Emilia Figueiredo, 49 DePaola, Tom, 151, 184 Department of Education, US, 125

Index   247 Digest of Education Statistics Report  2017, 122 Digital Pedagogy Lab, 180 disadvantaged students, 120 46;  crises  and struggles, 62, 134 35, 140 46;  demographic changes and, 121 25,  123f; early alert systems and, 50;  email communication and, 107; empathy and, 142 46; guiding principles to  help, 133 40; instructor relationships,  61; online class retention rates, 3, 28  29; perspectives of, 126 29; rapportbuilding strategies and, 6, 129 33,  133f dropout rates. See failing grades; retention rates Dunlap, Joanna, 109 Dziuban, Chuck, 193 94 early alert systems for struggling students, 48 50, 51 Eastep, Shannon, 66, 91 economic mobility, 21 23 emails: etiquette for, 104, 106; examples, 200 206; for extra credit points,  87; mail merge applications, 111  14, 112 14t; responses to, 70, 87 88,  106; response times for, 102 4, 152;  time investment for, 110 11; tone and  content, 104 10, 106 7t empathy, 43, 142 46 employment: assignment deadlines and,  103 4, 136; on campus, 128 college  degrees value for, 13, 21 22, 161 63;  instructor relationships, 75; online  classes flexibility for, 38; working  from home, skills for, 22 engagement of students, 62, 74 equality versus equity, 135 37, 162 evaluations, 78 79, 89, 152 53, 154t,  158 59 exam scheduling, 136 extra credit points, 87, 90, 117 18 facesaving strategies, 138 faceto-face classes. See traditional faceto-face classes facial recognition software, 138 faculty. See instructors failing grades: causes of, 36 44; costs  and consequences of, 29, 33 34; in  online classes, 2 3, 5, 26, 27, 76; replicating real life, 161 federal financial aid, 29, 33 34, 124 25 feedback strategies, 84t, 95 102: automated, 159 60; instructor adaptations  of, 118 19; purpose of, 83. See also  emails Felten, Peter, 50, 61 Fetzner, Marie J., 180 firstgeneration students: computer  access and, 174 75; costs of college  and, 16; disappearing from classes,  168 69; email communications and,  105 6, 107; equality versus equity for,  135 37; forprofit colleges and, 124  25; instructor relationships, 61, 74,  129 30; perspectives of online classes,  126 27; rapport, 6. See also disadvantaged students firstyear college students, 60 61 food insecurity, 127 28 foreign students, 20 forprofit colleges, 15, 124 25 friends, 172 77. See also peers and peer  relationships Gannon, Kevin M., 63 64, 142 gender: asynchronous class outcomes  and, 80; instructor relationships, 41  42, 70; isolation of students and, 62;  online student retention rates and, 28;  of tenured instructors, 183 Gerring, Carol S., 69 giving up on students, 140 42 goal setting, 40 GoldrickRab, Sara, 144 Google Sheets, 111 grade point average GPA: instructor relationships and, 61, 74; police   violence proximity and, 128; success  in online classes and, 39, 46; technology access and, 175. See also failing grades grading rubrics, 99 graduate school, 27, 75 graduation rates, 5, 28, 52, 75 Great Recession 2008 2013, 22, 24
INdEx Grisolia, Alexandra Monteiro, 49 grit, 40 41 group work, 117, 136, 170 71 growth mindset, 40 41 Harmon, Oskar R., 38 Harris, Frank, III, 6, 70 health issues of students, 20 hidden curriculum, 126 27, 135 36 higher education. See colleges and universities; community colleges Higher Education Act 1965, 124 highincome students, 15n Hispanic students. See Latinx students homelessness, 127 human connection, 42, 50 53, 163 66.  See also rapportbuilding strategies;  relationship building humanizing instructors, 84t, 85 95, 179;  case studies, 189 92; in electronic  environments, 43, 68 69; instructor  adaptations, 118; purpose of, 83 Hurst, Beth, 102 Hurtado, Sylvia, 63 Huss, John A., 66, 91 hybrid classes, 4, 80 81 hyflex classes, 4 implicit bias, 28 income level and higher education, 22,  125 inperson classes. See traditional faceto-face classes institutional culture change, 194 97 instructors: chance encounters with,  6 7; class size preferences, 97; compassion and empathy of, 43, 137  40, 142 46, 162; contingent versus  tenured, 25, 65 66, 151, 182 85;  COVID-19 pandemic and, 54, 80;  defined, 2n; email examples for, 200  206; engagement of, 65 67; giving up  on students, 140 42; growth mindsets, encouraging, 40 41; impact in  online classes, 67 75, 75f; implicit  biases of, 28; meaningful connections  with, 74 75, 75f, 129 30; modeling  behaviors, 68, 104, 106; office hours,  63 64, 88, 126 27, 171 72; presence  and pedagogical warmth of, 42 44,  69, 144, 158, 179; qualifications, 65  66; race and ethnicity of, 128; student  evaluations of, 78 79, 89, 152 53,  154t, 158 59; student relationships  and success rates of, 4 5, 50 53;  teaching with rapport, 178 81, 185,  189 91, 193; tradeoffs of building  rapport for, 110 11, 151 54, 154f;  traditional courses, preferences for, 44,  152, 181; transactional distance with,  79 81. See also humanizing instructors; rapportbuilding strategies; relationship building Integrated Postsecondary Education  Data Systema IPEDS, 16 17 integration into campus community,  42 44 international students, 20 internet access, 128, 138, 174 77 isolation, 43, 62, 66, 129, 181 Jaggers, Shanna Smith, 28, 38, 69, 164,  180 James, Scott, 124 jobs. See employment Johnson, Elaine S., 27, 37 Johnson, Hans P., 35 Johnson, Scott D., 37 Jones, Patrice W. Glenn, 116 Kaupp, Ray, 70 Kennesaw State University orientation,  47 Kentucky Community and Technical  College System retention rates, 67 Kezar, Adrianna, 60, 151, 184 Kim, Taehyun, 40 Kuh, George D., 60, 63 Lambert, Leo M., 50, 61 Lang, James M., 48 Latinx students: college enrollment   statistics, 122 23, 123f, 128; flexibility of online classes for, 19; instructor  relationships, 61, 70; online student  retention rates, 28 Lawson, Celeste, 37, 53 learning disabilities, 20

Index   249 Learning Management Systems LMSs,  48 50, 86, 94, 102 3 Learning Online Veletsianos, 104 learning types, 20 lecture notes and content, 86, 92 Lee, Youngju, 40 letters of recommendation, 75 loans, 29, 33 34, 125 LongwellGrice, Hope and Rob, 141 Lowenthal, Patrick R., 109 lowerincome students: affordability  of online classes, 14 17; disappearing from classes, 168 69; enrollment  rates, 14 15, 15n, 123 24; equality  versus equity for, 135 37; food insecurity and homelessness, 127; forprofit colleges and, 124; technological  inequalities and, 128. See also disadvantaged students mail merge applications, 111 14,  112 14t Massive Open Online Classes  MOOCs, 97 math classes, 73, 164 65 Maxey, Daniel, 60 McFadden, Cheryl, 27 McLean, Annice, 102 mentoring, 63, 130, 172 77. See also  relationship building Merrills, J. Maria Sweeney, 70 midcareer professionals, 18. See also  nontraditional students middleincome students, 14 15, 15n Miller, Michelle, 40 Minds Online Miller, 40 Minimum Rapport Experiment, 154 60,  157 58t, 159f Minority Serving Institutions MSIs, 22 modeling behaviors, 68, 104, 106 Modesto Junior College case study,  190 92 Monsys, 49 Moodle, 49 Moore, Janet C., 180 Moore, Michael G., 79 Morris, Sean Michael, 43, 180 motivation of students, 40, 62, 70 71, 74 Muilenburg, Lin Y., 69 National Center for Education Statistics,  122, 124 New York Times on dropout crisis, 52 Nilson, Linda, 141 42 99 Tips for Creating Simple and Sustainable Educational Videos Costa, 91 nontraditional students: accessibility of  online classes, 21; defined, 122, 172;  dropping and failing classes, 37 39;  early alert systems and, 50; enrollment  rates, 121; equality versus equity for,  135 37; flexibility of online classes  for, 17 18, 34; online combined with  traditional classes and, 35 36; student  loan debt of, 125. See also disadvantaged students Oakton Community College Persistence  Project, 118 office hours, 63 64, 88, 126 27, 171 72 online higher education, 13 30; Best  Worst Study data on, 64 67, 65t;  campus support services and, 4; college and university benefits from, 21  25; combined with traditional classes,  34 36, 35f, 170, 174, 187; costs of,  16 17, 16n; enrollment rates, 4, 18  21, 23 24; nontraditional students  and, 17 18, 21; retention rates, 2 3,  5, 26 30; rural students and, 21; skills  needed for, 39 42, 46 48; student  perspectives and, 126 29; students of  color and, 18 20; traditional classes  compared, 32 36, 32 33t, 35f, 59  60, 77 78, 151 52, 162; traditional  classes transitioned to, 92 93, 165.  See also costs of online education;  rapportbuilding strategies; tradeoffs  of building rapport Online Learning Consortium, 44 Online RapportBuilding Experiment,  76 79, 77f, 78n, 119 orientation classes, 46 48, 51, 185 87 PacanskyBrock, Michelle, 43, 87, 91,  179, 188 Palacios, Angelica M. G., 41, 80 pandemic recession 2020, 22 parental support to students, 172 77
INdEx Pascarella, Ernest T., 63 Patterson, Belinda, 27 PDF documents, feedback in, 100 101 pedagogical warmth, 43, 144 peers and peer relationships: classwork  feedback, 101; graduation rates and,  61; group work, 117, 136, 170 71;  rapportbuilding strategies, 116  18, 136, 170 71; support networks,  172 77 Pell Grant program, 124 people of color. See students of color people with disabilities, 144 45 perseverance, 40 41 personal relationships. See relationship  building phone calls, 114 16 plagiarism, 137 40 podcasts, 90 positive feedback, 101 poverty. See lowerincome students Predominantly White Institutions  PWIs, 19, 44, 128 29 presemester surveys, 88 89, 112 14,  136 37, 199 presence of instructors, 42 44, 69, 144,  158, 179 professors and faculty. See instructors profile pictures, 86 Purdue Course Signals system, 49 Putulowski, Joe R., 73 race and ethnicity. See students of color racism, 28, 129 Radical Hope Gannon, 63 rapportbuilding strategies, 82 119; case  studies, 188 94; humanizing instructors and, 85 95; importance of, 5 7,  43; instructor adaptations of, 118  19; measuring outcomes of, 129 33,  133f; Online RapportBuilding Experiment, 76 79, 77f, 78n, 119; orientation classes and, 48, 51; outside of  classrooms, 63; personalized feedback,  95 102; reaching out to students,  102 16, 106 7t, 112 14t; research  supporting, 3, 5 6; student crises and  struggles, handling, 62, 94 95, 134  35, 140 46; between students, 116  18, 136, 170 71; techniques, list, 83,  84t; training for instructors on, 178  81, 185, 189 91, 193. See also relationship building; tradeoffs of building rapport Rapport Impact Study, 129 33, 133f,  149 rational choice theory, 162 reaching out to students: email examples, 105 11, 106 7t; email mail  merge applications, 111 14, 112 14t;  instructor adaptations of, 118 19;  overview, 84t, 102 16; phone calls  and texts, 114 16; purpose of, 83 RealCollege, 144 recommendations. See support networks relationship building, 59 81; Best Worst  Study data and, 64 67, 65t; faceto-face classes and instructor impact,  60 64; meaningful instructor connections and, 4 5, 50 53, 74 75, 75f;  online classes and instructor impact,  67 74; Online RapportBuilding  Experiment, 76 79, 77f, 78n, 119;  transactional distance with instructors  and, 79 81. See also rapportbuilding  strategies Remind app, 116 research papers, 137 39, 175 retention rates, 31 55; case studies on  improving, 188 94; causes of dropouts, 36 44; contingent instructors  and, 182; current solutions for, 44 45;  defined, 26; digital divide and, 32 36,  32 33t, 35f; early alert system for, 48  50, 51; giving up on students, 140  42; human connection and, 50 53;  integration into campus community  and, 42 44; online classes and, 2 3,  5; online versus traditional classes  and, 26 30; performancebased funding models and, 30; rapport and, 5 7;  skills improvements and, 46 48; student crises and struggles, 62, 71 72,  134 35, 140 46. See also relationship  building reverse baby boom, 24

Index   251 Rio Salado College feedback software, 96 Rosenboom, Victoria, 21 rural areas, 21, 176 77 scaffolding, 130 Schaelen, Tracy, 189 scholarships, 187 Scott, Daniel T., 151, 184 selfassessments in orientation, 186 87,  189 90 selfdirected learning, 70, 163 64 selfregulation, 40 42 Shea, Peter, 35 skills: assessments and interventions for,  46 48; for online classes, 39 42; soft,  161; for studying, 40; technological,  40, 46, 69, 128; time management,  40 42, 46, 47; working from home  and, 22 smartphones, 87, 115 16, 175 Smedshammer, Michael, 87, 91, 192 social and economic mobility, 21 23 socioeconomic status. See lowerincome  students soft skills, 161 Sottile, James, 138 Southwestern College case study, 189 90 Stanley, Bolling Craig, 19, 129 State University of New York: graduation rates, 52; online classes and  retention rates, 35 36 Stommel, Jesse, 43, 139 40, 141, 180 student loan debt, 29, 33 34, 125 students: accessibility of traditional  classes, 20; contingent instructors  and learning outcomes, 182; demographic changes, 24; engagement of,  62, 74; evaluations of instructors,  78 79, 89, 152 53, 154t, 158 59;  instructor relationships and, 4 5, 50  53; integration into campus community, 42 44; isolation in online classes,  66, 68; motivation of, 40, 62, 70 71,  74; orientation classes for, 46 48, 51,  185 87; perspectives of, 26 27, 126  29; rapportbuilding strategies among,  116 18, 136, 170 71; recommendations for, 168 72; sense of self and  selfesteem, 29, 34; skills needed for  online class success, 39 42, 46 48;  tradeoffs of building rapport for, 160  63; traditional, decreasing number of,  121 22; traditional courses, preferences for, 41. See also crises of students; disadvantaged students; peers  and peer relationships; relationship  building students of color: accessibility of online  classes for, 18 20; asynchronous class  outcomes and, 80; college enrollment  statistics, 18 20, 122 23, 123f, 128;  diversity of students and instructors, 128; early alert systems and, 50;  instructor relationships, 61, 74; isolation of, 44, 62, 70, 129; rapport and,  6; relationships with instructors, 41  42; social and economic mobility, 22  23. See also disadvantaged students student success teams, 49 50 study skills, 40 support networks, 167 97; administrators and, 177 87; case studies, 188  94; institutional culture change and,  194 97; parents, friends, and mentors,  172 77; students forming, 168 72 surveillance systems, 138 39 Swan, Karen, 124 syllabi, 86 88, 141 42, 170 synchronous classes, 4, 80 81, 165 66 synchronous interaction opportunities,  92 93, 166 Takacs, Christopher G., 61 technology: human connection versus,  163 66; inequalities in, 128, 138,  174 77; Learning Management Systems and, 48 50, 86, 94, 102 3; skills  needed for, 40, 46, 69, 128; support  staff for management of, 180 Terenzini, Patrick T., 63 texting, 115 16 time management skills, 40 42, 46, 47 Tinto, Vincent, 50, 181 tradeoffs of building rapport, 149 66;  for instructors, 110 11, 151 54, 154f;  Minimum Rapport Experiment and, 
INdEx 154 60, 157 58t, 159f; for students,  160 63; technology without humanity, 163 66 traditional faceto-face classes: accessibility of, 20; Best Worst Study  data on, 64 65, 65t; combined with  online classes, 34 36, 35f, 170, 174,  187; declining enrollment in, 23 24;  instructors impact in, 60 64; instructor preferences for, 44, 152, 181;  online classes compared, 32 36, 32  33t, 35f, 59 60, 77 78, 151 52, 162;  retention rates and, 26 28; student  preferences for, 41; transferring to  online platform, 92 93, 165 transactional distance, 79 81 Tung, Lai Cheng, 38 tutoring, 73, 164 65 underserved students. See disadvantaged  students unemployment rates, 21 22 ungrading policies, 121, 141 Universal Design for Learning, 20 universities. See colleges and universities University of Arkansas: costs of online  classes, 16; COVID-19 survey, 143  44; culture of rapport, 184 85; firstgeneration students, 132, 174; online  classes and retention rates, 34 36,  35f, 174, 176 University of California, Los Angeles  UCLA firstgeneration faculty initiative, 135 University of Central Florida: case study,  192 94; Center for Distributed Learning, 44, 51, 193; online classes and  retention rates, 36 University of Southern Mississippi orientation, 47 University System of Georgia USG  eCore, 49 50, 51, 73, 184 Utz, Jenifer C., 47 Veletsianos, George, 79, 104 video and audio messages, 89 92 video feedback, 101 VincentLayton, Kim, 87, 91 Virginia Community Colleges, instructor  engagement, 66 Vosicka, Lucie, 47 Watson, George R., 138 welcome emails, 108, 200 201 White, Khalid, 6, 70 WiFi access, 176 Willging, Pedro A., 37 Wood, J. Luke, 6, 41, 70, 80, 191 Xu, Di, 28, 69, 164, 180 Zhang, ChingWen, 102 Zoom lectures, 80, 165 tradeoffs of building rapport cont.

Higher Education Books from Hopkins Press Relationship-Rich  Education How Human Connections Drive  Success in College Peter Felten and Leo M. Lambert A mentor, advisor, or even a friend?  Making connections in college makes  all the difference. 39.95 hcebook Teaching Online A Guide to Theory, Research,   and Practice Claire Howell Major Demystifies online teaching for both  enthusiastic and wary educators and  helps faculty who teach online do  their best work as digital instructors. 29.95 pbebook Learning Online The Student Experience George Veletsianos Learning Online exemplifies a studentcentered approach to online learning  that is vital to achieving accessible  and high-quality university education  for all.Martha Cleveland-Innes,  coeditor of An Introduction to Distance  Education: Understanding Teaching  and Learning in a New Era 29.95 hcebook Learning Innovation   and the Future   of Higher Education Joshua Kim and Edward Maloney Giving higher education professionals  the language and tools they need to  seize new opportunities   in digital learning. 39.95 hcebook

JHUPress     JohnsHopkinsUniversityPress   JHUPress For more books on Higher Education, visit press.jhu.edu