Creating Compassionate  Classrooms:   Understanding the Continuum of  Disabilities and Effective  Educational Interventions 

Nicholas D. Young, PhD, EdD  Angela Fain, PhD  Teresa A. Citro, PhD 

Series in Education 

Copyright  2019 Vernon Press, an imprint of Vernon Art and Science Inc, on behalf  of the author. 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval  system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,  photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior permission of Vernon Art and  Science Inc. 

www.vernonpress.com 

In the Americas:   Vernon Press  1000 N West Street,   Suite 1200, Wilmington,  Delaware 19801   United States  

In the rest of the world:  Vernon Press  CSancti Espiritu 17,  Malaga, 29006  Spain 

Series in Education  Library of Congress Control Number: 2018914549  ISBN: 978-1-62273-578-5  Also available: 978-1-62273-604-1 Hardback  Cover design by Vernon Press using elements designed by Pressfoto  Freepik. 

Product and company names mentioned in this work are the trademarks of their  respective owners. While every care has been taken in preparing this work, neither  the authors nor Vernon Art and Science Inc. may be held responsible for any loss or  damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the information  contained in it.  

Every effort has been made to trace all copyright holders, but if any have been  inadvertently overlooked the publisher will be pleased to include any necessary 

Table of Contents  Acknowledgement  v  Preface  vii  Chapter 1  Introduction to Special Education  1  Angela C. Fain, Ph.D., University of West Georgia  Chapter 2  The Potency of the Response to Intervention  Framework  11  Nicholas D. Young, PhD, EdD, American  International College, Kara Johnson, MEd,  Endicott College  Chapter 3  Creating Meaningful and Measurable  Individualized Education Plans  23  Nicholas D. Young, PhD, EdD., American  International College, Michaela F. Rice, MEd,  Endicott College  Chapter 4  Emotional Disturbance  33  Angela C. Fain, PhD, University of West Georgia  Chapter 5  Autism Spectrum Disorder  45  Nicholas D. Young, PhD, EdD, American  International College, Elizabeth Jean, EdD,  Endicott College  Chapter 6  Speech and Language Impairments  63  Katherine B. Green, Ph.D., University of West  Georgia  Chapter 7  Intellectual Disabilities  77  Jessica L. Bucholz, Ph.D., Sarasota County Public  Schools, FL, Janet I. Goodman, Ph.D., Haralson  Public Schools, GA 

Chapter 8  Specific Learning Disabilities  89  James R. Schwab, Ph.D., University of West  Georgia, Angela C. Fain, PhD., University of West  Georgia  Chapter 9  Other Health Impairments with an Emphasis  on ADHD  99  Nicholas D. Young, PhD, EdD, American  International College, Jennifer M. Innocenti, MA,  American International College, Kristen  Bonanno-Sotiropoulos, EdD, Bay Path  University  Chapter 10  Deaf and Hard of Hearing  119  Michelle A. Gremp, PhD, Eastern Kentucky  University  Chapter 11  Visual Impairment and Deaf-Blindness  137  Nicholas D. Young, American International  College, Kara Johnson, MEd, Endicott College  Chapter 12  Traumatic Brain Injury  145  Ann Marie Leonard-Zabel, D.Ed., ABSNP, Curry  College and NEALAC Clinic  Chapter 13  Multiple Disabilities  161  Rachel L. Seaman-Tullis, Ph.D., BCBA-D,  University of West Georgia, John M. Schaefer,  Ph.D., Cleveland State University  About the Authors  179 

Acknowledgement  We wish to extend our deepest appreciation to Mrs. Suzanne Sue Clark for  her imaginative and proficient editing of this tome. Sue is well known to her  friends and family as being a strong advocate for those less fortunate or in  need of extra support or assistance. It made perfect sense to us, then, when  she readily volunteered to serve as the editor for this project focused on  capturing, in one volume, all thirteen disability categories contained in the  Individuals with Disabilities Act of 2004. We will be forever grateful for Sues  careful attention to every word in this manuscript, which undoubtedly made  it both stronger and more reader-friendly. As if this were not enough, her  lifetime advocacy for others warrants a public note of gratitude as well. 

Preface  Creating Compassionate Classrooms: Understanding the Continuum of  Disabilities and Effective Educational Interventions was written for pre-service  teachers, seasoned teachers, school psychologists, related service providers,  school administrators, paraprofessionals, policy-makers, and families of  children who have one or more identified disabilities under the categories  determined by the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act IDEA  Center for Parent Information  Resources, 2017. Throughout the chapters  of this book, the reader will be introduced to the thirteen disability categories  included in IDEA specific learning disabilities, emotionalbehavioral  disorders, autism, other health impaired, intellectually disabled, multiple  disabilities, speech or language impairments, traumatic brain injury, hearing  impairment, deafblind, deafness, visual impairment, and orthopedic  impairment, using the legally established definitions. Lengthy descriptions  of best practices, modifications and accommodations follow, offering a  complete picture of each disability and how educators and parents  collaboratively can assist the struggling student. This book, then, is meant to  be a resource for all those whose path crosses with students in special  education.  Our motivation for writing this book comes from several concerns: 

Our belief that students in these disability categories deserve the  highest quality education that both schools and educators have to  offer, which can only occur when essential information on best  practices is shared; 

Our knowledge that there is currently a special education teacher  shortage in the District of Columbia and 48 out of 50 states, and that  this shortage leads to classrooms where special education students  may receive sub-par learning experiences Carver-Thomas, 2017; 

Our concern that approximately 13 of our student population  receives some sort of special education support, preferably in an  inclusion classroom, and that not all staff will be ready and able to  support these students Salem, 2018; 

Our interest in sharing strategies and practices that will enhance  student outcomes, and these must be taught explicitly to all staff  members, not just to special education teachers; 

viii   Preface 

Our passion in providing recent and relevant research that will move  the discussion forward on how to support our most needy students.  To set the stage, the book begins with chapters that discuss special  education in general, response to intervention as an intermediary step in the  academic continuum of support, and the individualized education plan  process. Subsequent chapters examine each of the thirteen aforementioned  IDEA disability categories, which have not been commonly incorporated into  one comprehensive resource; however, for the sake of brevity, some disability  categories have been combined when doing so did not impact practice  implications. Emphasis is placed on effective classroom strategies and  interventions associated with each disability category with the intent of  providing practitioners and those who support them with the information  and tools necessary to support students with identified educational needs. To  the extent possible, the primary authors sought to ensure this resource was  practical and user-friendly for educators who work directly with students with  the range of recognized disabilities.  This book was written by an experienced team whose members, at one time  or another, was a special education teacher, licensed psychologist, special  education administrator, superintendent of schools, recreation therapist,  parent, college professor, department chair, dean of doctoral programs, and  international learning disabilities advocate. Collectively, they have over  seventy years of experience working with families and students in a variety of  settings to include both the general education and substantially separate  classrooms, central office, and the college classroom. This wealth of  knowledge has made this book possible. In a world where special education is  bursting at the seams and staffing is not keeping up with classroom demand,  it is imperative that all educators are well-prepared to meet the needs of  todays students.   This book demystifies the special education process and disability  categories as well as offers educators and their families the tools to help our  students, who have one or more disabilities, find life-long success. Ensuring  the best for our students with disabilities requires that we first acknowledge  and support the hard work and deep commitment of those professionals and  parentsguardians who devote their lives to teaching, reaching, mentoring  and advocating for those most vulnerable in our classrooms. It is to those  individuals, and they know who they are, that we offer our heartfelt thanks  and appreciation. In the pages to follow, we trust you will find essential  information that will help you in your most noble endeavors. 

Preface  

ix 

References  Carver-Thomas, D. 2017. The special education teacher crisis: Whos teaching  our most vulnerable students? Retrieved from  https:learningpolicyinstitute.orgblogspecial-education-teacher-crisiswhos-teaching-our-most-vulnerable-students  Center for Parent Information  Resources. 2017. Categories of disability  under IDEA. Retrieved from  https:www.parentcenterhub.orgcategoriesld  Salem, T. 2018. Special education students on the rise. Retrieved from  https:www.usnews.comnewseducation-newsarticles2018-0606special-education-students-on-the-rise 

Chapter 1 

Introduction to Special Education  Angela C. Fain, Ph.D.,  University of West Georgia  Today, more than ever before, many students with disabilities are served in  inclusive educational settings alongside their non-disabled peers. Pre-service  teachers,  school  psychologists,  related  service  providers,  school  administrators, paraprofessionals, policy-makers, and families of children  who have one or more identified disabilities determined by the Individuals  with Disabilities Education Act IDEA all play important roles in special  education.  Definition of Special Education  Special education is not a place where students go to get services. Special  education is specifically designed instruction, services and supports provided  to individual students with disabilities to help them make progress in school.  IDEA ensures that all eligible students, ages 3 through 21, are provided a free  appropriate public education FAPE and receive special education and  related services DoDEA, 2018; American Psychological Association, 2018. To  be eligible for special education, a child must have an identified disability, the  disability must adversely affect the childs educational performance, and the  child must require a specifically designed instructional program American  Psychological Association, 2018. A student must meet the criteria of one of  the following 13 identified disabilities categories to include  1.  Specific learning disability SLD  a.  Dyslexia  b.  Dysgraphia  c.  Dyscalculia  d.  Auditory processing disorder  e.  Nonverbal learning disability  2.  Other health impairment OHI  3.  Autism spectrum disorder ASD or AU 

 Chapter 1 

4.  Emotional disturbance ED  5.  Speech or language impairment SLD  6.  Visual impairment, including blindness VI  7.  Deafness  8.  Hearing impairment HI  9.  Deaf-blindness BD  10. Orthopedic impairment OI  11. Intellectual disability ID  a.  Mild intellectual disability MID  b.  Moderate intellectual disability MOID  c.  Severe intellectual disability SID  d.  Profound intellectual disability PID  12. Traumatic brain injury TBI  13. Multiple disabilities MD  Related, or supplementary, services are provided to students on an  individualized basis and may be the only service a student receives. Examples  of related services include interpreting services, psychological services,  therapeutic recreation, counseling services, occupational and physical  therapy, orientation and mobility, medical services, and social work services  Center for Parent Information  Resources, 2017. If a student does not  qualify for special education, they may still meet the requirements for related  services under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act. Section 504 is a federal  law that provides services and changes to the learning environment to meet  the needs of students United States Access Board, n.d. To be eligible for  Section 504, a student must have a disability and the disability must interfere  with the childs ability to learn in the general education classroom  Understood, 2018. This is a much broader definition than the IDEA  definition of disability.  Accommodations and Modifications  Accommodations and modifications are considered and may be provided  when a student has a disability. Accommodations are tools or procedures that  provide students with disabilities equal access to instruction and assessment  Conderman, Liberty  DeSpain, 2017. Accommodations change how a child  learns and can be provided for any student Strom, 2018. Examples of  accommodations include preferential seating, extended time, frequent 

Introduction to Special Education  

breaks, highlighted materials, listening to audio recordings instead of reading  a text, using a calculator, and providing guided notes.  Modifications are not the same as accommodations. Modifications are  changes to what the student is taught and expected to do in school Strom,  2018. Assignment modifications include writing shorter papers, completing  fewer or different problems than peers, answering fewer or different test  questions, and creating alternate assignments, while examples of curriculum  modifications include learning different material, being assessed using  different standards than peers, and being excused from participating in  specific projects or assignments. Only a student with an IEP or 504 Plan can  have modifications Strom, 2018.  Key Vocabulary and Acronyms  Special education has many important terms and acronyms that teachers  need to be familiar with. Aside from the acronyms for the disability  categories, below are some of the most common acronyms teachers often  refer to when discussing students with disabilities. 

IEP  Individualized Education Plan 

RTI  Response to Intervention 

FAPEFree Appropriate Public Education 

IDEA  Individuals with Disabilities Education Act 

ADA  Americans with Disabilities Act 

ESY  Extended School Year 

NCLB  No Child Left Behind 

ESSA  Every Student Succeeds Act 

FBA  Functional Behavioral Assessment 

BIP  Behavior Intervention Plan 

LRE  Least Restrictive Environment  High-Incidence and Low-Incidence Disabilities  High-incidence disabilities occur with a relatively high frequency and include  learning disabilities LD, speech and language disorders SLD, emotional  disturbance ED, and mild intellectual disabilities MID Gage, Lierheimer,   Goran, 2012. Autism AU, which is categorized as a low-incidence disability,  has seen a dramatic increase in the last couple of decades, as have other  health impairments and orthopedic impairments OI; thus, it is possible that 

 Chapter 1 

they may eventually be categorized under high-incidence Gage et al., 2012.  Blindness, deafness, severe intellectual disabilities SID, and traumatic brain  injury TBI are considered low-incidence disabilities as they rarely occur  Gage et al., 2012.  Person-First Language  There has been some debate about the person-first language movement.  Advocates for person-first language prefer person with disabilities rather  than disabled person and person with autism rather than autistic person  Collier, 2012. These advocates believe a person should not be defined by a  disability and want people to look past the wheelchair or the guide dog;  however, disability rights supporters argue that putting the person before the  disability ignores the disability or means that the disability makes someone  less of a person. This group of individuals argue that using person-first  language implies that being a person means being able-bodied Collier, 2012.  History of Special Education  Special education can be traced back to the beginning roots of an early French  physician, Jean-Marc-Gaspard Itard 1774-1838, who studied diseases of the  ear and children who were deaf Encyclopaedia Britannica, 2018. In the early  1900s, Itard began educating a young boy around the age of 12 he found  wandering in the forests of France naked and wild. Itard made great progress  in dramatically improving the wild boys behavior Itard, 1962, helping to  form the foundation of many practices in special education today  Encyclopaedia Britannica, 2018. Other European physicians, Philippe Pinel  1745-1826 and douard Sguin, and United States physician Samuel Gridley  Howe 1801-1876 and minister Thomas Hopkins Gallaudet 1787-1851 made  early contributions in the field that impact the practices today as well  Encyclopaedia Britannica, 2018.  Prior to the late 1700s, disabilities and differences were viewed with fear and  superstition. Over time, some religious groups decided that society should be  more accepting and care for its less fortunate individuals. Large institutions  were built to house individuals who did not fit in with society and were  different. These asylums were generally overcrowded and unsanitary U.S.  Department of Education, 2007. The residents received little food, clothing,  or care. The first schools in the United States for children with disabilities  were boarding and residential schools.   From 1850-1920, there was a rapid increase in the number of residential  schools. Day school programs were established in cities and special education  classes were created in local schools Encyclopaedia Britannica, 2018. The 

Introduction to Special Education  

residential and day schools were operated by state and private schools and  were typically the only educational options for students with special needs.  Attitudes towards individuals with disabilities changed drastically in the  1940s and 1950s when parents began to form local, state, and national groups  and organizations. In the 1960s, programs segregated students with  disabilities in separate or self-contained classrooms, while the 1970s proved  to be one of the most significant decades in terms of improving the lives of  special education students U.S. Department of Education, Office of Special  Education and Rehabilitative Services, 2010. The Rehabilitation Act of 1973  ensured that the civil rights of all disabled people were protected and  required all schools receiving federal funds to provide students with  disabilities accommodations in school United States Access Board, n.d.  When the Education for All Handicapped Children Act EHA was passed in  1975, all students with disabilities were ensured FAPE in the least restrictive  environment LRE appropriate for their academic learning needs U.S.  Department of Education, Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative  Services, 2010.   The 20th century brought about great change for individuals with  disabilities that focused on normalization and deinstitutionalization. Large  institutions and asylums were closed and students with disabilities were  included in the general education classrooms. Children and adults with  intellectual disabilities ID were moved out of institutions and placed in  settings with closer contact with other members of the community. In 1997,  EHA became known as the IDEA. IDEA emphasized the individualized  education plan IEP, transition plan, and research-based practices.   The No Child Left Behind Act Klein, 2015 aligned with IDEA and provided  further accountability to schools for results, evidence-based practices,  expanded parental control, and expanded local control and flexibility. NCLB  held schools and school districts accountable for all student achievement  through readinglanguage arts and math assessments Klein, 2015. In 2015,  Every Student Succeeds Act ESSA reauthorized the 50-year-old Elementary  and Secondary Education Act ESEA, upholding the nations commitment to  equal opportunity for all students U.S. Department of Education, n.d. ESSA  replaced NCLB, which many believe was largely responsible for a culture of  over-testing Hani, 2016.  What is Inclusion?  One of the most controversial issues to come out of normalization in the 20th  century is inclusion. IDEA requires public schools in the United States to  provide all children with disabilities a free appropriate public education in  the LRE for their individual needs Webster, 2018. Students are included in 

 Chapter 1 

the general education classrooms to the maximum extent possible that is  appropriate for their academic and social needs. In the past decades,  education in the United States has seen a major shift towards inclusive  classrooms that integrate students with disabilities into the general education  program and provide support and assistance within the general education  classroom Webster, 2018.  Placement Options  When professionals consider the least restrictive environment for a student,  there are different increasingly restrictive placement options for students  with disabilities Obiakor, Harris, Mutua, Rotatori,  Algozzine, 2012. It may  be necessary to remove students from part or all of the general education to  provide special support and supplementary services IDEA, 2004. 

Inclusion, or regular classroom, is considered the least restrictive  environment, where students participate with their non-disabled  peers fully in the general education curriculum.  

A resource classroom provides services to students with disabilities  outside the general education classroom for at least 21 percent but  not more than 60 percent of the school day.  

A separate classroom provides services to students who need more  specialized instruction and services in a separate, self-contained  classroom for more than 60 percent of the school day.  

A separate school provides special education and related services in  a separate day school for students with disabilities for more than 50  percent of the school day.  

A residential facility is a public or private residential facility, at public  expense, that provides special education and related services for  students with disabilities for more than 50 percent of the school day.  

A homeboundhospital environment is considered the most  restrictive environment. Special education services are provided to  students with disabilities in hospital and homebound programs.  Obiakor et al., 2012  Students with disabilities should be given every opportunity to participate  in educational, nonacademic, and extracurricular programs and services with  their non-disabled peers. 

Introduction to Special Education  

Points to Remember 

Special education is not a place; it is specially designed instruction to  meet unique learning needs of students with a disability. 

There are 13 identified disability categories recognized under IDEA. 

Accommodations can be made for any student and are alterations to  the way tasks are presented to students that allow them to complete  the same assignments as their non-disabled peers.  

Modifications can only be provided for students with an IEP or 504  Plan and alter what the student is expected to learn and do.  

The Education for All Handicapped Children Act EHA was passed in  1975, all students with disabilities were ensured a free and  appropriate public education FAPE in the least restrictive  environment LRE appropriate for their academic learning needs. 

The 20th century brought about great change for individuals with  disabilities that focused on normalization and deinstitutionalization.  

In 2015, ESSA reauthorized the 50-year-old ESEA giving the states and  school districts more power over decision making and replaced NCLB,  considered largely responsible for creating a test-driven education  system.  Major OrganizationsResources  Organizations for parents and advocates: 

Advocating Change Together ACT 

Autism Society of America 

National Alliance for the Mentally Ill 

Parent Educational Advocacy Training Center PEATC 

The Association for Persons with Severe Handicaps TASH 

World Associations of Persons with Disabilities WAPD  Organization for administrators and teachers:  Council for Exceptional Children CEC  International Dyslexia Association IDA  National Association of Special Education Teachers NASET  National Center to Improve Practice in Special Education  National Organization on Disabilities 

 Chapter 1 

References  American Psychological Association. 2018. Individuals with Disabilities Act  IDEA. Retrieved from  https:www.apa.orgadvocacyeducationideaindex.aspx  Center for Parent Information  Resources. 2017. Related Services. Retrieved  from https:www.parentcenterhub.orgiep-relatedservices  Collier, R. 2012. Person-first language: What it means to be a person.  Canadian Medical Association Journal, 18418 E935-E936. DOI:  10.1503cmaj.109-4322   Conderman, G., Liberty, L.  DeSpain, S. 2017 Understanding  accommodations, modifications, and interventions. Kappa Delta Pi Record,  532, 70-75, DOI: 10.108000228958.2017.1299545  DoDEA. 2018. Special education. Retrieved from   https:www.dodea.eduCurriculumspecialEducindex.cfm  Encyclopaedia Britannica. 2018. Special education. Retrieved from    https:www.britannica.comtopicspecial-education  Gage, N.A., Lierheimer, K.S.,  Goran, L.G. 2012. Characteristics of students  with high-incidence disabilities broadly defined. Journal of disability policy  studies, 233, 168-178. DOI: 10.11771044207311425385.   Hani, M. 2016. Relying on high-stakes standardized tests to evaluate schools  and teachers: A bad idea. The Clearing House: A Journal of Educational  Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 892, 67-72. DOI:  10.108000098655.2016.1156628  IDEA. 2004. Building the legacy: IDEA 2004. Retrieved from    https:sites.ed.govideabuilding-the-legacy-idea-2004  Klein, A. 2015. No child left behind: An overview. Retrieved from  https:www.edweek.orgewsectionmultimediano-child-left-behindoverview-definition-summary.html  Klein, A. 2016. The every student succeeds act: An ESSA overview. Retrieved  from https:www.edweek.orgewissuesevery-student-succeedsactindex.html  Obiakor, F. E., Harris, M., Mutua, K., Rotatori, A.,  Algozzine, B. 2012.  Making inclusion work in general education classrooms. Education   Treatment of Children, 353, 477-490.   Strom, E. 2018. The difference between accommodations and modifications.  Retrieved from https:www.understood.orgenlearning-attentionissuestreatments-approacheseducational-strategiesthe-differencebetween-accommodations-and-modifications  Understood. 2018. Understanding 504 plans. Retrieved from  https:www.understood.orgenschool-learningspecial-services504planunderstanding-504-plans   United States Access Board. n.d. Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Retrieved from    https:www.access-board.govthe-boardlawsrehabilitation-act-of-1973  U.S. Department of Education. 2007. A 25-year history of the IDEA. Retrieved  from https:www2.ed.govpolicyspecedlegideahistory.html 

Introduction to Special Education  

U.S. Department of Education. n.d. Every Student Succeeds Act ESSA.  Retrieved from    https:www.ed.govessa  U.S. Department of Education, Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative  Services. 2010.  Thirty-five Years of Progress in Educating Children with Disabilities Through  IDEA. Retrieved from    https:www2.ed.govaboutofficeslistosersidea35historyidea-35history.pdf  Webster, J. 2018. Inclusion  what is inclusion? Retrieved from    https:www.thoughtco.comwhat-is-inclusion-3111011 

Chapter 2 

The Potency of the Response to  Intervention Framework  Nicholas D. Young, PhD, EdD,  American International College,  Kara Johnson, MEd,  Endicott College  Since the reauthorization of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act  IDEA in 2004, educators and policy makers have increased efforts to make  schools and classrooms more responsive to the instructional needs of  students. Through a systematic model of preventative and supplemental  services, the implementation of evidence-based practices through Response  to Intervention RtI has shown to reduce the prevalence rate of at-risk  students dropping out of school Bernhardt  Hbert, 2017; Wood, Kiperman,  Esch, Leroux,  Truscott, 2017. The RtI framework specifically addresses  areas of socialemotional, academic, and behavioral needs of students  Maggin, Wehby, Farmer,  Brooks, 2016.  RtI is a culturally responsive and evidence-based framework that uses  assessment and intervention in a prevention system with multiple levels that  are based on the intensity of student needs Bernhardt  Hbert, 2017. This  tiered system is designed to maximize student achievement and reduce  behavioral problems for all students in order to promote success and positive  long-term outcomes in school. At the center of a successful RtI practice and  implementation, schools use quantitative data to drive the decision-making  process Crone, Carlson,  Haack, 2015. The practice of evidence-based  decision-making assists schools in identifying students who fall within a  range that indicates a projection of poor learning outcomes. Utilizing data  also allows educators to monitor progress and adjust the intensity and  frequency of leveled interventions contingent upon student responsiveness  Crone, Carlson,  Haack, 2015; Daly, Neugebauer, Chafouleas,  Skinner,  2015.  RtI is not special education; yet, these two practices are not mutually  exclusive. The purpose of RtI is not to prevent special education, rather, it is 

 Chapter 2 

meant to provide early and leveled interventions that meet the needs of all  learners Bernhardt  Hbert, 2017. Students who do not respond positively  to intensive interventions may become candidates for special education  services Bernhardt  Hbert, 2017. Data-driven decision-making within RtI  can also be used to ensure appropriate identification of students with  disabilities as well as reduce the likelihood that students are wrongly  identified as having a disability Bernhardt  Hbert, 2017.  Legal Mandates for Response to Intervention  RtI emerged from decades of legal requirements for special education  referrals and evaluations, in addition to over identification and mislabeling of  students Martin, 2018. In previous years, school districts within the United  States utilized reactive models where students were moved from general  education directly to special education and the learning gap widened Martin,  2018. Recent policies at the federal, state, and district levels encouraged  schools to improve student achievement, instructional programs, and  teaching practices, as well as student outcomes in order to measure overall  school success U.S. Department of Education, Office of State Support, 2016.  The RtI framework moves away from reactive models to one that emphasizes  early and high-quality research-based interventions while the student  remains in the general education setting Martin, 2018.  Individuals with Disabilities Education Act  According to IDEA 2004, a specific learning disability SLD is a disorder that  manifests itself in the imperfect ability to listen, think, speak, read, write,  spell, or to do mathematical calculations. As a part of the original publication  of IDEA in 1975, a discrepancy model was developed to help identify students  with SLD Searle, 2010. The discrepancy formula was used to determine  whether a students actual achievement was significantly different from his or  her predicted achievement based upon their IQ score Searle, 2010. The  formula quickly proved to be ineffective and created the wait-to-fail  approach to intervention where educators were forced to delay services to  students Reynolds  Shaywitz, 2009. While using this formula, the needs of  students were often overlooked or not calculated, resulting in a much larger  gap in learning and students receiving services much later, thus becoming  less effective Otabia, Wagner,  Miller, 2014. The discrepancy formula  mislabeled students who underperformed due to their culturally and  linguistically diverse backgrounds; therefore these students received a greater  amount of support than needed to be successful Searle, 2010.  During the reauthorization of IDEA in 2004, the concept of RtI is mentioned  as an alternative approach to the discrepancy model IDEA, 2004. The act 

The Potency of the Response to Intervention Framework   13 

also required that students both with and without disabilities be provided  with proactive and supplemental support immediately following a potential  difficulty in learning andor behavior. The RtI process is able to meet this  requirement and decrease misidentification by providing options that are  more direct and less intensive than placement in a special education program  Searle, 2010; Hudson  McKenzie, 2016.  Child Find Law  IDEA 2004 mandates that students with disabilities receive a free appropriate  and public education FAPE and requires that the necessary services are in  place to meet the needs of students with disabilities in either a special  education placement or in the general education setting U.S. Department of  Education, Office of Civil Rights, 2010. IDEA 2004 also requires states to  develop a comprehensive and coordinated multidisciplinary system of Early  Intervention Services EIS for infants and toddlers with disabilities. School  districts within a state have a legal duty to find children, from birth through  age 21, who may have a disability and are in need of special education  services Wright  Wright, 2018. This law includes private and public school  students, migrant children, homeless children, and children who are wards of  the state IDEA, 2004. In order to receive special education services through  the special education process, students must be lacking effective progress or  demonstrate serious educational deficits IDEA, 2004. Schools cannot put the  onus on parents to report that a child is not making adequate progress.  Two Models of Response to Intervention  According to Fuchs, Mock, Morgan, and Young 2003, there are two models  commonly used for implementing RtI in schools to include the standard  protocol model and the problem-solving model. The standard-protocol  model requires a methodical analysis of student skills and targets problem  areas if they fall below a predetermined benchmark Fuchs et al., 2003; Searle,  2010. The resulting interventions would be applied broadly to any students  that fall within this range.  The standard-protocol model differs from the problem-solving model by  solely relying on a team of highly qualified individuals to design intervention  plans to meet the needs of individual learners Fuchs et al., 2003; Searle,  2010. Although these models are often viewed as separate entities, Hoover,  Baca, Wexler-Love, and Saenz 2008 recommend that they are used in  tandem in order for students to achieve the highest learning outcomes  possible. Both models seek to reduce or eliminate the barriers to academic  and behavioral learning by utilizing different problem-solving techniques that  offer complimentary benefits Hoover et al., 2008. In order for schools to 

 Chapter 2 

successfully implement RtI, a blended approach of both models should be  used.  Multiple Tiers of Support  Although the term tier is used in schools to describe the RtI model, the  National Center on Response to Intervention 2010 uses the terms Primary,  Secondary, and Tertiary levels to avoid the common misconception that  students are physically removed from a setting. Within each of the three  levels, there can be more than one intervention. There are likely to be  differences in the number and types of interventions used in each of the  levels due to how individual schools, districts, and states create and access RtI  National Center on Response to Intervention, 2010.  Primary Level  At the primary level, teachers provide poignant and standards-based  curricula that are delivered with evidence-based, differentiated, and targeted  instruction Bernhardt  Hbert 2017. Within this level, students are  explicitly taught expectations, procedures, and routines. According to  Bernhardt  Hbert 2017, the high-quality core instruction will meet the  needs of approximately 80 of the student population. The exceptions are  schools with a higher at-risk population, as these schools would require more  intensive intervention practices to meet the needs of the larger populations of  struggling learners Bernhardt  Hbert 2017. During primary level  instruction, instructional goals are established, and regular progress  monitoring of student performance takes place.  Students who perform above the school andor districts established  criterion, typically with standard scores of 90 or above, are considered  responsive to the primary level and, therefore, continue receiving instruction  at the primary level McKenzie, 2009; Hudson  McKenzie, 2016.  Modifications and accommodations are provided at this level to help a  struggling student; however, if a child continues to demonstrate difficulty  with these interventions, he or she should be referred to the secondary level  intervention approach Hoover, 2011. Even when a child is referred to the  secondary or tertiary level, they never stop receiving the primary level  instruction.  Secondary Level  The secondary level builds upon the primary prevention level and utilizes the  same evidence-based interventions but at a more moderate intensity. These  interventions are mostly delivered in small groups within the general 

The Potency of the Response to Intervention Framework   15 

education setting, and the intervention methods and measurements are  tailored to the individual child. The classroom teacher delivers instruction  with support from resource, instructional, andor behavioral specialists  depending on the areas of concern Bernhardt  Hbert, 2017.  Tertiary Level  The tertiary level interventions are delivered individually with increased  intensity for students who showed minimal response to secondary  prevention. According to Bernhardt and Hbert 2017, less than 5 of  students require this level of intervention. Specialists or special education  teachers typically provide individual instruction or very small group  instruction for academics and behavior. Students who provoke behavior  concerns at the tertiary level will most likely have a Functional Behavior  Assessment FBA conducted to determine the function of behavior or why a  student would be engaging in a certain behavior Cipani, 2017. According to  Cipani 2017, individuals engage in maladaptive behaviors usually to access a  tangible or escape something deemed undesirable. Should a student require  more in-depth services than what is offered in this tier of RtI in order to meet  his or her needs, the special education referral process ensues.  How to Implement Response to Intervention  Implementation of the RtI framework in a school requires careful  consideration and planning. RtI will look different across each school and  district, yet there are general guidelines that ensure successful student  learning outcomes McKenzie  Hudson, 2016. According to Bernhardt and  Hbert 2017, there are five essential stages every school should consider  prior to the start and throughout the implementation of RtI in order to have  the greatest amount of success possible to include 

Stage 1: Study and Commit 

Stage 2: Plan 

Stage 3: Build Capacity 

Stage 4: Implement and Monitor 

Stage 5: Continuously Improve  Stage 1: Study and Commit  The essence of the first stage is to explain to educators why RtI is needed, how  it will be designed, and how it will be implemented so that it meets the needs  for the population of students Bernhardt  Hbert, 2017. Administrators  should assist educators in reviewing literature and data to deepen their 

 Chapter 2 

understanding of RtI as a whole, understanding their individual roles and  responsibilities in carrying out RtI, and exploring structures that should be  implemented in their school Bergstrom, 2017. Bernhardt and Hbert 2017  argue that schools should obtain staff acceptance in this phase in order to  implement the RtI framework. It is imperative that effective leaders are able  to present information about RtI in a manner that conveys understanding and  illustrates the requirement of such a framework Bergstrom, 2017; Bernhardt   Hbert, 2017. Preparing and educating teachers, in the beginning, will save  districts a lot of time in the long-term and reduce misunderstandings about  the values and mission of the school in supporting students learning needs.  Stage 2: Plan  Clear processes and procedures in the planning stage help schools achieve  desired outcomes when implementing RtI. Overall planning at this level  reduces frustration among administration and staff, effectively allocates  resources and time management, leads to effective implementation of RtI in  schools, and positively impacts student learning outcomes Bernhardt   Hbert, 2017. When a clear plan is created, it allows schools to troubleshoot  areas before they become problematic and supports a framework that is  proactive in nature, rather than reactive. It also allows for educators to work in  a collaborative manner.  Stage 3: Build Capacity  This stage helps educators embrace the RtI framework as they achieve  understanding for the implementation of the system and how it fits into the  existing manner in which the school operates Bernhardt  Hbert, 2017. It  ensures that educators are implementing the RtI framework with coherence  and decorum in each classroom Hoover  Sarris, 2014. Learning at this stage  continues to be ongoing for educators and schools should establish staff  expectations to carryout RtI with fidelity as well as clarify and develop roles  and responsibilities for all staff RTI Action Network, n.d. Districts, at this  time, should be transparent with parents, community members, and other  stakeholders about the overall plan for the implementation of RtI and inform  them of the benefits of this framework Bernhardt  Hbert, 2017.  Each school should establish an RtI team that is comprised of staff who are  familiar with student needs and effective intervention techniques Dia   Rafael, 2017. This team would collaborate to assist in supporting educators  and students in the RtI process by alleviating time constraints and providing  additional resources for students with more intensive needs RTI Action  Network, n.d. The RtI team is most successful when the staff has experience 

The Potency of the Response to Intervention Framework   17 

and knowledge that can assist an educator with decision-making and  identifying important markers.  Stage 4: Implement and Monitor  RtI integrates assessment data and resources to provide more support options  for every type of learner. This systematic way of connecting the instructional  components that are already in place allows educators to identify students  strengths and weaknesses while reducing the length of time students wait to  receive necessary instruction and intervention Searle, 2010; Hoover  Sarris,  2014. RtI also requires that general and special education classrooms share  the responsibility to ensure that all students receive the additional supports  when the data indicates such necessity. Educators should work together to  closely monitor and document student progress on research-based  instruction in the general education classroom Hoover  Sarris, 2014. Using  data to drive the decision-making process ensures that schools are not overidentifying students with disabilities.  Universal screening. Academic universal screening is used to predict  learning outcomes for students who may be at risk for learning or behavioral  problems. Universal screening measures are administered to all students  frequently, at minimum three times throughout the year, and should be brief,  reliable, and valid Searle, 2010; Bernhardt  Hbert, 2017.   Progress monitoring. Progress monitoring is used to assess how a student  is performing and responding to an intervention by quantifying the rate of  improvement Bernhardt  Hbert, 2017. Progress monitoring assists  educators in making data-based decisions in regard to the intervention, such  as adjusting the intensity and frequency of the intervention or changing the  intervention altogether based on a students response. Like universal  screening, progress monitoring should be brief, valid, and reliable Crone,  Carlson,  Haack, 2015.   Progress monitoring is administered more frequently than universal  screening measures, at minimum weekly, and should take no more than 15  minutes in length to administer Bernhardt  Hbert, 2017. Given the  frequency that progress-monitoring tools are administered to students, it  assists educators with short and long-term data in regard to student success,  which is often graphed to help determine if students are making substantial,  sufficient, questionable, or poor progress McKenzie, 2009; Bernhardt   Hbert, 2017.   Curriculum-based measurements. According to Stecker, Lembke, and  Foegen 2008, progress monitoring within RtI should be able to show student  change, be educationally meaningful and require minimal time investment. 

 Chapter 2 

Curriculum-based measurements CBMs is an assessment tool used to  measure the progress a student is making toward learning predetermined  outcomes, such as the curriculum Hosp, Hosp,  Howell, 2016. Using  different types of CBMs across the academic content areas are essential for all  students when determining progress as it allows teachers to make betterinformed instructional decisions Greenfield, Rinaldi, Proctor,  Cardarelli,  2010.  Stage 5: Continuous Improvement  The final stage encourages schools to conduct ongoing evaluations on the  implementation of RtI within a school. During this stage, schools may adjust  teaching practices and activities to meet the evolving needs of learners Crone  et al., 2015. Schools are frequently conducting and evaluating overall  progress to assess the sustainability of RtI within a school. This stage requires  schools to use and reflect upon the data collected to determine whether the  current practices of RtI are working and furthering student learning outcomes  Crone et al., 2015; Bernhardt  Hbert, 2017.  Final Thoughts  There is an increased responsibility placed upon schools from the district,  state, and federal levels to improve student achievement. Although RtI was  originally developed to meet the federal reform requirements of IDEA of 2004,  it has provided educators with a systematic method of preventative and  supplemental services to meet the needs of learners. Successful RtI  implementation and practice begins with educators understanding the  concept of RtI, how it will be used to improve student-learning outcomes and  agreeing on the potential benefits for their schools.  As a deliberate process, RtI provides the framework for educators to be able  to adjust teaching practices and interventions based on data. Teachers who  use the data from RtI make more informed decisions to guide student  learning. By using available resources and adjusting teaching practices,  schools are able to develop a culture that is proactive in meeting the needs of  all learners, including those who are at-risk for poor learning.  Points to Remember 

RtI is an evidence-based tiered system that uses assessment and  intervention to meet the needs of all students based on individual  academic and behavioral needs. 

The Potency of the Response to Intervention Framework   19 

RtI meets the requirements of IDEA of 2004 as an alternative to the  mandated IQ-Discrepancy Model for identifying students with specific  learning disabilities.  

Schools or districts must design and implement their own versions of  RtI based on their specific student population.  

For successful implementation, the RtI framework should first be  accepted, thoroughly planned, and appropriately resourced. In order  to maintain success, the framework should be continuously monitored  and adapted to maximize student achievement. 

RtI uses collected data to drive the decision-making process in a way  that appropriately allocates support, minimizes the delay in providing  interventions, and prevents over-identification of students with SLD  in special education.  References  Bergstrom, M. 2017. Professional development in response to intervention:  Implementation of a model in a rural region. Rural Special Education  Quarterly, 274, 27-36. DOI: 10.1177875687050802700405  Bernhardt, V.  Hbert, C. 2017. Response to intervention and continuous  school improvement: How to design, implement, monitor, and evaluate a  school wide prevention system. New York, NY: Routledge.  Cipani, E. 2017. Functional behavioral assessment, diagnosis, and treatment:  A complete system for education and mental health settings. New York, NY:  Springer Publishing Company  Crone, D., Carlson, S.,  Haack, M. 2015. Data-based decision-making teams  in middle school: Observations and implications from the middle school  intervention project. Assessment for Effective Intervention, 412, 79-93. DOI:  10.11771534508415610322.   Daly, E., Neugebauer, S., Chafouleas, S.,  Skinner, C. 2015. Interventions for  reading problems: Designing and evaluating effective strategies. New York,  NY: The Guilford Press  Dia, J.  Rafael, A. 2017. Making RTI work: A story of success. Perspectives on    Language and Literacy, 434, 29-33. Retrieved from  https:mydigitalpublication.compublication?i445106articleid29084 47viewarticleBrowserverhtml522issueid22:445106,22view22 :22articleBrowser22,22articleid22:22290844722  Fuchs, D., Mock, D., Morgan, P.,  Young, C. 2003. Responsiveness-toIntervention: Definitions, evidence, and implications for the learning  disabilities construct. Learning Disabilities Research  Practice, 183, 157171. DOI: 10.11111540.5826.00072  Greenfield, R., Rinaldi, C., Proctor, C.,  Cardarelli, A. 2010. Teachers  perceptions of  a response to intervention RTI reform effort in an urban 

 Chapter 2 

elementary school: A consensual qualitative analysis. Journal of Disability  Policy Studies, 211, 47-63. DOI: 10.11771044207310365499  Hoover, J. 2011. Making informed instructional adjustments in RTI models:  Essentials for practitioners. Intervention in School and Clinic, 472, 82-90.  DOI: 10.11771053451211414193  Hoover, J., Baca, L., Wexler-Love, E.,  Saenz, L. 2008. National  Implementation of Response to Intervention RTI: Research Summary.  Retrieved from  https:www.nasdse.orgPortals0NationalImplementationofRTIResearchSummary.pdf  Hoover, J.  Sarris, J. 2014. Six Essential Instructional Roles to Implement  Response to Intervention Models: Perceptions of Highly Qualified Special  Educators. American Journal of Educational Research, 25, 257-266. DOI:  10.12691education-2-5-4. Hosp, M., Hosp, J.,  Howell, K. 2016. The ABCs  of CBM: A practical guide to curriculum-based measurement. New York: The  Guilford Press.   Hudson, T.  McKenzie, R. 2016. The impact of RTI on timely identification  of students with specific learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities: A  Multidisciplinary Journal, 212, 46-58. DOI: 10.18666LDMJ. IDEA. 2004.  Building the legacy: IDEA 2004. Retrieved from  https:sites.ed.govideabuilding-the-legacy-idea-2004  Maggin, D., Wehby, J., Farmer, T.,  Brooks, D. 2016. Intensive interventions  for students with emotional and behavioral disorders: Issues, theory, and  future directions. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 243, 127137. DOI: 10.11771063426616661498  Martin, J. 2018. Legal implication of response to intervention and special  education identification. Retrieved from  http:www.rtinetwork.orglearnldlegal-implications-of-response-tointervention-and-special-education-identification.   McKenzie, R. G. 2009. Obscuring vital distinctions: The oversimplification of  learning disabilities with response-to-intervention. Learning Disability  Quarterly, 32, 203-215. DOI:10.230727740373  National Center on Response to Intervention 2010. Essential components of  RTI: A closer look at response to intervention. Retrieved from  https:www.rti4success.orgessential-components-rti  Otabia, S., Wagner, R.,  Miller, B. 2014. Waiting to fail redux:  Understanding inadequate response to intervention. Journal of The Division  for Children with Learning Disabilities, 373, 129-133. DOI:  10.11770731948714525622.  Reynolds, C.R.  Shaywitz, S.E. 2009. Response to intervention: Ready or  not? or, from wait to fail to watch-them-fail. School Psychology Quarterly, 24,  130-145. DOI: 10.1037aoo16158.  RTI Action Network. n.d. Get started. Retrieved from  http:www.rtinetwork.orggetstarted  Searle, M. 2010. What every school leader needs to know about RTI.  Alexandra, VA: ASCD 

The Potency of the Response to Intervention Framework   21 

Stecker, P., Lembke, E.,  Foegen, A. 2008. Using progress-monitoring data to  improve instructional decision-making. Journal of Preventing School Failure,  522, 48-58. Retrieved from https:eric.ed.gov?idEJ785472  U.S. Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights, 2010. Free appropriate  public education for students with disabilities: Requirements under Section  504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Retrieved from  https:www2.ed.govaboutofficeslistocrdocsedlite-FAPE504.html  U.S. Department of Education, Office of State Report. 2016. Evidence-based  practices in school improvement: Five profiles of promising practices.  Retrieved from  https:statesupportnetwork.ed.govsitesdefaultfilesevidencebasedpracticesinschoolimprovement.pdf  Wood, L., Kiperman, S., Esch, R.C., Leroux, A.J.,  Truscott, S.D. 2017.  Predicting drop out using studentand school-level factors: An ecological  perspective. School Psychology Quarterly, 321, 35-49. DOI:  10.1037spq0000152  Wright, P.  Wright, P. 2018. The child find mandate: What does it mean to  you? Retrieved from  http:www.wrightslaw.cominfochild.find.mandate.htm 

Chapter 3 

Creating Meaningful and Measurable  Individualized Education Plans  Nicholas D. Young, PhD, EdD.,  American International College,  Michaela F. Rice, MEd,  Endicott College  All students who qualify and receive special education and related services  have a detailed and legal written description of the students educational  program Project IDEAL, 2013. This formal document is called an  Individualized Education Plan, or IEP, and this is the foundation of a quality  education for students with disabilities. Each IEP is individualized with each  student's specific needs in mind and ensures that those with disabilities  receive appropriate teaching and modifications and accommodations to  instruction necessary to ensure positive results U.S. Department of  Education, 2010  Although the format, design and presentation of an IEP can differ from  district to district and state to state, specific content items are mandated,  including a students present level of academic achievement and functional  performance; measurable annual goals; a description of all services to include  special education, related services, and supplemental aid services; general  education  curriculum  participation;  progress  monitoring  strategies;  participation consideration in state and district assessments; and transition  services DeBettencourt  Howard, 2017. An IEP provides the IEP team,  which includes the family of the student in question, with a guide for the  teaching and learning of a student with disabilities that is consistent with  state and federal laws DeBettencourt  Howard, 2017.  An IEP is not intended as an individual lesson plan but instead should  provide a vision of the students current abilities and needs, which are  identified through goals and objectives that provide the direction and focus of  the students learning throughout the IEP period. When written correctly an  IEP serves as a vehicle for improving the educational experience and 

 Chapter 3 

outcomes of students with disabilities Massachusetts Department of  Education, 2001.  Eligibility  The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act IDEA, 2004 requires public  schools to provide special education and related services to eligible students.  A parent, caregiver, or professional can request a special education evaluation  to be completed if there is concern about the students academic, social, or  behavioral development andor if the caregiver suspects the student requires  special education services. Assessment in special education is the process  used to determine a students specific strengths and weaknesses and to  determine if the student is eligible for special education services McMillian,  2013. The evaluation is a problem-solving process that involves collecting  information about a student in many different ways to base instructional and  intervention decisions National Association of Special Education Teachers,  2007.  There are thirteen categories that qualify infants, toddlers, preschoolers,  and young adults to receive a free appropriate public education FAPE  through special education services U.S. Department of Education, 2010. To  qualify for special education, students must show a deficit that substantially  affects the ability to access the curriculum based on one of the thirteen  categories to include specific learning disability SLD, other health  impairment OHI, autism spectrum disorder ASD or AU, emotional  disturbance ED, speech or language impairment SLD, visual impairment,  including blindness VI, deafness, hearing impairment HI, deaf-blindness  BD, orthopedic impairment OI, intellectual disability ID, traumatic  brain injury TBI, and multiple disabilities MD American Psychological  Association, 2018.  Developing Meaningful Measurable Objectives  An IEP includes annual goals for students that are measurable statements that  identify what knowledge, skills, or behaviors a student is expected to be able  to demonstrate within a period of time, which begins with the time of IEP  implementation until the next scheduled IEP review National Association of  Special Education Teachers, 2007. Annual goals are created to meet the  students needs, which are identified by the present level of performance.  Present Level of Performance  The Individuals Disabilities Act IDEA, 2004 requires each IEP to include a  statement of present levels of academic and functional performance. Specific 

Creating Meaningful and Measurable Individualized Education Plans   25 

and accurate information on a students current performance is essential to  the determination of a students current level of achievement and necessary  supports. Present level of performance can be collected through evaluation  such as initial evaluation, or three-year evaluation, teacher observation, work  samples and classroom data Bateman  Herr, 2011. Present level of  achievement assists the IEP team in deciding appropriate accommodations,  supplementary aids and services, and support for the student Burton, 2018.  A statement of present level of academic achievement and functional  performance should be connected with each annual goal provided Burton,  2017. Academic achievement is performance in academic areas such as  writing, math, or reading, and relates to the skills the student is expected to  master. If a student has math, written language, and decoding goals, for  example, there should be a present level of performance stated for each of the  separate objectives. Functional performance is the context of routine  activities that include everyday living such as social, behavioral, and mobility  skills, which are typically utilized for students with more significant  disabilities.  Measurable Goals  Annual goals are measurable statements that identify what knowledge,  behaviors, or skills a student is expected to be able to demonstrate within the  period of time, which will begin when the IEP is first implemented until the  next annual scheduled review Center for Parent Information  Resources,  2017. Measurable goals and short-term objectives are critical to the strategic  planning used to develop and implement IEPs Center for Parent Information   Resources, 2017. The process of creating annual goals should not start until  accurate and detailed present levels of performance are identified since the  annual goals should be based on the present levels of performance.  The goals and objectives determined for individual students create a  pathway for the IEP team to determine if the student is making adequate  progress in the special education environment, the general education  classroom and the appropriateness of the placement Hall, Quinn  Gollnick,  2018. Meaningful, measurable goals help students reach their vision by  setting the general direction for instruction, experiences and skills that the  student requires.  General goals and objectives are not helpful for teachers to keep  appropriate data to assess the progress of students in their current  placement. IEP goals should always be SMART, which stands for specific,  measurable, attainable, relevant and realistic, and time-limited Bateman   Herr, 2011. 

 Chapter 3 

Specific. Well-written goals should make it clear on exactly what is being  measured. Goals should have a corresponding measure in the present level of  performance section on the IEP as there should always be a starting point for  data collection Pierangelo  Giuliani, 2007. Without a specific point of  present level of performance, the IEP team will not know if the student has  made progress towards the goal or objective.  Measurable. All goals must be measurable to allow the IEP team to assess  what progress the student made after each measured performance. Without  measurable terms, progress cannot be monitored, and goals are no longer  meaningful Burton, 2017. A goal must have specific criteria to know if the  goal was achieved. A well-written goal explicitly describes what is being  measured and how it is being achieved with a note of observable  performance. Observable outcomes should be labeled as an action such as  repeat, label, draw, or write that can specifically be noted that a student has  achieved. Actions such as improving knowing or enjoying are not actions that  can be specifically observed by a teacher.   When observing actions, the expectations of the condition should be  specifically included to stay consistent. A student might be provided with a  number line, a multiplication chart, or a calculator as a condition for a  mathematics goal or objective, for example. Each goal should also include the  criteria to know if the student has reached the goal Burton, 2017. The  achievement can be measured through speed, quality of work, accuracy, or  fluency. Objective criteria should include what must be completed, and to  what level to reach the goal.  Attainable. When creating goals, the IEP team should start from the  students current level of performance. Knowing the present level of  performance will allow the team to create realistic goals that will be  achievable for the student to work towards and achieve within the IEP term  Burton, 2017. Goals should not be long-term in the sense that it will take the  student multiple years and grades to master.   Relevant. All goals should be individualized to meet the students specific  needs as resulted from disability and relevant to the present level of  performance Burton, 2017. Goals should not be based on district  curriculum, assessments, or external standards.  Time Limited. Providing a length of time that the student has to achieve the  goal, objective, or demonstrate mastery of the skill or behavior enables the  team to monitor progress at regular intervals Burton, 2017. 

Creating Meaningful and Measurable Individualized Education Plans   27 

Least Restrictive Environment  When writing an IEP, the least restrictive environment should always be  considered, as federal legislation mandates that services be provided to  students in the least restrictive environment Rothstein  Johnson, 2013. For  the majority of students, this is the general education classroom. For students  who are unable to access full inclusion, the student should be educated in the  setting that most closely mirrors the general education setting while meeting  the individualized needs of the student. Students should only be removed  from the general education classroom when the severity of the disability  prevents the student from achieving appropriate results even with supports  and services in place Friend, 2018.  Accommodations and Modifications  Accommodations and modifications are necessary on an individual basis for  students to successfully participate in the general education curriculum  Strom, 2018. A modification is an adjustment that changes the standard or  what is measured and is only available to students on IEPs. Modifications  change the expectations, assignment, or activity Strom, 2018. Modifications  might include allowing students to provide a writing outline instead of an  essay, give alternative project options, or continue working on multiplication  of fractions while the class moves on to the next standard.  Unlike modifications, accommodations allow students to complete the  same assignment as students in the general education setting without altering  what  is  being  measured  in  any  significant  way  Strom,  2018.  Accommodations make minor changes to the timing, formatting, setting,  scheduling, response or presentation of the assignment or assessment.  Accommodations listed on IEPs are typically grouped in the category of  presentation, response, timing, and setting Strom, 2018. Accommodations  include additional time for assessments, frequent breaks, the use of sensory  tools, receive work with larger print size, and listen to audiobooks instead of  reading text silently Strom, 2018. Accommodations can be provided to  students with or without disabilities.  When deciphering what accommodations and modifications are necessary  for student success, the present level of performance, strengths and  weaknesses, and individual needs must be considered Strom, 2018.  Providing the appropriate accommodations and modifications will allow each  student to have a successful experience in the least restrictive environment  University  of  Washington,  2017.  Evaluating  the  effectiveness  of  accommodations is a team effort and an ongoing process. Accommodations  and modifications should not be carried over from year to year without  examining present levels of performance as they may have changed or no 

 Chapter 3 

longer be relevant or student needs may have shifted. The entire team should  be included in the conversation of appropriate accommodations and  modifications for each student as team members may have different  viewpoints and specialty University of Washington, 2017.  Progress Monitoring  Progress monitoring is a scientifically-based practice used to assess students  progress and evaluate the effectiveness of the placement and instruction  Gargiulo  Metcalf, 2017. Progress monitoring informs the team of the  students rate of improvement or lack of adequate progress. Monitoring this  periodically allows the team to alter instruction, curriculum, and supports to  better meet the needs of the students and improve the students overall  success Tomlinson, 2014.  A progress monitoring plan should be explicitly noted in each students IEP,  which states how progress will be measured towards each annual goal that  should be decided on by the team when the IEP is developed Jones, 2017.  The plan should include the specific goals and objectives being monitored,  determine which member of the team will be responsible for monitoring  progress, and where and how often the data will be collected Jones, 2017. It  is important to establish a frequency that will provide valuable information  on student progress Salvia, Ysseldyke  Witmer, 2013. If the students  progress is only measured once in an IEP term, the information will not assist  the team throughout the IEP term to make appropriate changes or include  enough information to make sound educational decisions.   Progress monitoring is the responsibility of the entire IEP team, but  individual members of the team that are responsible for the instruction of the  specific IEP goals should be responsible for monitoring progress towards  those goals Lerner  Johns, 2014. The speech pathologist, for example,  would monitor progress for the expressive language goals. Although  paraprofessionals and teacher aides can assist with data collection for  progress monitoring, they should not be responsible for determining if the  childs progress is sufficient and that should be the responsibility of the  special education teacher or related service provider listed on the service  delivery grid Lerner  Johns, 2014.  Progress monitoring provides service providers with ongoing data to base  education decisions on and provides summative evidence for the IEP team to  determine if the student has made sufficient or insufficient progress towards  individual goals Lerner  Johns, 2014. Ongoing progress monitoring is  important as it helps the IEP team address a lack of expected progress  towards annual goals and makes appropriate changes to the curriculum  delivery prior to the IEP term ending Hoover  Patton, 2017. Progress 

Creating Meaningful and Measurable Individualized Education Plans   29 

monitoring is vital in determining the appropriateness of placement,  curriculum, and teaching strategies used and, when used correctly, can  improve the educational success of students with disabilities.  Final Thoughts  The IEP defines and mandates an effective process that engages the IEP team  in meaningful discussions of the students educational needs Pierangelo   Giuliani, 2007. The collaborative team effort includes the special education  teachers, general education teachers, related service providers, the parents,  and when appropriate the student. Each member of the team has an  important perspective of the student that can provide useful information to  include in the development of the students IEP and collaboration between  teachers contributes to school improvement and student success Sindelar,  McCray  Brownell, 2014. The completed IEP should be the product of  successful collaboration between the school staff and parents in equal  participation which identifies the students unique needs and appropriate  services Pierangelo  Giuliani, 2007.  Points to Remember 

All students who qualify and receive special education and related  services have an Individualized Education Plan IEP. An IEP is a  legal, detailed written description of the students educational  program that is the foundation of a quality education for students  with disabilities. 

An IEP includes annual goals for students which are measurable  statements that identify what knowledge, skills, or behaviors a student  is expected to be able to demonstrate within a period of time. 

Progress monitoring provides service providers with ongoing data to  base education decisions on and provides summative evidence for the  IEP team to determine if the student has made sufficient or  insufficient progress towards individual goals. 

Providing the appropriate accommodations and modifications will  allow students to have a successful experience in the least restrictive  environment.  References  American Psychological Association. 2018. Individuals with Disabilities Act  IDEA. Retrieved from  https:www.apa.orgadvocacyeducationideaindex.aspx 

 Chapter 3 

Bateman, D.  Herr, C. 2011. Writing measurable IEP goals and objectives.  Verona, WI: Attainment Company.   Burton, N. 2017. Creating effective IEPs: A guide for writing, developing and  implementing plans for teachers. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.   Center for Parent Information and Resources 2017. Present Levels. Retrieved  from https:www.parentcenterhub.orgpresent-levels  DeBettencourt, L.,  Howard, L. 2017. The effective special education teacher:  A practical guide for success. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.   Friend, M. 2018. Special education: Contemporary perspectives for school  professionals. Boston, MA: Pearson Education.  Gargiulo, R.  Metcalf, D. 2017. Teaching in todays inclusive classroom.  Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.   Hall, G., Quinn, L.,  Gollnick, D. 2018. The Wiley handbook of teaching and  learning. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.   Hoover, J.,  Patton, J. 2017. IEPs for other ELs: And other diverse learners.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.   IDEA. 2004. Building the legacy: IDEA 2004. Retrieved from    https:sites.ed.govideabuilding-the-legacy-idea-2004  Jones, P. 2017. Curricula for severe disabilities: Narratives of standardsreferenced good  practice. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.   Lerner, J.,  Johns, B. 2014. Learning disabilities and related disabilities:  Strategies for success. Stamford, CT: Cengage Learning.   Massachusetts Department of Education. 2001. The IEP process guide.  Retrieved from http:www.doe.mass.eduspediepproguide.pdf  McMillian, J. 2013. Research on classroom assessment. Thousand Oaks, CA:  Sage Publications.   National Association of Special Education Teachers. 2007. Assessment in  special education series. Retrieved from  https:www.naset.orgindex.php?id2876  Pierangelo, R.,  Giuliani, G. 2007. Understanding, developing, and writing  effective IEPs. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.  Project Ideal. 2013. The special education referral process. Retrieved from  http:www.projectidealonline.orgvspecial-education-referral-process  Rothstein, L.,  Johnson, S. 2013. Special education law. Thousand Oaks, CA:  Sage.   Salvia, J., Ysseldyke, J.,  Witmer, S. 2013. Assessment: In special and inclusive  education. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning.   Sindelar, P., Mccray, E.,  Brownell, M. 2014. Handbook of research on special  education teacher preparation. New York, NY: Routledge.   Strom, E. 2018. The difference between accommodations and modifications.  Retrieved from https:www.understood.orgenlearning-attentionissuestreatments-approacheseducational-strategiesthe-differencebetween-accommodations-and-modifications  Tomlinson, C. 2014. The differentiated classroom: Responding to the needs of  all learners. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.  

Creating Meaningful and Measurable Individualized Education Plans   31 

University of Washington. 2017. What is the difference between  accommodation and modification or a student with a disability. Retrieved  from https:www.washington.edudoitwhat-difference-betweenaccommodation-and-modification-student-disability  U.S. Department of Education 2010. IEPs, evaluations, and reevaluations.  Retrieved from  https:sites.ed.govideafilespolicyspecedguidideaiep-qa-2010.pdf 

Chapter 4 

Emotional Disturbance  Angela C. Fain, PhD,  University of West Georgia  As a teacher of more than 30 fourth-grade students, Mr. Diaz has his hands  full this year. Thankfully, his co-teacher, Mrs. Smith, will be by his side to help  him manage the diverse group of students individual academic and  behavioral needs. One of the biggest challenges this year will be to ensure that  the students who are struggling with emotional disturbances ED are  identified and behavioral and academic supports and interventions are  planned and implemented. It will be important for Mr. Diaz and Mrs. Smith to  ensure that all of the students are receiving high-quality teaching using  evidence-based instructional strategies. Mr. Diaz and Mrs. Smith will  differentiate instruction as needed, based on data collected through progress  monitoring. The data will help determine whether students need to transition  to Tier 2.  TerminologyDefinition  Terms that have been used to describe children who have extreme socialinterpersonal andor intrapersonal problems include emotionally disturbed  ED, seriously emotionally disturbed SED, emotionally handicapped,  emotionally  impaired,  behaviorally  impaired,  sociallyemotionally  handicapped, emotionally conflicted, seriously behaviorally disabled, and  emotionally  and  behaviorally  disordered  EBD  Center for Parent  Information  Resources, 2017. Emotional disturbance is defined as  a condition exhibiting one or more of the following characteristics over a  long period of time and to a marked degree that adversely affects a  childs educational performance:   A An inability to learn that cannot be explained by intellectual,  sensory, or other health factors.  B An inability to build or maintain satisfactory interpersonal  relationships with peers and teachers.  C Inappropriate types of behavior or feeling under normal  circumstances. 

 Chapter 4 

D A general pervasive mood of unhappiness or depression.  E A tendency to develop physical symptoms or fears associated with  personal or school problems.  As defined by IDEA, emotional disturbance includes schizophrenia  but does not apply to children who are socially maladjusted, unless  it is determined that they have an emotional disturbance Center  for Parent Information  Resources, 2017, n.p.  Much controversy has arisen over the use of the term maladjusted children  and many claim the definition is not clear when it comes to academic  performance. As an umbrella term, ED represents children who range in  severity with a wide array of specific mental disorders including childhood  onset schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, selective mutism, anxiety disorder,  conduct disorder, eating disorders, obsessive compulsive disorder, and  psychotic disorder Center for Parent Information  Resources, 2017, n.p.  Classification  Emotional disturbances can affect a persons physical, social, or cognitive  skills. Children with ED often exhibit specific behaviors and characteristics to  include  hyperactivity impulsiveness, short attention span, aggression or selfinjurious behavior such as acting or fighting, withdrawal depression,  anxiety, immaturity tantrums, poor coping skills, and learning  difficulties performing below grade level. Children with more serious  emotional disorders SED may exhibit excessive anxiety, bizarre motor  acts, distorted thinking, and abnormal mood swings. Some children  may exhibit these behaviors at various times during their development;  however, children with ED continue to display these behaviors over long  periods of time Center for Parent Information  Resources, 2017, n.p.  Two broad categories of behaviors have been identified to include  externalizing and internalizing behaviors Ogundele, 2018. Externalizing  behaviors include aggression, disruption, and hyperactivity. Internalizing  behaviors include depression, social withdrawal, and obsessive-compulsive  behaviors Ogundele, 2018. Children may exhibit characteristics of both  dimensions with any degree of intensity or severity as the dimensions are not  mutually exclusive Ogundele, 2018. Comorbidity, the co-occurrence of two  or more conditions in the same individual, is common for children with this  disorder. 

Emotional Disturbance   35 

A child with emotional and behavioral disorder who exhibits externalizing  behaviors such as aggressive hitting, fighting, teasing, crying, destructiveness,  and yelling, often refusing to comply with requests, is likely to earn the label  disturbed Rader, 2016. Other children may exhibit the same behaviors a  child with EBD does, but not as often and as impulsively. Children with EBD  are not popular with their peers and cause distractions for adults. When this  type of aggression is combined with school failure, it is essential that the  needs of the child are addressed and met Kauffman  Landrum, 2018. A  child who exhibits internalizing behaviors such as immaturity and withdrawal  or depression may also have difficulty developing friendships and meeting  the demands of everyday life. The school environment will cause anxiety and  distress for these individuals and cause them to be withdrawn Seely,  Severson,  Fixsen, 2014.  Prevalence  While less than 1 of school-aged children are identified with ED and served  in special education U.S. Department of Education, 2018, the number of  students who present symptoms of ED have been estimated to be much  greater Forness, Kim  Walker, 2012. Reports suggest that prevalence  estimates range from 2 to 20 of school-age children experience some form  of ED Forness, Freeman, Paparella, Kauffman,  Walker, 2012; Kauffman   Landrum, 2009. Students with ED who receive special education services  most often exhibit externalizing behaviors acting out, aggression,  disruption. Boys exhibit aggression more often than girls and outnumber  girls by a ratio of five to one.  Causes  To date, no one factor has been found to be the cause of behavioral or  emotional problems. Factors such as heredity, brain disorder, diet, stress, and  family environment have all been thoroughly researched. Research does not  indicate that any one of these factors is directly responsible; however, it is  believed some factors may predispose a child to problem behavior. Examples  of factors that may contribute to ED include poverty, abuse, neglect, violence,  defiance of adults, aggression towards peers, social rejection, truancy, drug  use, gang membership, and adult criminality Garner, Kauffman,  Elliott,  2014; Mash  Barkley, 2014.  Characteristics  Children with ED vary greatly in intelligence, academic performance, and  emotional and behavioral characteristics. The average student with ED  performs in the dull-normal IQ range around 90. Students with ED 

 Chapter 4 

consistently exhibit poor academic outcomes and it is widely accepted that  students with ED perform below grade level in reading, spelling, and  mathematics for a variety of reasons Gage, Lewis,  Adamson, 2010; Nelson,  Benner,  Bohaty, 2014; Yakimowski, Faggella-Luby, Kim,  Wei, 2016.  Students with ED perform more than one year below their non-disabled peers  in these areas and achieve well below national averages in both reading and  mathematics Anderson, Kutash,  Duchnowski, 2001. Academically, these  students often have difficulty attending to tasks, completing tasks in a timely  manner, staying on-task, and completing tasks independently Cancio, West,   Young, 2004.  Behaviorally, students with ED exhibit inappropriate classroom behaviors  during academic tasks; they may be anxious and nervous Ashcraft, Krause,   Hopko, 2007; Liaupsin, Jolivette,  Scott, 2007, non-compliant Osher et al.,  2007, andor verbally or physically aggressive to divert attention from their  academic difficulties andor escape task demands Osher et al., 2007. Task  difficulty can impact how these students respond, as often times they display  disruptive or noncompliant behaviors in an effort to escape task demands  Mayer, 2001. These inappropriate behaviors often result in lower teacher  expectations, removal from a desired task, or removal from the educational  setting Colvin, 2004.   These students often display poor social skills that can affect their ability to  complete academic tasks Sutherland, Lewis-Palmer, Stichter,  Morgan,  2008. Social skill deficits in students with ED include misreading social cues  from peers and teachers, inappropriately responding to directives, and the  inability to maintain appropriate peer and adult relationships IDEA, 2004.  Students with ED have difficulty taking turns, appropriately seeking teacher  attention, maintaining appropriate peer interactions, and responding  appropriately in social situations Cook et al., 2008.  Educational Settings  Students with ED may be educated in a variety of settings including the  general education classroom, resource, self-contained classrooms, selfcontained schools, and residential settings. According to IDEA 2004 and No  Child Left Behind Klein, 2015, all students are entitled to have access to the  general education curriculum within a least restrictive environment LRE to  the maximum extent appropriate with those who are not disabled. Only when  a student is considered to have a disability in which the nature or severity of  the disability is such that education in a general education class with  supplementary aids and services will not satisfactorily meet the needs of the  student is the student considered for placement in an alternative setting such  as a special class or separate school. 

Emotional Disturbance   37 

Identification  Students with ED are most often identified by their teachers. Teachers should  include an assessment of emotional and behavioral strengths, as well as  deficits Lane, Menzies, Oakes,  Germer, 2014. Most often, students with  conduct disorder are identified as their behavior is often disruptive and easy  to identify. Systematic screeners provide teachers with effective ways to  gather data that can be helpful in identifying potential issues, validate  concerns, and catch students who otherwise might go unnoticed.  Providing Academic and Behavioral Supports Within the RtI Model  Several intervention models such as the comprehensive, integrated, threetiered CI3T model of prevention and the multi-tiered systems of support  Rosen, 2018; Harlacher, Sakelaris,  Kattelman, 2013 resemble practices of  Response to Intervention RTI Action Network, n.d.; Fuchs  Fuchs, 2006  model and Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports Positive Behavioral  Interventions and Supports; 2018; Sugai  Horner, 2009 model. The RtI  model identifies and responds to academic and behavioral needs of students  based on a four-tiered system while PBIS focuses on students behavioral and  social skill needs. The following examples show how Mr. Diaz and Mrs. Smith  might address possible academic and behavioral needs of the students in the  classroom.  Response to Intervention RtI model  All teachers are required to provide research-based instruction and  environments that will promote learning. Given the movement to more  inclusive classrooms, teachers are required to manage more disruptive  behaviors in the general education classroom. At Tier 1, Mr. Diaz and Mrs.  Smith should already be implementing evidence-based strategies that engage  all students and support academic and behavioral outcomes. High student  engagement strategies include choral responding, response cards, peer  tutoring, high expectations, established routines and procedures, andor  teacher modeling of positive behaviors Sayeski  Brown, 2011.  Tier 2 strategies and interventions for students who continue to  demonstrate challenging behaviors, Mr. Diaz and Mrs. Smith need to consider  making changes to academic instruction such as tutoring or remedial  interventions, provide contingency plans, positive reinforcement systems,  token economies, andor behavior contracts.   For Tier 3, the most intensive, individualized interventions should be  utilized to support students. Mr. Diaz and Mrs. Smith should consider  implementing  Functional Behavioral Assessments FBAs, Behavioral 

 Chapter 4 

Intervention  Plans  BIPs,  self-monitoring  strategies,  daily  student  evaluations, andor social skills instruction.  Multi-Tiered Systems of Support MTSS model  With the growing support for MTSS and similar models in school settings,  there is a need for universal interventions delivered at each tier of support for  behavioral and academic support. For behavioral support at the 1st Tier, Mr.  Diaz and Mrs. Smith should consider including a universal program used to  reinforce appropriate social and classroom behaviors such as The Good  Behavior Game GBG. The GBG is primarily used in elementary school  settings. Classrooms are divided into teams and teams can earn  pointsrewards if the entire team is in compliance with specified teacher  expectations. Research shows that the GBG helps to significantly reduce  disruptive behavior and increase academic engagement Coombes, Chan,  Allen,  Foxcroft, 2016; McDaniel, Bruhn,  Troughton; 2017  As a 2nd Tier Option, Check InCheck Out CICO is an evidence-based  intervention that provides frequent and timely feedback to students regarding  their behavior throughout the day. CICO uses a Daily Progress Report DPR  card that students carry with them throughout the day to obtain feedback  regarding their behavior and to earn points towards a reward. The students  have a morning check-in with a school staff member who provides them with  the DPR, positive adult attention, and encouragement to meet the daily  behavioral expectations. Each student is provided with structured teacher  feedback at the end of each class using the DPR. At the end of the day,  students meet with a school staff member to determine the total points  earned and discuss the progress of the goals. Students take the DPR home to  share with guardians and have signed and return it the following day.  Researchers have found CICO to be effective for 65-76 of students who  participate in the program Lane, Capizzi, Fisher,  Ennis, 2012.  Comprehensive, Integrated, Three-Tiered CI3T model  The CI3T model of prevention combines practices of RtI and PBIS, using  behavioral and academic data to support students across Tier 2 and Tier 3. At  Tier 2, students who are in need of additional support are identified using  academic  and  behavioral  measurements  such  as  curriculum-based  measurements, formative assessments, report cards, attendance, screeners,  and office discipline referrals Whisman,  Chapman, 2013; Oakes, Lane, Cox,  Magrane, Jenkins,  Hankins, 2012. Tier 2 interventions may be school-level  supports such as tutoring or peer-supported learning and can often be  delivered by the general education teachers. Tier 2 interventions may require  additional resources like intensive reading programs or CICO. Tier 3, or 

Emotional Disturbance   39 

tertiary, supports are the most intensive supports available to students. They  can be delivered through one-on-one instruction, counseling, or small  groups. Students receiving tertiary supports may experience interventions in  higher frequency or longer duration than in Tier 2.  Educational Considerations: Strategies That Work  The best way to ensure that all students are on-task and exhibiting positive  behaviors in class is to provide engaging academic lessons. When students are  actively engaged in class, they are less likely to be off-task and misbehaving.  Some strategies that have been proven to be most successful for students with  ED are Ryan, Pierce, Mooney, 2008: 

Explicit instruction: systematic, direct instruction that provides  students with clear guidelines  

Positive Behavioral Intervention Supports PBIS: a behaviorallybased support system for all students within schools focused on  creating and sustaining tiered supports that make desired behavior  more functional.  

Progress monitoring: used to assess student academic performance,  respond to interventions and evaluate effectiveness of interventions 

Time for practice and rehearsal: essential for mastery of skills 

Cooperative learning: students of varying academic levels of ability  are put in small groups to work together to improve their  understanding of the material. 

Peer tutoring: students of varying levels of ability are paired together  to serve as tutors and tutees to learn academic and behavioral  concepts.  

Self-monitoring: student measures and records progress of their own  behavior and measures that behavior with a pre-determined  standard. 

Modeling: model appropriate behavior for students.  

Frequent and timely feedback: provide frequent and timely feedback  to students.  

Mnemonics: used to help remember a large amount of information  Functional Behavioral AssessmentBehavioral Intervention Plan  Functional behavioral assessments FBAs are effective in reducing problem  behaviors and increasing desirable behaviors of students Jones, Greenwood, 

 Chapter 4 

 Dunn, 2016. FBA identify target behaviors, define the purpose of the  behavior, and why the behavior is interfering with learning Jones et al.,  2016. Oftentimes, an FBA is used as the basis of a behavioral intervention  plan BIP for specific disciplinary actions when the student is placed in  alternative settings or if the conduct of the student has been determined to be  a manifestation of the students disability. A BIP, on the other hand, is the  culmination of an FBA, where the student is taught replacement behaviors for  those identified in the FBA Jones et al., 2016.  Final Thoughts  Students with EBD present some of the most complex academic and  behavioral challenges for teachers. Due to the severe behavioral problems  many students exhibit, students with EBD experience academic difficulties as  well. Teachers and other educational and health professionals are faced with  the challenges of promoting positive social, emotional, academic, and  behavioral growth for these students.  Points to Remember 

Common characteristics and behaviors seen in children with ED  include hyperactivity impulsiveness, short attention span, aggression  or self-injurious behavior such as acting or fighting, withdrawal  depression, anxiety, immaturity tantrums, poor coping skills, and  learning difficulties performing below grade level.  

Two broad categories of behaviors have been identified: externalizing  and internalizing behaviors.  

Examples of factors that contribute to ED include poverty, abuse,  neglect, violence, defiance of adults, aggression towards peers, social  rejection, truancy, drug use, gang membership, and adult criminality.  

Students with ED may be educated in a variety of settings including  the general education classroom, resource, self-contained classrooms,  self-contained schools, and residential settings.  

The best way to ensure that all students are on-task and exhibiting  positive behaviors in class is to provide engaging academic lessons. 

Functional behavioral assessments FBAs are effective in reducing  problem behaviors and increasing desirable behaviors of students. 

Emotional Disturbance   41 

References  Anderson, J, A., Kutash, K.,  Duchnowski, A. J. 2001. A comparison of the  academic progress of students with EBD and students with LD. Journal of  Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 92, 106-115. DOI:  10.1177106243660100900205  Ashcraft, M. H., Krause, J. A.,  Hopko, D. R. 2007. Is math anxiety a  mathematical learning disability? In D. B., Berch,  M. M., Mazzocco, Why is  Math so Hard for Some Children? pp. 329348. Baltimore, MA: Paul H.  Brookes.  Cancio, E. J., West, R. P.,  Young, K. R., 2004. Improving mathematics  homework completion and accuracy of students with EBD through selfmanagement and parent participation. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral  Disorders, 121, 9-22. DOI: 10.117710624366040120010201  Colvin, G. 2004. Managing the cycle of acting-out behavior in the classroom.  Eugene, OR: Behavior Associates.   Cook, C. R., Gresham, F. M., Kern, L., Barreras, R. B., Thorton, S.,  Crews, S. D.  2008. Social skills training for secondary students with emotional andor  behavioral disorders: A review and analysis of the meta-analytic literature.  Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 163, 131-144. DOI:  10.11771063426608314541  Coombes, L., Chan, G., Allen, D.,  Foxcroft, D. R. 2016. Mixed-methods  Evaluation of the Good Behavior Game in English Primary Schools. Journal  of Community  Applied Social Psychology, 265, 369-387. DOI:  10.1002casp.2268  Center for Parent Information  Resources. 2017. Emotional disturbance.  Retrieved from https:www.parentcenterhub.orgemotionaldisturbance  Forness, S. R., Freeman, S. F. N., Paparella, T., Kauffman, J. M.,  Walker, H. M.  2012.   Special education implications of point and cumulative prevalence for  children with emotional or behavioral disorders. Journal of Emotional and  Behavioral Disorders, 201, 4-18. DOI: 10.11771063426611401624  Forness, S. R., Kim, J.,  Walker, H. M. 2012. Prevalence of students with  EBD: Impact on general education. Beyond Behavior, 212, 3-10. Retrieved  from https:eric.ed.gov?idEJ975007  Fuchs, D.  Fuchs, L. 2006. Introduction to response to intervention: What,  why, and how valid is it? Reading Research Quarterly, 411, 93-99. DOI:  10.1598RRQ.41.1.4  Gage, N. A., Lewis, T.,  Adamson, R. M. 2010. An examination of 35 years of  Behavioral Disorders: What, how, and who has been published. Behavioral  Disorders, 354. 280-293. Retrieved from  https:www.jstor.orgstable43153512   Garner, P., Kauffman, J.  Elliott, J. 2014 Introduction: Themes and  dimensions of EBD: a conceptual overview. In Garner, P., Kauffman, J. and  Elliott, J. eds. The Sage Handbook of Emotional and Behavioral Difficulties,  pp. 1-5. London, UK: SAGE 

 Chapter 4 

Harlacher, J. E., Sakelaris, T. L.,  Kattelman, N. M. 2013. Practitioners guide  to curriculum-based evaluation in reading. New York, NY: Springer Science   Business Media  Individuals with Disabilities Education Act 2004. Department of Education,  Office of Special Education Programs. Retrieved from  https:sites.ed.govidea  Jones, V., Greenwood, A., Dunn, C. 2016. Effective supports for students with  emotional and Behavioral disorders: A continuum of services. New York, NY:  Pearson  Kaufmann, J. M.,  Landrum, T. J. 2018. Characteristics of emotional and  behavioral disorders of children and youth 11th ed. Boston, MA:  PearsonMerrill.  Klein, A. 2015. No child left behind: An overview. Retrieved from  https:www.edweek.orgewsectionmultimediano-child-left-behindoverview-definition-summary.html  Lane, K.L., Menzies, H.M., Oakes, W. P.  Germer, K.A. 2014. Screening and  identification approaches for detecting students at-risk. In H.M. Walker   F.M. Gresham Eds., Handbook of Evidence-Based Practices for Emotional  and Behavioral Disorders: Applications in Schools, pp. 129-151. New York,  NY: Guilford Press.  Liaupsin, C.J., Jolivette, K.,  Scott, T.M. 2007 Schoolwide systems of  behavior support. In R. B., Rutherford Jr., M. M., Quinn,  S. R., Mathur,  Eds., Handbook of Research in Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, pp.  487-501. New York, NY: Guilford.   Mash, E. J.,  Barkley, B. A. Eds. 2014. Child psychopathology 3rd ed. New  York, NY: Guilford Press.   Mayer, G. R. 2001. Antisocial behavior: Its causes and prevention within our  schools. Education and Treatment of Children, 244, 414-429. Retrieved  from https:www.jstor.orgstablei40111098  McDaniel, S., Bruhn, A.,  Troughton, L. 2017. A Brief Social Skills  Intervention to Reduce Challenging Classroom Behavior. Journal of  Behavioral Education, 261, 53-74. DOI:10.1007s10864-016-9259-y.  National Dissemination Center for Children with Disabilities. 2010.  Emotional Disturbance. Retrieved from  https:www.parentcenterhub.orgwp-contentuploadsrepoitemsfs5.pdf  Nelson, J.R., Benner, G.J.,  Bohaty, J. 2014. Addressing the academic  problems and challenges of students with emotional behavioral disorders.  In H.M. Walker  F.M. Gresham Eds., Handbook of Evidence-Based  Practices for Emotional and Behavioral Disorders: Applications in Schools,  pp. 363-377. New York, NY: Guilford Press.  Oakes, W.P., Lane, K.L., Cox, M., Magrane, A., Jenkins, A.,  Hankins, K. 2012.  Tier 2 supports to improve motivation and performance of elementary  students with behavioral challenges and poor work completion. Education   Treatment of Children, 354, 547-584. Retrieved from  https:eric.ed.gov?idEJ999347 

Emotional Disturbance   43 

Ogundele, M.O. 2018. Behavioural and emotional disorders in childhood: A  brief overview for paediatricians. Journal of Clinical Pediatrics, 71, 9-26.  DOI: 10.5409wjcp.v7.i1.9  Osher, D., Carledge, G., Oswald, D., Sutherland, K.S., Artiles, A.J.,  Coutinho,  M. 2007. Cultural and linguistic competency and disproportionate  representation. In R.B. Rutherford Jr., M.M. Quinn,  S.R. Mathur, Eds.,  Handbook of Research in Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, pp. 54-77.  New York, NY: Guilford Press  Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports. 2018. Positive behavioral  interventions and supports: OSEP technical center. Retrieved from  https:www.pbis.org  Rader, R.A. 2016. Examination of externalizing behaviors within general  education, at-risk, and special education preschool-aged classrooms.  Retrieved from  https:thekeep.eiu.educgiviewcontent.cgi?refererhttps:www.google.c omhttpsredir1article3418contexttheses  RTI Action Network. n.d. Get started. Retrieved from  http:www.rtinetwork.orggetstarted  Rosen, P. 2018. MTSS: What you need to know. Retrieved from  https:www.understood.orgenlearning-attention-issuestreatmentsapproacheseducational-strategiesmtss-what-you-need-to-know  Ryan, J. B., Pierce, C. D., Mooney, P. 2008. Evidence-based teaching strategies  for students with EBD. Beyond Behavior, 173, 22-29. Retrieved from  https:www.mona.uwi.educopsitesdefaultfilesresourcefilesevidenc ed20based20teachins20strategies20-EDC.pdf  Sayeski, K.L., Brown, M.R. 2011. Developing a classroom management plan  using a tiered approach. Teaching Exceptional Children, 472, 119-127. DOI:  10.11770040059914553208  Seeley, J.R., Severson, H.H.,  Fixsen, A. 2014. Empirically-based targeted  prevention approaches for addressing externalizing and internalizing  behavior disorders within school contexts. In H.M. Walker  F.M. Gresham  Eds., Handbook of Evidence-Based Practices for Emotional and Behavioral  Disorders: Applications in Schools, pp. 307323. New York: Guilford Press.  Sugai, G.,  Horner, R.H. 2009. Responsiveness-to-intervention and schoolwide positive behavior supports: Integration of multi-tiered system  approaches. Exceptionality, 174, 223-237. DOI:  10.108009362830903235375  Sutherland, K.S., Lewis-Palmer, T., Stichter, J.,  Morgan, P.L. 2008.  Examining the influence of teacher behavior and classroom context on the  behavioral and academic outcomes for students with emotional or  behavioral disorders. The Journal of Special Education, 414, 223-233. DOI:  10.11770022466907310372  U.S. Department of Education 2018. National Center for Education Statistics:  Students with disabilities. Retrieved from  https:nces.ed.govfastfactsdisplay.asp?id64  Whisman, A.,  Chapman, D. 2013. Improving school discipline data  collection and reporting: A status report for the 20122013 school year.  Retrieved from https:wvde.uswp44 

 Chapter 4 

contentuploads201801ImprovingSchoolDisciplineDataCollectionandRe porting2013.pdf  Yakimowski, M. E., Faggella-Luby, M., Kim, Y.,  Wei, Y. 2016. Reading  achievement in the middle school years: A study investigating growth  patterns by high incidence disability. Journal of Education for Students  Placed at Risk, 212, 118128. DOI:10.108010824669.2016.1147962 

Chapter 5 

Autism Spectrum Disorder  Nicholas D. Young, PhD, EdD,  American International College,  Elizabeth Jean, EdD,  Endicott College  Autism spectrum disorder ASD is one of the fastest growing disability  categories of the 21st century. Boys are more likely than girls to develop  autism by a margin of four to one National Alliance on Mental Illness, 2015.  In the last six years alone, the statistics have risen from 1 in 68 children in  2012 to 1 in 59 children in 2018 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,  2018.  Although the cause of ASD is unknown, researchers and families whose  children have this disorder believe it may be due to environmental factors or  genetics LaBarbera, 2019; National Alliance on Mental Illness, 2015.  Researchers have ruled out a link to childhood vaccinations, long believed to  be the starting point of ASD related symptoms Jain, Buikema, Bancroft, Kelly,   Newschaffer, 2015.  What makes this disorder even more complex is the range of impairment  possible as this neurodevelopmental disorder affects communication, social  interactions, and movement American Psychiatric Association, 2013a. Many  individuals with ASD perseverate on toys, topics, and books and, equally  discouraging, often have difficulty with repetitive and stereotyped  movements American Psychiatric Association, 2013a. Despite these issues,  students with ASD are being taught in the inclusion setting as often as  possible as required by the Individuals with Disabilities Act, otherwise  referred to as IDEA IDEA: Individuals with Disabilities Act, n.d.   Within the general education settings, students with ASD and typically  developing peers should be taught side-by-side using a variety of methods of  differentiation. This learning environment has produced positive results for  many students with ASD to include improved social connections and greater  academic outcomes Zagona, Kurth,  MacFarland, 2017. It is important,  therefore, for both special education and general education teachers to 

 Chapter 5 

understand the myriad options for differentiation and specific learning tools  that will advance the learning for students with ASD.  Understanding Autism  The most recent fact sheet from the American Psychiatric Associations DSM5 2013b describes ASD as any individual who, from a very young age, has  persistent deficits in communication, is overly dependent on routines, highly  sensitive to changes in their environment, or intensely focused on  inappropriate items p. 1. It is important to understand that the degree to  which these appear is highly dependent on the severity of the disorder.  In order to diagnose ASD, individuals must exhibit persistent deficits,  although the degree to which each symptom is seen differs. Deficits in social  communication and interactions may be manifested in struggles with  nonverbal exchanges to include body language, gestures, and lack of eye  contact; an inability or limited ability to read social cues accurately; and  difficulty in making friendships Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,  US Department of Health  Human Services, 2018.  Individuals with ASD will exhibit restricted andor repetitive actions,  behaviors, or activities such as motor activities that are repetitive such as  making lines of blocks or toys, inflexible thinking and sameness of routine,  transitions and changes are difficult, reactivity to sensory input Centers for  Disease Control and Prevention, US Department of Health  Human Services,  2018. These are often referred to as stereotyped behaviors as they fall  invariably into the same pattern or form Merriam-Webster, 2018.  The impairment of the above deficits and restrictive patterns cause  clinically significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important  areas of current functioning Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, US  Department of Health  Human Services, 2018, n.p. It is vital, then, to  ensure that these deficits are not due to other disabilities such as global  developmental delay or an intellectual developmental disorder Centers for  Disease Control and Prevention, US Department of Health  Human Services,  2018.   The determination and severity of ASD is also set along a continuum. High  functioning  individuals  may  require  minimal  accommodations  or  modifications to school structures and academics, while those with more  severe cases will require myriad modifications to academics and life skills  Ousley  Cermak, 2014. Once a diagnosis is confirmed, and the severity  defined, educators and other stakeholders can create an Individualized  Education Plan IEP that addresses the needs of the student. 

Autism Spectrum Disorder   47 

Treatment of ASD must be specific to each individual and address the  current level of need National Alliance on Mental Illness, 2015. Using a fourpronged approach will likely yield the best results, allowing individuals with  ASD to be most successful in life. According to the National Alliance on  Mental Illness 2015, this four-pronged approach includes 

Education and development, including specialized classes and skills  training, time with therapists and other specialists 

Behavioral treatments, such as applied behavior analysis ABA 

Medication for co-occurring symptoms, combined with therapy 

Complementary and alternative medicine CAM, such as supplements  and changes in diet  p. 2.  Defining Autism-Associated Traits  Children who develop ASD generally struggle with the give-and-take of  everyday human interactions National Alliance on Mental Illness, 2015, p.  1. The traits of autism are usually divided into three distinct areas to include  social interactions, communication, and movement Centers for Disease  Control and Prevention, US Department of Health  Human Services, 2018.  Each exists on the ASD continuum and may manifest itself in different ways in  each individual, from severely challenged to gifted National Alliance on  Mental Illness, 2015.  Social interactions. This category refers to a childs ability to be involved in  social interactions as well as share emotions and interests with friends and  acquaintances American Psychiatric Association, 2013a. When these  activities occur naturally, it is referred to as social reciprocity. Social  reciprocity deficits in children may include an inability to identify emotions in  others LaBarbera, 2019. Additional struggles include making and keeping  friendships as they are often unable to change their behaviors in different  situations or lack the ability to read facial expressions Zager, Wehmeyer,   Simpson, 2012.  Communication. Children who struggle with social conversations may not  be able to communicate their feelings or understand things very literally  LaBarbera,  2019.  Communication deficits are the most common  characteristic for individuals with ASD Webber  Scheuermann, 2008.  Again, social reciprocity, or a lack of, is at play here. It is not uncommon for  these individuals to avoid conversations and instead, move towards more  individualized activities that do not require verbal interactions American  Psychiatric Association, 2013a. Additional struggles occur when an individual 

 Chapter 5 

with ASD does not pick up on body language and social cues that would be  commonplace to a non-affected peer LaBarbera, 2019.  Movement. Individuals with ASD experience at least two of five different  issues with movement to include fixated interests; stereotyped movements  such as hand and arm flapping, whirling, or rocking back and forth;  hyperactivity to sensory input; specific interest in environmental sensory  inputs; and unnatural need for predicable schedules American Psychiatric  Association, 2013a.  The History of Inclusion  Several court battles brought inclusion into the limelight of education; yet it  was not an issue of disability that first occurred. Brown v. the Board of  Education guaranteed that students were not segregated by virtue of race, and  that separate but equal was a farce was decided in 1954 AE Network, 2018.  The Civil Rights Act of 1964 in part delineated that all persons, regardless of  race, gender, or ethnicity, should be treated equally under the law if they  receive federal financial aid University of Kansas-School of Education, 2018.  The 1971 case of Pennsylvania Association of Retarded Children PARC v.  the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the 1972 case of Mills v. the Board of  Education of the District of Columbia were perhaps the two most influential  lawsuits that brought the inclusion of students with disabilities to the  forefront. The PARC lawsuit guaranteed that students with diagnosed learning  and intellectual disabilities should be taught in public schools with their  peers, in the least restrictive environment possible Young, Jean,  Mead,  2018. The Mills case broadened the scope of inclusion with a decision that  included all students with disabilities, not just those with mental deficiencies,  be given educational opportunities that were the same as those granted to  non-disabled peers.  Soon after PARC and Mills were decided, the federal government passed the  Education for All Handicapped Children Act in 1975, which protected  students with exceptionalities and gave further guidance to schools Lee,  2018. Perhaps the most important part of this act was to guarantee free,  appropriate public education FAPE to each child with a disability in every  state and locality across the country U.S. Department of Education, 2007.  This law has gone through several upgrades and iterations and eventually  became known as the Individuals with Disabilities Act Lee, 2018; Young, Jean,   Mead, 2018. 

Autism Spectrum Disorder   49 

The Case for Inclusive Classrooms and Schools  Inclusion is not a place, rather, it is a way of teaching that honors all students  and seeks to include all learning styles in one classroom Pratt, 1997.  Inclusive education is beneficial for all students, especially those with  disabilities, and offers myriad benefits to include higher academic  achievement, social skills acquisition, relationship-building with nondisabled peers, and higher rates of graduation Hehir et al., 2016.  In schools where inclusion is valued, educators share responsibilities and  collaborate so that all students can learn in the general education setting  Olson, Leko  Roberts, 2016. It is this type of school culture where staff,  students with disabilities, and their non-disabled peers are able to learn from  each other and where services and supports are offered across all school  settings  both academic and social Olson et al., 2016.  Academic Benefits  While some critics of inclusion insist that this method is distracting to nondisabled peers, the majority of research indicates that everyone benefits from  this model of instruction Hehir et al., 2016; Dessemontet  Bless, 2013.  Educators who plan for inclusion tend to use more differentiation, more oneon-one teaching time, and non-disabled peers to support students with  autism as well as other disabilities, all of which lead to higher scores on  achievement tests as compared to their autistic peers in self-contained  classrooms National Council on Disability, 2018; Kurth  Mastergeorge,  2010.  Social Benefits  Autistic students who are placed in inclusion classrooms tend to have better  behavioral and social abilities as they spend more time with their non-autistic  peers to include expressive language gains, social competence, increased  student engagement especially with non-disabled peers, more diverse  friendships for students with autism National Council on Disability, 2018;  Reagan, 2012. A longitudinal study completed in 2006 National Center for  Special Education Research proved that regardless of the disability, students  who spent more time in an inclusion setting were likely to attend school more  often, have fewer behavior issues, and have better outcomes after high school  graduation.  Interestingly, Tonnsen and Hahn 2015 suggest that inclusion settings offer  non-disabled peers the opportunity to improve their self-esteem, develop  personal principles and morals, increase their understanding and comfort  level of individual differences between peers, and exhibit more pro-social 

 Chapter 5 

awareness. This is especially important as students with and without  disabilities recognized a stronger sense of belonging in inclusive schools and  classrooms University of Kansas School of Education, 2016.  Knowing that inclusive classrooms offer the best possible setting in which  students with ASD can learn, teachers must thoughtfully identify and  implement evidence-based strategies to promote positive outcomes for all  students Kurth, Lyon,  Shogren, 2015.  Preparing to Teach Students Using Evidence-Based Practices  The use of evidence-based strategies and practices benefit all students, yet  students with disabilities, and especially those with ASD, find the most  success when these strategies are paired with the general education setting.  Evidence-based practices are those that have withstood scrutiny and repeated  testing through research and demonstrate successful outcomes in one or  more domains to include social, academic, or behavioral Graham, Harris,   Chambers, 2016. Both the Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015 and the  Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004 mandate the  use of evidence-based strategies in teaching students with documented  disabilities Klein, 2016, Lee, 2018.  Criteria for Evidence-Based Practices  The Institute of Educational Sciences and the Council for Exceptional  Children, or CES, 2014 have both created similar documents that define the  criteria for evidence-based practices using specific indicators in a number of  areas. Using a continuum to track effectiveness strategies are classified as  having insufficient evidence, negative effects, mixed effects, potentially  evidence-based practices, and evidence-based practices Council for  Exceptional Children, 2014.  In addition to the classifications, quality indicators were assigned to further  support the use of evidence-based practices to include context and setting,  participants, intervention agent, description of practice, fidelity of  implementation, internal validity, outcome measures and dependent  variable, and data analysis Council for Exceptional Children, 2014.   Planning for Educational Success 

The first job of the teacher is to consider overarching educational  programming components that provide the basis for success for  students with ASD Dunlap et al., 2012. Teachers are advised to put  these practices into regular practice within their classroom. 

Autism Spectrum Disorder   51 

Systematic instruction: Data collection leads to meaningful goals and  explicit instruction that create student opportunities. 

Individualized supports and services: Tailored to student need and  consideration given to the family. 

Logical and structured learning environment: Expectations are clear  to staff and students and the environment supports the development  of essential skills. 

Specialized curriculum focus: Importance is placed on student need  and areas of deficit using a variety of specific supports such as  prompting strategies, applied behavioral analysis, discrete trials,  visual environment supports, and others. 

Positive behavioral supports: Using reinforcements to increase  positive behaviors, such as Positive Behavioral Incentives and  Supports PBIS Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports,  2018. 

Family involvement: Engaging families to be co-contributors in  student learning, which leads to more positive outcomes.  Dunlap et al., 2010  The next step in preparing to teach students with ASD includes  understanding the needs of the students before them. With this in mind,  Westling, Fox, and Carter 2014 described twelve specific educational  practices that are vital planning tools for any teacher who works with students  with ASD. 

Plan instruction carefully considering the characteristics of students  with ASD; 

Manage instructional time, create structure, be consistent; 

Manage  student  behaviors  through  behavior  plans  and  reinforcements; 

Meet the learning needs of all students using well-thought-out  groupings and peer mentors; 

Consider learning styles when presenting new material; 

Establish classroom routines and procedures that lend themselves to  a positive learning environment; 

Use a process of feedback that builds confidence; 

Spiral learning so that students have multiple chances at mastery; 

Integrate college and career readiness skills; 

 Chapter 5 

Set challenging yet realistic expectations for students; and 

Create positive interactions for students to increase pro-social  behaviors.   Westling, Fox,  Carter, 2014  With the overarching programming components and the teaching strategies  in place, it is time to investigate strategies that differentiate instruction and  offer students with ASD an entry point into the general education academic  setting.  Evidence-Based Strategies that Promote Learning  The next step in teaching students with ASD is to include evidence-based  strategies based on student deficit. While applied behavior analysis and  discrete trial are two very common practices for teaching students with ASD,  they are not generally taught in the general education inclusion classroom as  they are more a more specific means of changing behaviors and abilities  Zager et al., 2012.  Once a student is able to be in the general education classroom, however,  differentiating instruction will provide specific strategies that lead to student  success.  Some  evidence-based  practices  include  prompting,  visual  environment supports, social skills development, and universal design for  learning CAST, 2018; Ault  Griffen, 2013; Crosland  Dunlap, 2012; Texas  Statewide Leadership for Austin, 2013.  Prompting Strategies  Prompting strategies assist the student with ASD in attaining a chosen  behavior. The teacher prompts the student until the desired behavior has  been achieved, then the prompts fade over time until the student can  independently perform the behavior or activity Ault  Griffen, 2013.  Prompts that support students with ASD to commonplace routines within the  general education setting can be given by teachers, paraprofessionals, andor  students Wong et al., 2015.  Using a system of least prompts SLP, the smallest amount of prompting is  given first, and it can be increased if necessary Ault  Griffen, 2013. A  natural cue is the first step on the prompting hierarchy followed by a gesture,  a verbalpicture cue, and then modeling the preferred task Mims, n.d. The  most indiscreet prompts include a partial physical cue, and a full physical  cue, both of which require a hands-on approach Mims, n.d. The teacher  implementing a prompting strategy would first decide where to begin in the  hierarchy, provide specific direction and wait a few seconds for a response. If 

Autism Spectrum Disorder   53 

the student is successful, the prompt would be lessened the next time;  whereas, if the student needs further direction, the prompt may be increased  in the future Mims, n.d.  Visual Environment Supports  Students with ASD are challenged by differences in how they interact in social  situations, their behavior and communication abilities, and sensory  processing issues Texas Statewide Leadership for Austin, 2013. Each student  has different needs and, as such, a number of environmental supports exist to  assist students in accessing the curriculum as well as completing day-to-day  tasks. These might include visual schedules and task cards, social stories,  people locators, boundary settings, labels and lists, graphic organizers, travel  cards, and a home base card Texas Statewide Leadership for Austin, 2013.  Visual schedules and task cards. Students with ASD may need assistance  understanding the daily schedule or may not be able to transition between  activities. A visual schedule or task cards communicate next steps in pictures  and words; thus, it increases a level of independence available to a student  Crosland  Dunlap, 2012. Visual schedules may include firstthen, full day  schedules, or choice boards, to name a few.  People locators. Students with ASD thrive on predictability and often  perseverate on knowing where people are, especially those important to  them. People locators offer the student a visual representation of where each  person is during the day. Using either photos of faces or written names of  these individuals, they are posted on a card made with the locations of each  person; for example, if mom or a sibling are usually at home during the day,  there would be a picture of the childs house and then the appropriate picture  underneath it Texas Statewide Leadership for Austin, 2013. Similarly, if the  child needs to know where the science teacher is, perhaps there would be a  picture of the science teacher at her classroom door.   Boundary settings. Using furniture, color coding, and labeling to make  specific spaces more obvious is helpful to students with ASD. Teachers must  first define the need, such as a student who presents with a safety concern,  and then they define the boundary using furniture, tables, and partitions if  available Smith  Collet-Klingenberg, 2009. Once these steps are  established, it is time to teach the student the boundary and expectations  using modeling, positive reinforcement, and corrective feedback Smith   Collet-Klingenberg, 2009. Above all else, it is vital that there is consistency in  all aspects of visual boundaries Smith  Collet-Klingenberg, 2009.  Labels and lists. These two strategies provide visual supports that students  can access easily within the classroom; yet they often need to be taught first 

 Chapter 5 

to recognize and understand the information Texas Schoolwide Leadership  for Austin, 2013. Often, labels are found on shelves, cubbies, items such as  crayons and pencils, the book corner, a water or sand table, and many other  items, while lists provide information that is often not represented otherwise,  such as the steps to checking out a book from the library. Number lists or  checklists are but two of the ways in which lists might be written for students  Texas Schoolwide Leadership for Austin, 2013.  Graphic organizers. This tool organizes academic information for students  that makes the task of learning easier to comprehend. Venn diagrams,  outlines, charts, and semantic maps all offer the students with ASD a visual  representation of information that might be given orally such as ideas or facts  Knight, Spooner, Browder, Smith  Wood, 2013. When paired with explicit  instruction, graphic organizers have the ability to improve student vocabulary  and comprehension Knight et al., 2013.  Travel cards. Used to improve targeted behaviors, travel cards are given to  students with ASD who then carry the card from room to room. Teachers  must sign off each time the student brings the card to class and engages in  pre-specified target behaviors Texas Schoolwide Leadership for Austin,  2013. The card has the potential to increase productive behavior across  multiple  environmentsandfacilitates  teacher  collaboration  and  improves school-home communication Texas Schoolwide Leadership for  Austin, 2013.  Home base card. This is equivalent to a take-a-break spot in the classroom  and allows students with ASD a chance to breathe, unwind, and pull  themselves back together Texas Schoolwide Leadership for Austin, 2013.  Other benefits include a space for ASD students to go when they are  overwhelmed by sounds, movement, and lighting Texas Schoolwide  Leadership for Austin, 2013.  Social Skills Development  Individuals with ASD have difficulty in making and maintaining eye contact,  making requests, expressing appropriate behaviors, and an inability to play  with toys in the way intended; yet, learning to do so correctly is extremely  difficult Thompson, 2017; Wilkinson, 2014. Using discrete trials and  modeling provides an entry point into teaching students appropriate social  cues Wilkinson, 2014. While there are many strategies that can be used,  some of which are boxed programs, peer-mediated interventions and social  stories are easy to prepare and well-received by students.  Peer-mediated interventions. This evidence-based strategy teaches  younger students with ASD how to play and share, using their typically 

Autism Spectrum Disorder   55 

developing classmates as mentor or tutors to facilitate appropriate play  Wilkinson, 2014. In older students, peer-mediated teaching focuses on  social interactions and the acceptance of differences in people. In both age  groups, typically developing peers are the mentors that are trained to work  with their disabled counterparts.   Social stories. Some students will find it confusing or difficult to change  their behavior, adjust to new routines, or understand a social situation. This  may lead to greater anxiety; however, short narratives, or social stories, can  help to quell fears Oakley, n.d. Stories can include topics such as  transitioning from home to school, daily routines, asking questions, and  anything else a student is struggling with Oakley, n.d. Once the teacher  decides on a topic, a story is written and often it is accompanied by photos or  pictures. Once the story has been put together, it is important to read it to the  student in a quiet place when he or she is calm Oakley, n.d. Social stories  are meant to be read repeatedly as that is how the student will best  understand and learn.  Universal Design for Learning UDL  Universal design for learning, commonly called UDL, is a three-part  framework that is used to optimize teaching and learning for all people  based on scientific insights into how humans learn CAST, 2018, n.p. Based  on brain research, the theory behind ULD states that students can access  and participate in challenging learning opportunities CAST, 2018, n.d.  Requiring multiple means of learning, the UDL guidelines encompass  engagement the what of learning, representation the how of learning,  and action and expression the why of learning and offer staff and students  a variety of tools that can be further broken down into smaller sections with  designated checkpoints CAST, 2018.  On the CASST 2018 website, the guidelines are set up within a table where  subsequent rows explain how to 1 increase access to learning through  recruiting interest, perception, and physical action, 2 build or develop effort  and  persistence,  language  and  symbols,  andor  expression  and  communication and, 3 helps learners to internalize the learning through  self-regulation, comprehension, and executive function skills CAST, 2018.  When taken in totality, the goal of this matrix is to develop expert learners  who arepurposeful and motivated, resourceful and knowledgeable, and  strategic and self-directed CAST, 2018, n.p.   Dependent on student goals, educators may choose a variety of aspects,  andor use this knowledge to inform the IEP among other ways. These  guidelines, when used as a supportive tool, aid in the development of shared  language in the designing of goals and the assessment of materials and 

 Chapter 5 

methods, which lead to accessible, meaningful, and challenging learning  experiences CAST, 2018, n.p. UDL believes in proactive planning that  changes the environment to meet student needs rather than changing the  student Buyrn  Stowe, 2018.  When looking specifically at students with ASD, universal design for  learning can be beneficial as it offers a wide range of options for teaching  Zehner, Chen,  Aladsani, 2017. All students, therefore, have the potential to  learn more than expected as the teacher can differentiate to meet specific  needs Zehner et al., 2017. This change in curriculum design and  instructional delivery is beneficial for everyone and UDL guidelines offer new  models of teaching students with ASD Domings, Crevecoeur,  Ralabate.  2014.  Final Thoughts  With statistics rising at an alarming rate, autism spectrum disorder is the  fastest growing developmental issue in the 21st century Centers for Disease  Control and Prevention, 2018. Individuals with ASD present in numerous  ways as the disorder exists on a continuum where students may be highfunctioning or severely restricted in abilities. This neurological disorder  impacts social interactions, communication, and movement.  Students with ASD require accommodations that allow them to be  successful in the general education classroom where they can interact with  typically developing peers. In order to provide an inclusive setting, teachers  are tasked with providing differentiated lessons and activities that appeal to a  wide variety of students and their learning styles and abilities. It is also  suggested that these classrooms have predicable schedules, routines, and  procedures so that students with ASD are more comfortable.   School culture is the first step in creating an inclusionary school where all  students are valued and the expectations for learning are clear. Using an  inclusion model, students with ASD and their typically developing peers  benefit from learning through collaboration, peer mentoring, one-on-one  teaching and conferencing as needed, and engagement in positive social  interactions, to name just a few.   Evidence-based teaching practices used within the general education  setting offer students learning methods that have been proven over time and  through research; thus, students will be more successful. The federal  government has mandated the use of evidence-based practices as part of  both ESSA and IDEA, making them the strategies of choice; however, teachers  must know what to use and when to use it appropriately. The use of prompts  and fading, for example, will help a struggling student who needs only 

Autism Spectrum Disorder   57 

minimal help, while UDL guidelines make it possible for educators to  pinpoint learning entry points and activities for students individually.  Students with ASD, when placed in an inclusion setting, have the potential to  make substantial gains as compared to their ASD peers who are in selfcontained classrooms. Equally important, typically developing peers make  academic gains but also tend to become more compassionate and  understanding of students with disabilities.  Points to Remember 

Autism spectrum disorder has no known cause at this time, although  current research in the field tends to favor a genetic or environmental  link. 

Individuals with ASD are highly sensitive to environmental changes  and noises, perseverates on toys and subjects of interest, and  dependent on routines. 

Evidence-based practices are those strategies that have been tested over  time through research and demonstrate successful outcomes in one or  more domains. 

Several organizations have created indicators and guidelines to help  track the effectiveness of a strategy. While the organizations differ, the  categories range from insufficient evidence and negative effects to  evidence-based practices 

Evidence-based practices are mandated by the federal government as a  tool for teaching students who may need additional help, although  these strategies benefit all students.  References  AE Network. 2018. Brown v. board of education. Retrieved from  https:www.history.comtopicsblack-historybrown-v-board-ofeducation-of-topeka  American Psychiatric Association 2013a. Diagnostic and statistical manual  of mental disorders, 5th ed. DSM-5. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric  Publishing.   American Psychiatric Association 2013b. DSM-5 autism spectrum disorder  fact sheet. Retrieved from  https:www.psychiatry.orgpsychiatristspracticedsmeducationalresourcesdsm-5-fact-sheets  Ault, M.  Griffen, A. 2013. Teaching with the system of least prompts: An  easy method for monitoring progress. Teaching Exceptional Children, 453,  46-53. DOI: 10.1177004005991304500305 

 Chapter 5 

Buyrn, C.A.  Stowe, M.M. 2018. Understanding the basics of universal design  for learning. Retrieved from  https:education.wm.educentersttacresourcesarticlesassistivetechu nderstandingthebasicsofUDLindex.php  CAST 2018. The UDL guidelines. Retrieved from  http:udlguidelines.cast.org  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2018. Autism spectrum disorder:  Data  statistics. Retrieved from  https:www.cdc.govncbdddautismdata.html  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, US Department of Health   Human Services. 2018. Autism spectrum disorder ASD. Retrieved from  https:www.cdc.govncbdddautismhcp-dsm.html  Council for Exceptional Children 2014. Standards for evidence-based  practices in special education. Council for Exceptional Children. Retrieved  from  http:www.cec.sped.orgmediaFilesStandardsEvidence20based20 Practices20and20PracticeEBP20FINAL.pdf  Crosland, K.  Dunlap, G. 2012. Effective strategies for the inclusion of  children with autism in general education classrooms. Behavior  Modification, 363, 251-269. DOI: 10.11770145445512442682  Dessemontet, R.,  Bless, G., 2013. The impact of including children with  intellectual disability in general education classrooms on the academic  achievement of their low-, average-, and high-achieving peers. Journal of  Intellectual and Developmental Disability, 381, 2330.  DOI:10.310913668250.2012.757589.   Domings, Y., Crevecoeur, Y.C.,  Ralabate, P.K. 2014. Meeting the needs of  learners with autism spectrum disorders: Universal design for learning. In K.  Boser, M. Goodwin,  S.C. Wayland Eds., Learning Technologies for People  with Autism and Related Conditions: A Research-Based Guide for Teachers,  Parents, and Clinicians, pp. 22-42. Baltimore: Paul Brookes Publishing.  Dunlap, G., Iovannone, R., Kincaid, D., Wilson, K., Christiansen, K., Stain, P.,   English, C.    2010. Prevent-teach-reinforce: The school-based model of individualized  positive behavior supports. Baltimore, MD: Brooks Publishing  Graham, S. Harris, K., and Chambers, A. 2016. Evidence-based practice and  writing instruction. A review of reviews. In C. MacAuthur, S. Graham,  J.  Fitzgerald, Handbook of Writing Research, pp. 211-226. New York, NY: The  Guilford Press Publications, Inc.   Hehir, T., Grindal, T., Freeman, B., Lamoreau, R, Borquaye, Y.,  Burke, S.  2016. A summary of the evidence on inclusive education. Retrieved from  https:alana.org.brwpcontentuploads201612ASummaryoftheevidenceoninclusiveedu cation.pdf  IDEA: Individuals with Disabilities Act. n.d. About IDEA. Retrieved from    https:sites.ed.govideaabout-idea  Jain, A., Marshall, J., Buikema, A., Bancroft, T., Kelly, J.,  Newschaffer, C.  2015. Autism occurrence by MMR vaccine status among US children with 

Autism Spectrum Disorder   59 

older siblings with and without autism. Journal of the American Medical  Association, 31315, 15341540. DOI: 10.1001jama.2015.3077  Klein, A. 2016. The every student succeeds act: An overview. Retrieved from    https:www.edweek.orgewissuesevery-student-succeedsactindex.html  Knight, V.F., Spooner, F., Browder, D.M., Smith, B.R.,  Wood, C.L. 2013.  Using systematic instruction and graphic organizers to teach science  concepts to students with autism spectrum disorders and intellectual  disability. Focus on Autism, and Other Developmental Disabilities, 282,  115-126. Retrieved from https:eric.ed.gov?idEJ1005184  Kurth, J. A.,  Mastergeorge, A. M. 2010. Academic and cognitive profiles of  students with autism: Implications for classroom practice and placement.  International Journal of Special Education, 252, 814. Retrieved from  https:eric.ed.gov?idEJ890580  Kurth, J. A., Lyon, K. J.,  Shogren, K. A. 2015. Supporting students with  severe disabilities in inclusive schools: A descriptive account from schools  implementing inclusive practices. Research and Practice for Persons with  Severe Disabilities, 404, 261274. DOI:10.11771540796915594160   LaBarbera, R. 2019. Educating students with autism spectrum disorders:  Partnering with families for positive outcomes. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.   Lee, A.M. 2018. Individuals with Disabilities Act IDEA: What you need to  know. Retrieved from https:www.understood.orgenschoollearningyour-childs-rightsbasics-about-childs-rightsindividuals-withdisabilities-education-act-idea-what-you-need-to-know  Merriam-Webster. 2018. Stereotyped. Retrieved from https:www.merriamwebster.comdictionarystereotyped  Mims, P. n.d. Prompting Systems: Modules Addressing Special Education and  Teacher Education: Response prompting. Retrieved from  http:mast.ecu.edumodulespsconcept1  National Association on Mental Illness. 2015. Autism. Retrieved from  https:www.nami.orggetattachmentLearn-MoreMental-Health-FactSheet-LibraryAutism-Fact-Sheet.pdf  National Council on Disability 2018. The education of students with  disabilities: Where do we stand? Retrieved from https:www.ncd.gov.   Oakley, B. n.d. Autism preparation kit for teachers. Retrieved from  https:www.gadoe.orgCurriculum-Instruction-and-AssessmentSpecialEducationServicesDocumentsEligibility20AreasAutismautismpreparationkitfort eacherspdf.pdf  Olson, A., Leko, M.,  Roberts, C. 2016. Providing students with severe  disabilities access to the general education curriculum. Research and  Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 413, 143157.  DOI:10.11771540796916651975  Ousley, O.  Cermak, T. 2014. Autism spectrum disorder: Defining  dimensions and subgroups. Current Developmental Disorders Reports, 110,  20-28.   DOI: 10.1007s40474-013-0003-1 

 Chapter 5 

Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports. 2018. Positive behavioral  interventions and supports: OSEP technical center. Retrieved from  https:www.pbis.org  Pratt, C. 1997. There is no place called inclusion. The Reporter, 23, 4-5, 1314. Retrieved from http:hdl.handle.net20229504  Reagan, N. 2012. Effective inclusion of students with autism spectrum  disorders. Retrieved from  https:fisherpub.sjfc.educgiviewcontent.cgi?article1277contexteduca tionETDmasters  Smith, S.,  Collet-Klingenberg, L. 2009. Steps for implementation: Visual  boundaries. The National Professional Development Center on Autism  Spectrum Disorders, Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin. Retrieved  from  https:csesa.fpg.unc.edusitescsesa.fpg.unc.edufilesebpbriefsVisualBo undariesSteps.pdf  Texas Statewide Leadership for Austin. 2013. Visual environment supports.  Retrieved from  https:www.unl.eduasdnetworkimagesVisualSupports.pdf  Thompson, B.N. 2017. Helping your child with autism improve social skills.  Retrieved from  https:www.psychologytoday.comusblogsocioemotionalsuccess201706helping-your-child-autism-improve-social-skills  Tonnsen, B. L.,  Hahn, E. R. 2015. Middle school students attitudes toward  a peer with autism spectrum disorder: Effects of social acceptance and  physical inclusion. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities,  314, 262274. DOI:10.11771088357614559213  University of Kansas School of Education. 2018. Timeline of the Individuals  with Disabilities Education Act IDEA. Retrieved from  https:educationonline.ku.educommunityidea-timeline  University of Kansas School of Education. 2016. Study shows students with,  without disabilities recognize benefits of inclusive schools. Retrieved from  https:soe.ku.educherry-picked-study-shows-students-withoutdisabilities-recognize-benefits-inclusive-schools  U.S. Department of Education. 2007. 25 years of progress in educating  children with disabilities through IDEA. Retrieved from  https:www2.ed.govpolicyspecedlegideahistory.html  Vander Wiele, L.J. 2012. The pros and cons of inclusion for children autism  spectrum disorder: What constitutes that least restrictive environment?  Retrieved from  https:digitalcommons.liberty.educgiviewcontent.cgi?refererhttps:w ww.google.comhttpsredir1article1265contexthonors  Webber, J.,  Scheuermann, B. 2008. Educating students with autism: A  quick start manual. Austin, TX: ProEd  Westling, D.L., Fox, L.,  Carter, E.W. 2014. Teaching students with severe  disabilities 5th ed. New York, NY: Pearson. 

Autism Spectrum Disorder   61 

Wilkinson, L.A. 2014. Autism spectrum disorder in children and adolescents:  Evidence-based  assessment and intervention in schools. Washington, DC:  American Psychologist Association  Young, N.D., Jean, E.  Mead, A.E. 2018. Potency of the principalship: ActionOriented leadership at the heart of school improvement. Wilmington, DE:  Vernon Press  Zager, D., Wehmeyer, M.L.,  Simpson, R.L. 2012. Educating students with  autism spectrum disorders: research-based principles and practices. New  York, NY: Routledge.   Zagona, A., Kurth, J.,  MacFarland, S. 2017. Teachers views of their  preparation for  inclusive education and preparation. Teacher Education and  Special Education, 403, 163178. DOI: 10.11770888406417692969  Zehner A, Chen X, Aladsani M. 2017. Implementing Universal Design for  Learning in Classrooms with Minorities with Autism. Journal of Childhood   Developmental Disorders, 32. DOI: 10.41722472-1786.100048 

Chapter 6 

Speech and Language Impairments  Katherine B. Green, Ph.D.,  University of West Georgia  Jacob is a second grader at Chestnut Elementary School. He has always  interacted well with peers, is at grade level in math and science, yet  below grade level in language arts and reading. His teacher has noticed  that when she gives the class directions, Jacob does not always follow the  directions appropriately. He struggles more than most students in  correcting sentences with mistakes and speaks and writes with incorrect  grammar. Additionally, Jacob has sound substitutions that are affecting  his spelling and his communication. He says and writes f for th, such  as fum for thumb. Jacobs teacher spoke with the administration  regarding these concerns and they suggested the teacher begin the  Response to Intervention RtI process, and to include a speech-language  pathologist on the RtI team.  Communication is a skill that many individuals take for granted.  Communicating thoughts, ideas, wants, and needs is natural for the majority  of the population; however, there is a percentage of the population who do  not acquire appropriate communication skills instinctively. Some individuals  may have had typical communication skills prior to an accident, episode, or  event in their lives. Communication is not simply verbal speech; it includes  comprehension of speech, an understanding of rules of language, motorspeech control, and the use of language, including body language State of  Queensland Queensland Health, 2017. Speech and language impairments  can exist in voice quality or voice disorders, the fluency of speech, receptive  forms of speech, signs, and gestures Prelock, Hutchins,  Glascoe, 2008.  Students who have difficulty expressing their wants or needs, or have  difficulty understanding others, may qualify for treatment of speech and  language impairments American Speech-Language-Hearing Association  ASHA, 2016. Students who may demonstrate speech and language  impairments are evaluated and treated in school by speech-language  pathologists. A speech-language pathologist is a professional who specializes 

 Chapter 6 

in the assessment and treatment of individuals with speech-language  impairments American Speech-Language-Hearing Association ASHA, n.d.  TerminologyDefinition  Under the federal law of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act  IDEA, communication disorders are labeled as Speech or Language  Impairment. Speech or language impairment is defined as a communication  disorder such as stuttering, impaired articulation, impaired language use and  understanding, or a voice impairment, that adversely affects a childs  educational performance Special Education Guide, 2018, n.p. Students are  determined to be eligible for a speech or language impairment by an  evaluation completed by a speech-language pathologist Power-de Fur, 2011.  Classification  Communication disorders are classified on etiology, or presumed causes, to  include age of onset, and different components of communication such as  voice, articulation, language, fluency, and hearing Prelock et al., 2008. An  individuals etiology may be due to a defect in a neurophysiological  mechanism and may present as aphasia, a disorder directly related to brain  damage, or a child born with deafness or a cleft palate.  Communication disorders may also be classified by the age of onset to  include congenital disorders i.e., at time of birth or shortly thereafter and  acquired disorders i.e., those who have experienced normal communication,  but later has communication difficulties Rosenbaum  Simon, 2016.  Congenital disorders include a cleft lip or cleft palate, while a child who is  communicating fluently until the age of 7, and then the child begins  stuttering is an example of an acquired disorder. Another example might be  when an adult has normal hearing and then experiences hearing loss around  the age of 60 or 70. Communication disorders may be described by five major  components or categories of communication: voice, articulation, language,  fluency, and hearing Rosenbaum  Simon, 2016.  Voice. Voice is a necessary component of verbal language; yet it is important  to note that an individual can communicate without voice, such as through  gestures, signs, and symbols Rosenbaum  Simon, 2016. Humans make a  wide range of vocal sounds, characterized by various levels of pitch, loudness,  as well as tone. The larynx, located in the neck, is the foundation of oral  communication. The larynx contains vocal folds, a pair of thin muscles and  tissue that vibrate when air from the lungs passes over them. Those vibrations  of the vocal folds are the source of the human voice. When the vocal folds 

Speech and Language Impairments   65 

have irregularities, such as polyps, the voice may sound disordered  Rosenbaum  Simon, 2016.  Articulation. Articulation is the movement of the tongue, lips, and palate,  which all come together to make a variety of sounds Perlock et al., 2008. The  study of sounds and sound patterns is called phonology. A phoneme is a  single speech sound, such as the production of p Merriam-Webster, 2018a.  Multiple productions of a single phoneme produce phonemes, which is a  group of speech sounds. Phonemes are combined to form syllables and  words.   Language. Language is a system of codes and symbols that, when produced  verbally, is called oral language Rosenbaum  Simon, 2016. Language can  exist without verbalization. When language is produced non-orally, such as  through signs, symbols, and gestures, it is called non-verbal or non-oral  language Rosenbaum  Simon, 2016. Language is characterized by  expressive language, which is produced or expressed through a means of oral  communication, signs, symbols, or written words and receptive language,  which is information received or understood by the listener Prelock et al.,  2008.   Linguists have described several components of language to include  morphology, syntax, semantics, and pragmatics. 

Morphology is the study of word and sound structure. 

Syntax is the arrangement of words to make meaning.  

Semantics is the meaning of language, the meaning that words,  phrases, and sentences convey, while pragmatics is the study of rules  that govern the use of language in social situations.  

Pragmatics may also be called social communication. Children with  difficulties in social skills may have difficulties in pragmatics or the  rules of conversation e.g., turn taking, listening, maintaining eye  contact.  Rosenbaum  Simon, 2016  Fluency. Fluency is the ease and flow of speech and is characterized by the  variations in rate, pitch, stress, and intonation Perlock et al., 2008. If a  speaker is fluent, then the speech feels or seems effortless, while nonfluent  speech is characterized by abrupt stops, prolongations, repetitions,  interjections, and revisions, or the inability to form effortless communication,  such as stuttering Rosenbaum  Simon, 2016. Dysfluencies do not always  mean a person has a communication disorder; for example, when learning  another language, the speaker may temporarily become dysfluent. When  young children learn language at a fast rate, the child may become 

 Chapter 6 

temporarily dysfluent. Constant or consistent dysfluencies, however, may  require a referral to a speech-language pathologist.  Hearing. The final component of communication disorders is hearing.  Similar to the voice, an individual can communicate even when the hearing is  impaired; however, hearing is typically required for acquiring clear verbal  language. There are three parts to the ear to include the outer ear, the middle  ear, and the inner ear. The outer, or external, ear picks up sound, amplifies it,  and moves the sound to the eardrum i.e., tympanic membrane, which  vibrates and transfers sound waves to the three small bones in the middle ear  Stanford Childrens Hospital, 2018. The vibrations of those bones cause  movement in the fluids of the inner ear, which stimulate the structures within  the cochlea. The cochlea stimulates the nerve that carries the sound from the  inner ear to the brain where it is then interpreted as the meaning of the sound  Stanford Childrens Hospital, 2018. If a child cannot perceive speech  through hearing, then acquiring speech can be difficult, as hearing the sound  can be a critical component of monitoring ones speech production  Rosenbaum  Simon, 2016.  Prevalence  In United States public schools, approximately 2.6 of enrolled students were  served for speech-language impairments, the second highest percentage of  students served with disabilities, after specific learning disabilities Snyder, de  Brey,  Dillow, 2018. While it is unclear the exact number of individuals in the  United States with communication disorders, it is estimated that the  prevalence is at least 17 of the U.S. population. According to the National  Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders NIDOCD 2016,  approximately 1 in 12 children 7.7 has had a voice, speech, language, or  swallowing disorder. Boys are more likely have a communication disorder,  and communication disorders are more common for children ages 3 to 6  11, compared to children ages 11 to 17 4.9 NIDOCD, 2016. The most  common communication disorder in children is articulation disorders,  followed by language disorders; while nearly one in 10, or 9.6 percent, of black  children ages 3-17 has a voice, speech, language, or swallowing disorder,  compared to 7.8 percent of white children and 6.9 percent of Hispanic  children Black, Vahratian,  Hoffman, 2012.  Causes  The cause or etiology of a communication disorder can be described by  organic disorders or functional disorders. An organic disorder means that the  cause is a defect in the neurophysiological mechanism of speech. An example  of an organic disorder is aphasia, where brain damage has caused difficulties 

Speech and Language Impairments   67 

in formulating, expressing, and understanding language National Aphasia  Association, n.d. A functional or idiopathic disorder, meaning there is not a  clear cause or origin, may be due to environment, emotional issues, habits,  faulty learning, or another unknown cause National Aphasia Association,  n.d. An example of a functional disorder is if a child starts stuttering around  at the age of seven and had typical communication prior to the stuttering  onset.  Characteristics  Voice disorders. A voice disorder occurs when there is a problem with the  pitch, tone and quality of a voice that does not appropriately reflect the  gender or the age of that person ASHA, 2018a. Characteristics of voice  disorders include raspy, breathy, or another unusual quality to an individuals  voice. There are three ways to classify voice disorders to include organic,  functional, and neurological ASHA, 2018a. Voice disorders may be  temporary or permanent. Temporary voice disorders can come from yelling  too loud or being in a smoky room for too long, while permanent voice  disorders can come from damage or growths on the larynx. Voice disorders  can also be characterized into aphonia and dysphonia. Aphonia is described  as the inability to produce a sound, or a loss of voice, and is caused by a  splitting of a muscle nerve in the larynx ASHA, 2018a. Dysphonia is a spasm  of the vocal cords which causes the voice quality to break up or sound  strained ASHA, 2018a.  Articulation disorders. In regard to communication disorders, articulation  is the movement of the speech mechanisms to produce the sounds of speech.  This includes the way the lips, tongue, teeth, and soft palate all work together  to produce words. There are two types of articulation disorders to include  phonological disorder and motor-speech disorder ASHA, 2018b. A  phonological disorder is characterized when an individual has difficulty with  certain patterns of sounds persisting past when it is developmentally  appropriate. This individual may have trouble with leaving off the beginning  or ending sounds in words, such as saying pider for spider. Some of the  most common phonological disorders include: 

Cluster reduction: pider for spider 

Initial consonant deletion: at for pat 

Final consonant deletion: ca for cat 

Syllable deletion: nana for banana 

Backing: gog for dog 

Fronting: tootie for cookie 

 Chapter 6 

Gliding: wabbit for rabbit 

Stopping: pan for fan  Speech is a difficult process and there are many steps to producing speech.  First, the brain has to plan and coordinate what it wants the mouth to say.  Then the muscles in the mouth jaw, lips, tongue, larynx, and vocal cords  have to respond and form the word or words to say. A motor speech disorder  is the inability to produce speech because there is a problem with the range of  motion of muscles in the mouth due to neurological damage ASHA, 2018b.  The two main types of motor speech disorders are apraxia and dysarthria.  Apraxia is a motor speech disorder in which children have difficulty saying  sounds or words due to the brain's inability to plan and coordinate the mouth  to move ASHA, 2018b. Apraxia can be developmental or acquired. People  with apraxia normally have trouble with expressing their wants and needs.  Dysarthria is considered a motor communication problem due to weakness,  slowness, or lack of coordination in speech production ASHA, 2018b. An  individual with an articulation disorder may experience difficulties with  producing one or more sounds. While an individual may be able to produce  f in isolation, they may have difficulty combining f with other sounds in a  word, such as fish or puffy.  Language disorders. Individuals with language disorders can exhibit a wide  range of characteristics. The most common language disorders include  morphological deficits, syntactic deficits, semantic deficits, and pragmatic  deficits American Psychological Association, 2013. Teachers must remember  that children develop and learn the language over time; thus, a five-year-old  who shows deficits in language may be experiencing developmentally  appropriate language, while a twelve-year-old with the same language  patterns as the five-year-old may have a language disorder.   Students may exhibit morphological deficits when they have difficulty  comprehending or using grammatical morphemes. Morphemes are the  smallest grammatical unit. Examples of morphological deficits would be  leaving off a tense marker e.g., Jack walk yesterday, rather than Jack  walked yesterday, or a plural marker e.g., the gum was 10 cent, rather than  the gum was 10 cents. Syntactic deficits are demonstrated when an  individual has difficulty stringing words together to organize a grammatically  correct phrase, clause, or sentence American Psychological Association,  2013. Students may demonstrate difficulty in oral andor written  communication. Students with syntactic deficits may express themselves with  fewer words in a sentence than their peers, and have difficulty using complex  sentences. Finding grammatical errors within sentences is difficult for  students with syntactic deficits Montgomery, Evans,  Gillam, 2018.  

Speech and Language Impairments   69 

Students who exhibit semantic deficits have difficulties with word  knowledge, word meaning, and sentence meaning. Students with these  deficits will have difficulty with comprehension of verbal and written  language, as well as word finding skills Storkel  Krueger, 2016. They may  acquire words at a later date, and have difficulty understanding and  answering questions. Students with semantic deficits may also have difficulty  using and comprehending synonyms, antonyms, and figurative language  Lowe, Henry, Mller,  Joffe, 2018.   Students with pragmatic deficits may present with difficulties in social  situations. Often, students with pragmatic deficits have difficulty with  attending to conversational rules, such as turn-taking and eye contact  Bishop, 2001. Students may not understand when it is appropriate to speak  in class, and when not to speak in class. Classroom discussions can be  challenging in keeping to the relevant topic, turn-taking, and self-monitoring.  Students who exhibit difficulty with pragmatics will often find making or  keeping friends challenging, as they may be perceived as less mature than  their peers and may have difficulty understanding others Bishop, 2001.   Fluency disorders. Normal fluency of speech, especially when a child is  learning to talk, sometimes includes some types of hesitations, repetitions, or  pauses in between speech ASHA, 2018c. Fluency in speech is characterized  by the continuity, rate, and smoothness of speech; therefore, a fluency  disorder is defined as an interruption in the flow of speaking ASHA, 2018c.  Characteristics of fluency disorders include repetitions of sounds, syllables,  words, and phrases, sound prolongations, blocks, revisions, and interjections.  Stuttering and cluttering are the two most common fluency disorders.  Stuttering is a continuous disfluency in speech and is characterized by  repeated words or syllables, word blocking, silent pauses, and uneven rate of  speech ASHA, 2018c. Some examples of stuttering include: 

Phrase repetitions what are you-what are you doing? 

Interjection wordnonword filters Pink is my uh favorite color 

Whole word repetitions I said-said I like to play 

Part-word repetitions L-l-lets go play 

Prolongations I hhhhhhhhhad so much fun.  Cluttering is similar to stuttering in that there are continuous disfluencies. A  child with a cluttering fluency disorder speaks very rapidly, irregularly, and  has an excessive number of disfluencies ASHA, 2018c. Speech comes out in  rapid bursts with random pauses throughout, and the words um, well, and uh  are used frequently. These individuals also use final sound repetitions such as 

 Chapter 6 

heat-eat or treat-eat. Fluency disorders can be very frustrating and can cause  a fear of speaking in general Rasinski, Blachoqicz,  Lems, 2012.  Hearing disorders. Hearing impairment is another aspect that can affect  speech. There are three main hearing disorders that speech pathologists work  with to include conductive, sensorineural, and mixed hearing loss ASHA,  2018d. Hearing disorders are determined by what part of the ear the  interference comes from as that prevents sound from being conducted  correctly.   Conductive hearing loss is due to an impairment coming from the ear canal,  eardrum, and middle ear. Conductive hearing loss is typically mild to  moderate and can sometimes be treated with medicine or surgery, while  mixed is a combination of the two previous types ASHA, 2018d. A  sensorineural hearing loss refers to a problem in the inner ear, is generally  severe to profound, and is usually permanent ASHA, 2018d. There are a few  problems that can occur alongside of sensorineural hearing loss to include  sound distortions, balance problems, and roaring or ringing in the ears  ASHA, 2018d. Sensorineural hearing loss can be treated with hearing aids or  cochlear implants.  Identification  Individuals are identified with speech and language disorders by assessments  conducted by speech-language pathologists. Often, school districts may use  an RTI model to investigate if the student will respond to teacher or parentprovided interventions, rather than an immediate referral for special  education or speech services Ehren, Montgomery, Rudebusch,  Whitmire,  2018. If the student responds to the interventions and does not require  further intervention, the student may not be deemed eligible for speech  services; however, if the RTI interventions do not improve the speech  challenges, or if the student requires small group or individual assistance,  then the student may be referred for speech services Ehren et al., 2018.  It is important to note that sometimes a communication difference can  sound like a speech or language impairment, when it is developmentally  appropriate; for instance, it can be developmentally normal for a 4-year-old  to say w for r or for a 5-year-old to say f for th. Individuals with a  particular dialect or culture may sound as if they have a communication  disorder Hendricks  Adlof, 2017. Importantly, if it is determined that the  communication difference is due to a dialect or cultural influences, the  student will not be eligible for speech services Hendricks  Adlof, 2017.  Jacobs teacher consulted with the RTI team, which consisted of school  administration, a special educator, a speech-language pathologist SLP, 

Speech and Language Impairments   71 

the school counselor, and Jacobs mother. The SLP suggested various  strategies to improve Jacobs syntax, semantics, and articulation. The  classroom teacher and his mother tried the strategies within the  classroom for eight weeks and collected data and work samples. After  eight weeks, the team met again to review all data. While Jacob made  some progress in his articulation with modeling and extra opportunities  to practice, he was still well behind peers in language arts and reading.  The team determined Jacob required a speech-language evaluation.  Strategies to Assist Students with Communication Disorders  As communication disorders differ greatly by type, characteristics, time of  onset, and severity, the strategies and treatment of communication disorders  will differ greatly as well. Each child is unique; thus, every strategy may not  work with all students. Classroom teachers should consult with the speechlanguage pathologists to learn the exact strategies to best assist the student  with disabilities Kuder, 2017. General strategies for working with individuals  with communication disorders include modeling the appropriate response,  providing opportunities for practice of targeted responses, and providing  prompts to the individual prior to the opportunities for practice Kuder,  2017. Oftentimes, these strategies can be used for the whole class and can  help students who do not have documented communication disorders.  Modeling the Appropriate Response  Teachers should always model appropriate grammar, social skills, and  language with their students; however, teachers may be more cognizant of  modeling when working with a child with a communication disorder Kuder,  2017. An example of providing a model would be when the student asks to  sharpen his encil instead of his pencil, the teacher would repeat, yes, you  may sharpen your pencil. If the child needs practice with proper grammar or  language, modeling a sentence would be similar to: child: I runned on the  playground yesterday, teacher: Oh, you ran on the playground yesterday.  For a student with social communication difficulties, it is important that the  teacher model proper pronunciation and grammar when communicating  with others, along with responding appropriately to gestural cues and body  language Kuder, 2017. 

Providing Opportunities for Practice  Providing opportunities to practice means that the teacher would increase the  students ability to see or hear a specific phoneme that needs practice. If the 

 Chapter 6 

child is working on language or grammar, the educator would provide  opportunities within daily work to fix or reorganize sentences. For a student  working on social communication skills, andor pragmatics, providing  opportunities to practice social skills with peers can help the student apply  the social skills he or she is learning in the speech therapy classroom Kuder,  2017. For students who have difficulty with fluency, or stuttering, provide  practice reading and speaking aloud in class; however, it is imperative to allow  them to finish their sentence if they begin to stutter do not finish their  sentence for them and give them time to complete their thoughts Chmela   Johnson, 2018.  Providing Prompts or Cues  To provide a child with prompts or cues, the educator sets up a signal so that  the child knows he or she is being called upon. Providing that signal can help  individuals with any communication disorder, particularly fluency, language,  and articulation; for example, for a student who stutters, the teacher can tap  the student on the shoulder before it is time to read aloud Rasinski,  Blachoqicz,  Lems, 2012. The educator can let the student know that she  will be listening for one particular sound. If the child has difficulty following  oral directions, then written directions or gestures can be used as a prompt. A  visual schedule can also work for students who have difficulty transitioning  from one activity to another Spriggs, Knight,  Sherrow, 2015. For a student  who is working on vocabulary skills, the vocabulary words can be sent home  ahead of time.  It is important that the teacher not embarrass the child with the  communication disorder with the strategies provided by the speech-language  pathologist. The strategies should be built into the classroom routine and the  child should not be singled out Kuder, 2017. Any non-verbal strategies, such  as providing prompts or cues, should be discussed quietly with the child in  advance.  After the previous RTI meeting, Jacob was evaluated for a speech or  language impairment by the school speech-language pathologist. It was  determined that he qualified for a language disorder, particularly in  receptive and expressive syntax and semantics. Jacob still exhibited some  articulation difficulties, yet, he was making improvements with extra  supports from his teacher and mother.  Final Thoughts  Research suggests that the first 6 months of life are the most crucial to a  childs development of language skills. For a person to become fully 

Speech and Language Impairments   73 

competent in any language, exposure must begin as early as possible,  preferably before school age Kuhl, 1994; Yeung  Werker, 2009. Speechlanguage impairment is a broad category consisting of children who have  difficulties with language, articulation, voice, fluency, andor stuttering. Its  the second most prevalent disability category in United States schools. While  certified speech-language pathologists service individuals who have speech  or language impairments, the classroom teacher, special education teacher,  and other school personnel can have a great impact on the success of children  with communication disorders.  Points to Remember 

Speech or language impairment means a communication disorder,  such as stuttering, impaired articulation, impaired language use and  understanding, or a voice impairment, that adversely affects a childs  educational performance. 

Communication disorders are classified on etiology i.e., presumed  causes, age of onset, and different components of communication  e.g., voice, articulation, language, fluency, and hearing. 

A voice disorder occurs when there is a problem with the pitch, tone  and quality of a voice that does not appropriately reflect the gender or  the age of that person. 

A phonological disorder articulation disorder is characterized when  an individual has difficulty with certain patterns of sounds persisting  past when it is developmentally appropriate. 

A motor speech disorder articulation disorder is the inability to  produce speech because there is a problem with the range of motion of  muscles in the mouth due to neurological damage.  

The most common language disorders include: morphological deficits,  syntactic deficits, semantic deficits, and pragmatic deficits. 

A fluency disorder is defined as an interruption in the flow of  speaking. 

General strategies for working with individuals with communication  disorders include modeling the appropriate response, providing  opportunities for practice of targeted responses, and providing  prompts to the individual prior to the opportunities for practice. 

Teachers should always model appropriate grammar, social skills, and  language with their students. 

 Chapter 6 

References  American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic and statistical manual of  mental disorders 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing   American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 2018a. Voice disorders.  Retrieved from https:www.asha.orgpractice-portalclinical-topicsvoicedisorders  American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 2018b. Speech sound  disorders: Articulation and phonology. Retrieved from  https:www.asha.orgpractice-portalclinical-topicsarticulation-andphonology  American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 2018c. Childhood Fluency  disorders. Retrieved from https:www.asha.orgpractice-portalclinicaltopicschildhood-fluency-disorders  American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 2018d. Types of hearing  loss. Retrieved from https:www.asha.orgpublichearingtypes-ofhearing-loss  American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. n.d. Who are speechlanguage pathologists, and what do they do? Retrieved from  https:www.asha.orgpublicWho-Are-Speech-Language-Pathologists  Bishop, D.V. 2001. Pragmatic language impairment: A correlate of SLI, a  distinct subgroup, or part of the autistic continuum? In D.V.M. Bishop  L.B.  Leonard, Speech and Language Impairments in Children: Causes,  Characteristics, Interventions, and Outcome, pp. 99-114. Psychology Press.  Black, L.I., Vahratian, A.,  Hoffman, H.J. 2015. Communication disorders  and use of intervention services among children aged 317 years: United  States, 2012. NCHS data brief, 205, 1-8. National Center for Health  Statistics. Retrieved from https:www.ncbi.nlm.nih.govpubmed26079397  Chmela, K.,  Johnson, L. 2018. How Can We Overcome the Challenges of  Providing School-Based Fluency Services? Seminars in Speech and  Language, 394, 371-381. DOI: 10.1055s-0038-1667165  Ehren, B.J., Montgomery, J., Rudebusch, J.,  Whitmire, K. 2018.  Responsiveness to intervention: New roles for speech-language pathologists.  Retrieved from https:www.asha.orgSLPschoolsprofconsultNewRolesSLP  Gaskell  J. Mirkovic Eds. Speech Perception and Spoken Word Recognition,  pp. 174-190. New York, NY: Psychology Press.  Hendricks, A. E.,  Adlof, S. M. 2017. Language assessment with children  who speak nonmainstream dialects: Examining the effects of scoring  modifications in norm-referenced assessment. Language, Speech, and  Hearing Services in Schools, 483, 168-182. DOI: 10.10442017LSHSS-160060  Kuder, S.J. 2017. Teaching students with language and communication  disabilities 5th ed. New York, NY: Pearson   Lowe, H., Henry, L., Mller, L. M.,  Joffe, V. L. 2018. Vocabulary intervention  for adolescents with language disorder: a systematic review. International  Journal of Language  Communication Disorders, 532, 199-217. DOI:  10.11111460-6984.12355 

Speech and Language Impairments   75 

Merriam-Webster. 2018. Phenomes. Retrieved from https:www.merriamwebster.comdictionaryphoneme  Montgomery, J. W., Evans, J. L.,  Gillam, R. B. 2018. Memory and language  in children with SLI. In T.P. Alloway Ed., Working Memory and Clinical  Developmental Disorders: Theories, Debates and Interventions, pp. 9-21.  New York, NY: Routledge.  National Aphasia Association. n.d. Aphasia definitions. Retrieved from    https:www.aphasia.orgaphasia-definitions  National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders. 2016.  Statistics and Epidemiology. Retrieved from  https:www.nidcd.nih.govhealthstatisticsquick-statistics-voice-speechlanguage  Prelock, P.A., Hutchins, T., Glascoe, F.P. 2008. Speech-language impairment:  How to identify the most common and least diagnosed disability of  childhood. The Medscape Journal of Medicine, 106, 136-148. Retrieved  from https:www.ncbi.nlm.nih.govpmcarticlesPMC2491683  Rasinski, T., Blachoqicz, C.  Lems, K. 2012. Fluency instruction: Researchbased best practices 2nd ed. New York, NY: Guilford Press  Rosenbaum, S.  Simon, P. 2016. Speech and language disorders in children:  Implications for the Social Security Administrations Supplemental Security  income program. Washington, DC: National Academies Press  Snyder, T.D., de Brey, C.,  Dillow S.A. 2018. Digest of Education Statistics,  2016 NCES 2017-094. Washington, DC: National Center for Education  Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.  Retrieved from https:nces.ed.govpubs20172017094.pdf  Special Education Guide. 2018. Speech and language impairments. Retrieved  from https:www.specialeducationguide.comdisability-profilesspeechand-language-impairments  Spriggs, A. D., Knight, V.,  Sherrow, L. 2015. Talking picture schedules:  Embedding video models into visual activity schedules to increase  independence for students with ASD. Journal of Autism and Developmental  Disorders, 4512, 3846-3861. DOI: 10.1007s10803-014-2315-3  Stanford Childrens Hospital. 2018. Anatomy and physiology of the ear.  Retrieved from  https:www.stanfordchildrens.orgentopicdefault?idanatomy-andphysiology-of-the-ear-90-P02025  State of Queensland Queensland Health. 2017. Allied health professions  office of Queensland: Speech pathology learner guide: Support the  development of speech and communication skills. Retrieved from  https:www.health.qld.gov.audataassetspdffile0026650591LGspeech-comm-skills.pdf  Storkel, H. L.,  Krueger, B. I. 2016. The effect of speech sound disorders on  the developing language system: Implications for treatment and future  directions in research. In M.G.  

Chapter 7 

Intellectual Disabilities  Jessica L. Bucholz, Ph.D.,  Sarasota County Public Schools, FL,  Janet I. Goodman, Ph.D.,  Haralson Public Schools, GA  The American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities  AAIDD 2018 defines Intellectual disability as being characterized by  significant limitations both in intellectual functioning and in adaptive  behavior as expressed in conceptual, social, and practical adaptive skills. This  disability originates before age 18. AAIDD, 2018, n.p. A significant  limitation in intellectual functioning is defined as an IQ of approximately 70  or below, which is approximately 2 of the population AAIDD, 2018.  According to Westling, Fox, and Carter 2015, several levels of intellectual  disability: mild, moderate, severe, and profound are used in most schools and  the IQ ranges are as follows: 

Mild intellectual disabilities: IQ range is typically between 55 and 70.  

Moderate intellectual disabilities: IQ range is typically between 3550,  

Severe intellectual disabilities: IQ range is typically between 20-35,  and  

Profound intellectual disabilities: IQ range below 20-25.  Students with intellectual disabilities also display deficits in adaptive  behavior skills, which are conceptual, social, and practical skills AAIDD,  2018. Some examples of these skills include activities related to language,  money, time, daily living, socialpersonal interactions, safety, and problemsolving.  To be identified as having intellectual disabilities the final determination  must be based on multiple assessments and sources of information  McNicholas, Floyd, Woods Jr., Singh, Manugno,  Maki, 2018. Multiple  assessments may include IQ and achievement tests, classroom performance,  structured observations and reports, and adaptive behavior assessments that  are normed on the general population Schalock et al., 2010. School 

 Chapter 7 

psychologists need to consider contextual factors when identifying students  with an intellectual disability McNicholas et al., 2018. Confounding factors  such as limited English proficiency; visual, hearing, or motor disabilities;  emotional disorders; cultural, environmental or economic factors; interrupted  or lack of instruction may result in a lower IQ score McNicholas et al., 2018.  Characteristics of Students with Mild Intellectual Disabilities  Students with mild intellectual disabilities often spend much of their day in  an inclusive setting and may have some of their instruction delivered in a  special education classroom. These students typically look, act, and use  language much like their peers who are typically developing. Their language  and social skills may be somewhat delayed, but this is not easily recognized in  casual interactions; these delays appear more often in academic or higherorder problem-solving activities Smith, Polloway, Doughty, Patton,  Dowdy,  2016. Deficits also may appear in social interactions that require decisionmaking skills; for example, they may be easily swayed to get involved in  inappropriate social activities because they may not think through to all the  possible consequences of their actions Smith et al., 2016.  In academic activities, students with mild intellectual disabilities typically  have low achievement across all academic areas, deficits in memory and  motivation, and are often inattentive and distractible Smith et al., 2016.  These students may find upper-level vocabulary hard to grasp, have difficulty  applying skills to novel situations, and struggle with abstract concepts. The  interventions and strategies that these students need to be successful in the  general education curriculum typically focus on helping them to make the  connection between concrete and abstract concepts and making sense of  content-specific vocabulary and language Smith et al., 2016.  Using Evidence-Based Strategies and Interventions in the RTI Process  The need to implement evidence-based interventions and strategies for all  students in K-12 schools is outlined in both the Every Student Succeeds Act  ESSA ESSA, 2016 and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act  IDEA IDEA, 2004 through the RTI process, and requires that all teachers  use evidence-based interventions to support student achievement. There are  several resources available that identify the research behind many  interventions. Some of these resources include the What Works Clearinghouse  n.d. and the Center for Research and Reform in Education 2018. Many  interventions are researched using different populations of students and the  results can be examined based on the age, disability, and ethnicity of different  student populations. 

Intellectual Disabilities   79 

Academic Interventions  Direct instruction. Direct Instruction DI is an explicit, teacher-directed  model of effective instruction that was developed by Siegfried Engelmann in  the 1960s through his efforts to teach his own two sons, and further with his  research with Bereiter Adams  Englemann, 1996. Together they formed the  Bereiter-Engelmann preschool, where they would begin using and testing  direct instruction techniques. It was during this time that Engelmann  developed the central philosophy of DI; which is, if a student has not learned  the material, it is not the students fault; rather, it is due to poor instruction  Adams  Englemann 1996; National Institute on Direct Instruction, n.d.  The goal of DI is to accelerate student learning by controlling the variables  of the curriculum and instructional delivery that impact the performance of  children Adams  Englemann, 1996; Hollingsworth  Ybarra, 2017. There  are three main components to the delivery of DI programs; 1 program  design, 2 how instruction is organized, and 3 interactions between the  teacher and student Marchand-Martella, Slocum,  Martella, 2004. While  more than 60 DI programs have been developed, the first was a series for  reading and math called DISTAR, which stands for Direct Instruction System  for Teaching Arithmetic and Reading Adams  Englemann, 1996. SRA Direct  Instruction has been shown to significantly increase reading achievement of  students with reading disabilities Young, 2014.  Repeated Readings. LaBerge and Samuels 1974 emphasized the  importance of automaticity in successful reading. Automaticity in reading is  the ability of the reader to automatically, with little thought or effort, read the  words in the text. One strategy that has been used to support the  development of automaticity is repeated readings. The repeated reading  method requires students to reread a short passage several times until a preidentified level of fluency is reached Samuels, 1979. In his seminal article,  Samuels 1979 conducted a case study to evaluate the effectiveness of  repeated readings on reading fluency. The one participant in the study  increased fluency levels and decreased reading errors with repeated reading  of each passage.   To implement the repeated reading strategy, a teacher should sit with a  student, if possible in a quiet location. It is important for the teacher to hold  the book in a way that allows them both to read the text. The teacher should  select a short passage of about 50 to 200 words and have the student read  through the passage. If the student misreads a word or hesitates for longer  than 5 seconds, the teacher should read the word aloud for the student and  then have the student repeat the word before continuing to read the passage.  The student should reread the passage approximately four times or until the 

 Chapter 7 

student can read at a predetermined rate of frequency Therrien,  Kubina  2006, What Works Clearinghouse, n.d. As a guideline, by the end of firstgrade students should read at a rate of 60 words correct per minute WCPM  Rasinski, Blachowicz,  Lems, 2012. By the end of second-grade students  should read at approximately 90-100 WCPM and by the end of third grade 114  WCPM Rasinski et al., 2012.  Reciprocal teaching. Reciprocal teaching is a cooperative learning strategy  to improve students comprehension of the text they are reading Oczkus,  2018; Okkinga, van Steensel, van Gelderen,  Sleegers, 2018. With the  reciprocal teaching method, students are taught to make sense of what they  are reading by using four strategies: predicting, question generating,  summarizing, and clarifying. For the predicting strategy, students are taught  to make educated guesses about future content based on context cues in what  they have previously read and their prior knowledge of the topic Okkinga et  al., 2018.  The goal of this strategy is to give students a purpose for their reading,  which is to look for information in the text that proves or disproves their  prediction Oczkus, 2018. The question generating strategy requires students  to ask questions while they are reading and then continue to read in order to  answer the questions they have generated. When summarizing, students are  taught to synthesize important information or the main ideas from the text.  Finally, the clarifying strategy requires students to clarify any words that may  be confusing or unknown Oczkus, 2018.  It is important for the teacher to first model each of the four strategies for  students and to provide guided practice before students engage in these  strategies independently Oczkus, 2018. Once students are able to use each  strategy independently, they work in small groups to use those strategies to  read and comprehend assigned texts. During this process, one student takes  on the role of leader or teacher for a section of the passage. The role of leader  or teacher then passes to other members of the group as the reading  continues.   Peer-assisted learning strategies. Peer-Assisted Learning Strategies PALS  is an evidence-based intervention that can be provided through the RTI  process. PALS Reading is a peer tutoring program that was developed for  students in grades 2 through 6 but has been used in elementary through high  school classrooms to improve students proficiency in reading Fuchs, Fuchs,  Mathes,  Simmons, 1997; What Works Clearinghouse, n.d. To use PALS  Reading, teachers instruct students to use specific strategies when reading.  These strategies include passage reading with a partner, paragraph shrinking  summarizing the main idea, and prediction relay.  

Intellectual Disabilities   81 

Students are placed into mixed ability pairs and those students alternate  between being the tutor and the tutee. Within this partnership, students read  aloud, listen to their partner read, use the strategies they have learned, and  provide feedback to one another. PALS for reading focuses on the  development of important reading skills such as phonemic awareness,  decoding, reading fluency, comprehension, and summarizing. PALS Reading  does not require any specialized materials and can be used with both fiction  and non-fiction. PALS Reading has been used successfully with elementary  and high school students who are racially or linguistically diverse and have  learning disabilities Thorius,  Santamara Graff, 2018; Vllinger, Supanc,   Brunstein, 2018; Josephs  Jolivette 2016.   PALS has also been used to help students with learning mathematics where  students of differing ability levels are paired together, and one student starts  off as the coach and the other the player Powell  Fuchs, 2015. These  students switch roles throughout the work session. Together the students  work through the necessary steps of solving the assigned grade-level math  problems Powell  Fuchs, 2015. To start, the students are taught specific  steps and are provided with specific questions to use when working in their  assigned peer partnerships. The students use these strategies and questions  as they work through the assigned math problems during each PALS Math  session.   PALS Math has been used successfully to help elementary-aged students as  well as high school students, both of whom have disabilities Baker, Gersten,  Dimino,  Griffiths, 2004; Calhoon,  Fuchs, 2003.   TouchMath. Touch Math Bullock, 2005 is a multisensory math program for  students in the elementary grades. This teaching method uses multi-modality  strategies for helping students to understand numbers and operations. Every  number from one through nine has visual points on the actual number that  represent the value for that number. These points are called TouchPoints  and learners use these points when solving mathematical equations. Some  numbers have single TouchPoints numbers 1-5, some have double  TouchPoints numbers 6 and 8, while others have a combination of single  and double TouchPoints numbers 7 and 9. These are represented by dots for  the single TouchPoints and a dot surrounded by a circle for the double  TouchPoints.   Initially, students are taught to drawn in the Touch Points on each number  and then to touch each point on the number while counting aloud; for  example, the number 3 would have three dots and a student would touch  each dot on the number and count out loud as he or she touches those dots  Bullock, 2005. Eventually, students transition to simply touching where the 

 Chapter 7 

points would be drawn and counting as needed Bullock, 2005. Students are  taught to use the TouchPoints to add, subtract, multiply, and divide Calik,   Kargin, 2010; Yikms, 2016. TouchMath has been shown to be effective for  students with intellectual disabilities Calik  Kargin, 2010; Fletcher, Boon,   Cihak, 2010 as well as students with autism Yikms, 2016, and students with  learning disabilities Simon  Hanrahan, 2004.  Concrete-representational-abstract.  Concrete-Representational-Abstract  CRA is an intervention for mathematics instruction that can improve  students conceptual knowledge and their ability to solve mathematical  equations Bouck, Park,  Nickell, 2017; Flores, 2010. CRA is a three-part  strategy where each step or part builds on the previous steps. The three  steps in the CRA process are concrete, representational, and abstract.   Concrete level instruction involves the teacher modeling each mathematical  concept using concrete materials or manipulatives Bouck et al., 2017. These  manipulatives may include chips, colored bears or blocks, base-ten blocks,  fraction bars, or geometric figures. The teacher models how to manipulate the  concrete items in order to solve the math skillconcept being taught. The  teacher then guides the students in the use of manipulatives by providing  prompts while the students demonstrate their understanding of the  skillconcept Bouck et al., 2017. Finally, students independently use the  manipulatives.  During the representational stage the teacher transitions to using a  representational or semi-concrete item such as drawing circles or tally marks  or making pictures to illustrate the skillsconcepts being taught Bouck et al.,  2017. Instruction proceeds as it did during the concrete stage with the  teacher first modeling the strategy and then providing guidance to students as  they first use the strategy and then students using the strategy independently.  In this stage, the illustrations represent the concrete items that had been used  during the previous stage; for example, tally marks would represent colored  blocks that had been used for counting.   Finally, in the abstract stage, the teacher models the skillsconcepts for  students at a symbolic level where only numerals and mathematical symbols  are used to represent the concrete and semi-concrete items that had been  used previously Flores, 2010. Bouck et al. 2017 used CRA to teach middle  school students with intellectual disabilities to solve making change  problems. All four students were educated in a self-contained mathematics  class and all four learned to accurately solve the change making problems  using the CRA method.   Self-regulated strategy development. Self-Regulated Strategy Development  SRSD is a six-step process that incorporates academic strategies and selfIntellectual Disabilities   83 

regulation skills to help students improve their academic skills Harris,  Graham,  Adkins, 2015. These steps are important to help students,  especially those with disabilities, to accurately use strategies to master  academic content. The SRSD model involves six stages to include developing  background knowledge, discussing it, modeling it, memorizing it, supporting  it, and establishing independent practice Harris et al., 2015. To begin, the  teacher models the six steps for the students. This means that the teacher  would provide the students with background knowledge, discuss the strategy  with the students, model the use of the strategy, help the students memorize  the strategy, and help the students practice the use of the strategy  independently.   When initially learning a strategy, there is a high level of direct instruction  through modeling and think aloud by the teacher. With time and practice,  however, students are able to use the strategy independently. This  intervention includes the process of teaching self-regulation skills including  goal-setting, self-monitoring, self-talk, and self-reinforcement. The goal of the  self-regulation piece is to help students learn to apply the strategy without  continued support and guidance Harris et al., 2015.  SocialEmotional Interventions  Functional behavioral assessment-based interventions. A functional  behavioral assessment FBA is an individualized process for identifying the  function of a students problem behavior von Ravensberg,  Blakely, 2015.  The FBA process involves collecting information about the environmental  conditions that precede the problem behavior and the subsequent rewards  that reinforce the behavior. According to Chandler and Dahlquist 2015, the  FBA and intervention selection process is based on a set of core assumptions  to include 

Challenging behavior and appropriate behavior are supported by the  current environment. 

Behavior serves a function. 

Challenging behavior can be changed using positive intervention  strategies that address the function of behavior. 

Functional assessment should be a team-based process p. 32.  The information that is gathered as part of the FBA process is used to  generate a hypothesis as to the function of the problem behavior and to  identify an intervention that will meet the students needs but in a more  appropriate manner von Ravensberg  Blakely, 2015. Essentially, the goal is  to reduce the need for the problem behavior by increasing a more positive 

 Chapter 7 

behavior that serves the same function for the student Chandler  Dahlquist,  2015.  Check  connect. Check  connect is an intervention used with students in  grades K through 12. The goal of check  connect is to help build a  relationship between the student and a caring adult mentor or monitor at the  school Sinclair, Christenson, Evelo,  Hurley, 1998. The primary goal of the  monitor or mentor is to keep education a salient issue for the student, his or  her family members, and teachers, and to reduce and prevent the occurrence  of absenteeism, suspensions, failing grades and other warning signs of school  withdrawal Sinclair et al., 1998, p. 10. The check part of the check  connect  process involves the mentor systematically checking in with the student and  monitoring the students performance; while the goal is to continuously  monitor the students engagement in school Sinclair et al., 1998.  Monitoring may include watching for absences from school andor specific  classes, behavioral referrals, and grades Maynard, Kjellstrand,  Thompson,  2014. The connect portion of the check  connect intervention refers to the  mentor working with the student to provide support and guidance to help the  student build skills and acquire strategies to help him or her be more  successful Maynard et al., 2014.   In addition to building positive relationships with the student, the mentor  also establishes positive relationships with the students family Maynard et  al., 2014; What Works Clearinghouse, n.d. Sinclair and colleagues 1998  explained the need for two levels of connect interventions, basic and  intensive. Basic interventions are provided to all students in the check   connect process at least once a month. Intensive interventions are provided  to those students that were displaying behaviors that put them at greater risk  for school failure or dropping out Sinclair et al., 1998.  Final Thoughts  Some students, regardless of their motivation, past instruction, and  knowledge prior to starting school, may demonstrate issues with learning  academic concepts including recalling basic facts, solving problems with  concrete to abstract concepts, and applying knowledge to real-world  problems. In order for all students to succeed in school, teachers must use  data to inform instruction and provide high-quality, evidence-based  strategies that are aligned to all students needs. The RTI process is a  framework for providing different levels of support using student progress  data.  An explicit focus on academic and behavioral evidence-based interventions  that support students who may be identified with mild intellectual disabilities 

Intellectual Disabilities   85 

ensures that students will be provided with strategies to target their specific  needs. Several of these strategies include moving from concrete to abstract  reasoning skills, problem-solving skills, hands-on learning, and visual and  auditory approaches to allow all students to succeed in mastering the  curriculum. Through the RTI process, many students will show progress  towards mastering the curriculum through the use of these strategies, while  others may need specially designed instruction which would occur through a  special education placement if they are identified as a student with a mild  intellectual disability.  Points to Remember 

Students with intellectual disabilities have a wide range of  educational needs. 

Students with mild intellectual disabilities typically struggle with  academic concepts across the curriculum. 

The RTI process is a framework designed to provide different levels of  support to ensure students master the curriculum. 

Evidence-based strategies and interventions are required by federal  law and are best practice for supporting all students. 

Evidence-based strategies must be selected that target individual  student needs through analysis of progress monitoring data.  

Different strategies are used which address different learning strengths  including auditory, visual, kinesthetic, and concrete to abstract  reasoning.  References  Adams, G.L.  Engelmann, S. 1996. Research on direct instruction: 25 years  beyond DISTAR. Seattle, WA: Educational Achievement Systems.  American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities  AAIDD. 2018. Definition of Intellectual Disability. Retrieved from  http:aaidd.orgintellectual-disabilitydefinition  Baker, S., Gersten, R., Dimino, J. A.,  Griffiths, R. 2004. The sustained use of  research-based instructional practice: A case study of peer-assisted learning  strategies in mathematics. Remedial and Special Education, 251, 5-24.  DOI: 10.117707419325040250010301   Bouck, E., Park, J.,  Nickell, B. 2017. Using the concrete-representationalabstract approach to support students with intellectual disability to solve  change-making problems. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 60, 24-36.  DOI: 10.1016j.ridd.2016.11.006  

 Chapter 7 

Bullock, J. 2005. Touch math the alphabet of mathematics, training manual.  Colorado Springs, CO: Innovative Concepts Inc.  Calhoon, M. B.  Fuchs, L. S. 2003. The effects of peer-assisted learning  strategies and curriculum-based measurement on the mathematics  performance of secondary students with disabilities. Remedial and Special  Education, 244, 235-245. DOI: 10.117707419325030240040601  Calik, N.C.,  Kargin, T. 2010. Effectiveness of the Touch Math technique in  teaching addition skills to students with intellectual disabilities.  International Journal of Special Education, 251, 195-204. Retrieved from  https:eric.ed.gov?idEJ890578  Center for Research and Reform in Education. 2018. Evidence for ESSA.  Retrieved from https:www.evidenceforessa.org  Chandler, L.K.,  Dahlquist, C.M. 2015. Functional assessment: Strategies to  prevent and remediate challenging behaviors in school settings 4th ed.  Boston, MA: Pearson.  ESSA. 2015. Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015, Pub. L. No. 114-95  114 Stat.  1177. Retrieved from https:www.congress.gov114plawspubl95PLAW114publ95.pdf  Fletcher, D. Boon., R.T.,  Cihak, D.F. 2010. Effects of the Touch Math  program compared to a number line strategy to teach addition facts to  middle school students with moderate intellectual disabilities. Education  and Training in Autism and Developmental Disabilities, 453, 449-458.  Retrieved from  http:www.touchmath.compdfautismddjournalsept2010.pdf  Flores, M. M. 2010. Using the concrete-representationalabstract sequence  to teach subtraction with regrouping to students at risk for failure. Remedial  and Special Education, 313, 195-207. DOI: 10.11770741932508327467  Fuchs, D.,  Fuchs, L.S. 2005. Peer-assisted learning strategies: Promoting  word recognition, fluency, and reading comprehension in young children.  The Journal of Special Education, 391, 34-44. Retrieved from  https:files.eric.ed.govfulltextEJ693939.pdf  Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L.S., Mathes, P.G.,  Simmons, D.C. 1997. Peer-assisted  learning strategies: Making classrooms more responsive to diversity.  American Educational Research Journal, 341, 174-206. DOI:  10.310200028312034001174  Getzel, E. E. 2012. Response to intervention, what are the challenges? In P.  Wehman  J.   Kregel, Eds., Functional Curriculum for Elementary and Secondary Students  with Special Needs 3rd ed. pp. 93-102. Austin, TX: Pro-ed  Harris, K. R., Graham, S., Adkins, M. 2015. Practice-based professional  development and Self-Regulated Strategy Development for Tier 2, at-risk  writers in second grade. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 40, 5-16.  DOI: 10.1016j.cedpsych.2014.02.003  Hollingsworth, J.R.  Ybarra, S.E. 2017. Explicit direct instruction: The power  of the well-crafted, well-taught lesson. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin  Josephs, N.L.,  Jolivette, K. 2016. Effects of peer mediated instruction on  the oral reading fluency skills of high school aged struggling readers. 

Intellectual Disabilities   87 

Insights into Learning Disabilities, 131, 39-59. Retrieved from  https:files.eric.ed.govfulltextEJ1103672.pdf  LaBerge, D.,  Samuels, S.J. 1974. Toward a theory of automatic information  processing in reading. Cognitive Psychology, 62, 293323. DOI:  10.10160010-02857490015-2  Marchand-Martella, N.E., Slocum, T.A.,  Martella, R.C. Eds. 2004.  Introduction to direct instruction. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.  Maynard, B. R., Kjellstrand, E. K.,  Thompson, A. M. 2014. Effects of check  and connect on attendance, behavior, and academics: A randomized  effectiveness trial. Research on Social Work Practice, 243, 296-309. DOI:  10.11771049731513497804  McNicholas, P.J., Floyd, R.G., Woods Jr., I.L., Singh, L.J., Manguno, M.S.,   Maki, K.E. 2018. State special education criteria for identifying intellectual  disability: A review following revised diagnostic criteria and Rosas Law.  School Psychology Quarterly 331, 75-82. DOI: 10.1037spq0000208  Oczkus, L. 2018. Reciprocal teaching at work: Powerful strategies and lessons  for improving reading comprehension 3rd ed. Alexandria, VA: ASCD  Okkinga, M., van Steensel, R., van Gelderen, A.J.S., Sleegers, P.J.C. 2018.  Effects of reciprocal teaching on reading comprehension of low-achieving  adolescents. The importance of specific teacher skills. Journal of Research in  Reading, 411, 20-41. DOI: 10.11111467-9817.12082  Palinscar, A.S.  Brown, A.L. 1988. Teaching and practicing thinking skills to  promote comprehension in the context of group problem solving. Remedial  and Special Education, 91, 53-59. DOI: 10.1177074193258800900110  Powell, S.K.  Fuchs, L.S. 2015. Peer assisted learning strategies in math. In  K.R. Harris  L.   Melzer Eds. The Power of Peers in the Classroom: Enhancing Learning and  Social Skills, pp. 188-223. New York, NY: Guilford Press.  Rasinski, T., Blachoqicz, C.  Lems, K. 2012. Fluency instruction: Researchbased best practices 2nd ed. New York, NY: Guilford Press  Samuels, S. J. 1979. The method of repeated readings. The Reading Teacher,  324, 403-408. https:www.jstor.orgstable20194790  Schalock R. L., Borthwick-Duffy, S. A, Bradley, V. J., Buntinx, W. H. E., Coulter,  D. L., Craig, E. M. . . . Yeater, M. 2010. Intellectual disability: definition,  classification, and systems of supports 11th ed. Washington, DC: American  Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities.  Simon, R.  Hanrahan, J. 2004. An evaluation of the Touch Math method for  teaching addition to students with learning disabilities in mathematics.  European Journal of Special Needs Education, 192, 191-209. Retrieved from  https:eric.ed.gov?idEJ681567  Sinclair, M.F., Christenson, S. L., Evelo, D.L.,  Hurley, C.M. 1998. Dropout  prevention for youth with disabilities: Efficacy of a sustained school  engagement procedure. Exceptional Children, 651, 722. DOI:  10.1177001440299806500101  Smith, T.E.C., Polloway, E.A., Doughty, T.T., Patton, J.R., Dowdy, C.A. 2016.  Teaching students with special needs in inclusive settings 7th ed. Boston,  MA: Pearson. 

 Chapter 7 

Therrien, W. J. 2004. Fluency and comprehension gains as a result of  repeated reading: A meta-analysis. Remedial and Special Education, 254,  252261. DOI: 10.117707419325040250040801  Therrien, W.J.  Kubina Jr, R.M. 2006. Developing reading fluency with  repeated reading. Intervention in School and Clinic, 413, 156-160. DOI:  10.117710534512060410030501  Thorius, K.A.K.  Santamara Graff, C. 2018. Extending Peer-Assisted  Learning Strategies for racially, linguistically, and ability diverse learners.  Intervention in School and Clinic, 533, 163-170. DOI:  10.11771053451217702113  Vllinger, V. A., Supanc, M.,  Brunstein, J. C. 2018. Examining  between-group and within-group effects of a peer-assisted reading  strategies intervention. Psychology in the Schools, 555, 573-589. DOI:  10.1002pits.22121  von Ravensberg, H.  Blakely, A. 2015. When to use functional behavioral  assessment? A state-by-state analysis of the law. Retrieved from  https:www.pbis.orgCommonCmsfilespbisresourcesEvalBriefOct201 5.pdf  Westling, D.L., Fox, L.,  Carter, E.W. 2015. Teaching students with severe  disabilities 5th ed. Boston, MA: Pearson.  What Works Clearinghouse. n.d. Select topics to find what works based on  the evidence. Retrieved from https:ies.ed.govnceewwcFWW  Yikms, A. 2016. Effectiveness of the TouchMath technique in teaching  addition to children with autism. Educational Sciences: Theory and Practice,  163, 1005-1025. DOI: 10.12738estp.2016.3.2057  Young, S.K. 2014. The efficacy of the Scientific Associates Corrective Reading  program for students with reading disabilities. Lewiston, ID: Edwin Mellen  Press. 

Chapter 8 

Specific Learning Disabilities  James R. Schwab, Ph.D.,  University of West Georgia,  Angela C. Fain, PhD.,  University of West Georgia  A specific learning disability SLD is defined as a disorder in one or more of  the basic psychological processes involved in understanding or in using  language, spoken or written, which disorder may manifest itself in an  imperfect ability to listen, think, speak, write, spell, or do mathematics  calculationsand is unrelated to learning problems that are primarily the  result of visual, hearing, or motor disabilities; of intellectual disability; of  emotional disturbance; or of environmental, cultural, or economic  disadvantage Center for Parent Information  Resources, 2017, n.p. There  are three main types of SLD subtypes in reading, writing, and mathematics. 

Dyslexia is a disability in reading in which children demonstrate  difficulty with reading comprehension, spelling, and writing. They  often have trouble reading accurately and fluently Center for Parent  Information  Resources, 2015. 

Dysgraphia is a disability in writing. Children with dysgraphia  demonstrate difficulty writing legibly and at age-appropriate speed.  Many children with dysgraphia also struggle to express their  thoughts in writing Center for Parent Information  Resources,  2015. 

Dyscalculia is a disability in mathematics in which children have  difficulty understanding number-related concepts or using symbols  or functions needed for success in mathematics Center for Parent  Information  Resources, 2015.  Identification  Prior to the passing of IDEA in 2004, all states and schools identified students  using the discrepancy model, which states that four criteria are met before a 

 Chapter 8 

student is considered eligible for a specific learning disability Ihori,  Olvera,  2015; Restori, Katz,  Lee, 2009. Those four criteria include  a establishing a discrepancy between intellectualcognitive ability  and academic achievement; b identifying the psychological  cognitive processing deficit; c determining if the childs  educational needs can or cannot be met with special education and  related services; and d exclusionary considerations Restori et al.,  2009.  The discrepancy model, however, has many criticisms including tester  inconsistencies, and student underachievement that skewed scores Restori  et al., 2009. With the authorization of IDEA American Psychological  Association, 2018 states were now allowed to use a response to intervention  RtI which was developed due to major criticisms of the discrepancy model  Restori et al., 2009; Zirkel  Thomas, 2010.  Assume, for example, that a child has an IQ of 85 and the scores in reading,  mathematics, and writing were 75, 76, and 77 respectively. Under the  discrepancy definition the student would not qualify for special education;  however, she may still require special education services. Using the RtI  model instead allowed psychologists to use a process that determines if the  child responds to scientific, research-based intervention as a part of the  evaluation procedures ASHA, 2018, n.p.   Students could be identified with a deficit using universal screening tier 1,  provided high-quality research-based instruction in small groups tier 2, and  possibly individualized instruction tier 3 before testing for special education  services. It is important to use data-based decision making when moving  students through the RtI tiers to ensure they really need special education  services Reschly, 2014. If the student did not respond to the scientific,  research-based interventions over the course of several weeks, then the  student might be identified as needing further testing that could lead to a  diagnosis of SLD.  PrevalenceCauses  According to the National Center for Education Statistics NCES 2018, there  are approximately 2.3 million students diagnosed with specific learning  disabilities SLD and receive services under IDEA, which translates into  approximately 34 of all students ages 3-21 receiving special education  services had SLD. By some estimates, mathematics disabilities affect 5 to 8  Geary, 2004 and writing disabilities affect 6.9 to 14.7 of the population  Katusic, Colligan, Weaver,  Barbaresi, 2009. Reading disabilities affect 5 to 

Specific Learning Disabilities   91 
of the population although some estimate that 80 of the students with  SLD have a reading disability Fuchs, Fuchs,  Compton, 2004; Shaywitz   Shaywitz, 2005.  The exact cause of SLD is not known; however, researchers have found some  possible causes such as genetics Pennington, 1991, neurological factors  Rao, 2003, and environmental factors Silver  Haggin, 2002. Researchers  believe neurological problems could occur during the prenatal or postnatal  period, as the nervous system is developing Rao, 2003. An alternative theory  suggests other factors such as head injury, lack of oxygen, exposure to toxins,  seizures and nutritional deficiencies may contribute to central nervous  system damage Rao, 2003. Researchers have shown that malnutrition,  prematurity, poor prenatal and post-natal health care, stress, and poor  parenting and teaching can create conditions in which brain dysfunction is  more likely Jensen, 2009; Silver  Haggin, 2002. Substance abuse, defective  learning models, emotional disturbances, and social and cultural deprivation  have also been associated with SLD Jensen, 2009; Silver  Haggin, 2002.  Characteristics  No two students with SLD will possess an identical profile of strengths and  weaknesses because SLD covers an extremely wide range of characteristics;  however, some common characteristics include academic problems,  attention deficits, oral language difficulties, process deficits and informationprocessing problems, psychological lack of cognitive strategies needed for  efficient learning, social skill deficit, poor motor abilities, and specific  problems in reading, mathematics, andor writing Cimera, 2007. Students  with SLD can display problem behaviors due to their academic deficits  Schwab, Tucci  Jolivette, 2013.  An SLD in reading is characterized by a difficulty in word recognition,  fluency, andor comprehension Lyon, Shaywitz,  Shaywitz, 2003. Students  with an SLD in reading have trouble decoding words, which affects their  ability to read fluently, which will affect their ability to comprehend text  Snowling, 2013. Researchers have found that reading rate is one of the  number one predictors of an SLD in reading and requires early intervention  Bryant, Bryant, Hammill, McCray,  Kethley, 2004 Students with an SLD in  reading may display problems with attention, verbal working memory, and  other executive functions Costa, Hooper,  Edwards, 2016.   Students with an SLD in writing may experience difficulty with the general  cognitive and affective processes that effective writing requires Swanson,  Harris,  Graham, 2013. These students have weaker memory skills,  executive functioning skills, and cognitive processing skills that makes writing 

 Chapter 8 

more difficult, and have low phonological and reading skills, which makes  writing more difficult Costa et al., 2016; Graham, Collins,  Rigby-Wills,  2017. Finally, they can also experience low motivation due to their lack of  writing skills Bryan, 1991.  Students with SLD in mathematics lack the basic foundational skills i.e.,  number sense, fractions, mathematics reasoning to solve more difficult  mathematics problems. These students tend to make simple mathematics  calculation errors when solving mathematics problems that require higher  order thinking skills Swanson, Lussier,  Orosco, 2011. Students with SLD in  mathematics have difficulty retaining information and solving problems  strategically, while poor working memory abilities and low cognitive load  capabilities may cause them to struggle with comprehending and solving  word problems Gersten et al., 2008; Swanson et al., 2011.  Providing Academic and Behavioral Supports Within the RtI Model  Mr. Smith is currently teaching a class of twenty-five fifth grade  elementary students at Big River Elementary School. This class consists  of twenty regular education students and 5 students who receive services  for special education. Three of the students, Bill, Devante, and Marcia  receive services for a specific learning disability in reading and two  students, Elizabeth and LaShawn, receive services for a specific learning  disability in mathematics. Bill, Devante, and Marcia tend to really  struggle with word problems due to comprehension and reading  difficulties. Elizabeth and LaShawn have trouble identifying the correct  operation to use, identifying what the problem is asking, and using an  appropriate strategy to solve the word problem.   Mr. Smith has modeled several times the correct steps, but students  continue to perform the steps in the incorrect sequence when presented  with independent work. In addition to academic challenges, Elizabeth  and Bill also display problem behaviors when asked to answer questions  in the class. Since Mr. Smith wants to provide support for all students,  including students with SLD, Mr. Smith decides to use an evidencebased mnemonic strategy to support all students.  Tier 1 Instruction  One type of strategy instruction that can help students with SLD be successful  in solving word problems is to teach students to use the mnemonic STAR,  which stands for Search the problem, Translate the problem into pictures or  equations, Answer the problem, and Review the solution Peltier  Vannest, 

Specific Learning Disabilities   93 

2016. Continuing with the example from above, here is how Mr. Smith  supported all students in using the STAR strategy.  First, Mr. Smith begins by providing effective tier 1 instruction, which  you learned about in chapter two. Assume Mr. Smith is teaching  students to solve the word problem The average temperature at the  South Pole is 45F. The average temperature on the Equator is 92F.  How much warmer is the average temperature on the Equator than at  the South Pole? Mr. Smith models for students how to Search the  problem and underline the important information as he underlines  45F, 92F and how much warmer in the word problem. Next, Mr.  Smith models how to Translate the word problem into an equation and  writes 92F  45F. Third, Mr. Smith reminds students of the  subtraction of integers rule, which states to add the opposite of the  second term. Fourth, Mr. Smith models how to Answer the problem by  adding 92 plus 45 to get 137F. Finally, Mr. Smith models how to Review  the solution and checks that the answer makes sense. Mr. Smith then  goes onto performing guided practice with the students on another word  problem with the plan to move to independent practice if the students  perform well during guided practice.  Tier 2 Instruction  In tier 2 instruction, students get the general curriculum plus more, or core  plus more Shapiro, n.d. Here, specific research-based interventions are  incorporated in small group work with fidelity. Mr. Smith uses tier 2 in the  following way:  Mr. Smith would like to get an accurate response from all students and  has noticed that Elizabeth and Bill are not fully participating in solving  the word problems, so he decides to let the students write the answers on  white boards to increase opportunities to respond during guided  practice Schwab et al., 2013. These written answers, or response cards,  allow students to hold up white boards simultaneously to show  responses to a teacher's question, which provides greater anonymity,  which may increase students' willingness to respond Gardner, Heward   Grossi, 1994; Lambert, Cartledge,  Heward, 2006.   When Mr. Smith asks the students to solve the word problem using  STAR, Elizabeth and Bill are participating in attempting to solve the  word problems. However, Mr. Smith notices that all students with SLD  and three other students are providing the incorrect answers and not  performing the steps to the STAR strategy in the correct order. 

 Chapter 8 

Mr. Smith decides to provide tier 2 instruction for the five struggling  students. He assigns the other students to independent work the  following day and decides to work with the five students in a small  group. To help these students with the STAR strategy, Mr. Smith provides  checklists of each step to STAR with details on each sub-step and  questions the student should ask; for example, underneath Search the  problem, the checklist includes the sub-steps Read the problem  carefully, Identify what is known and what is unknown, and Underline  the facts.   Mr. Smith also reads the word problems out loud, which helps students  who have a specific learning disability in reading. Mr. Smith continues  to model and use guided practice while letting students use the  checklists to complete each step.   As the STAR strategy becomes more familiar to the students, Mr. Smith  gradually fades away use of the checklist. Elizabeth, however, continues  to struggle with adding and subtracting integers in word problems.  Elizabeth can now set the word problem up correctly, yet performing the  correct operation is still a problem.  Tier 3 Instruction  For tier 3 instruction, students get core plus more, plus individual instruction  and interventions Shapiro, n.d. As the story unfolds, Mr. Smith continues to  find solutions for Elizabeth within the RtI tiered system.  Mr. Smith asks the special education teacher, Ms. Roberts, to work oneon-one with Elizabeth to help learn to solve word problems using the  STAR strategy. Ms. Roberts decides to use a graduated instructional  sequence Maccini  Hughes, 2000; Maccini  Ruhl, 2000 to help  Elizabeth solve the word problems. Ms. Roberts first teaches Elizabeth to  model the word problems using chips or counters while translating the  problem into an equation or drawing. As Elizabeth becomes proficient  at using the chips or counters, Elizabeth moves onto using drawings,  then finally begins to use the equations only. By the end of the week, all  of Mr. Smiths students have initial mastery of the STAR strategy.  Progress Monitoring  Changes in the identification of students with SLD have helped to provide  students with tiered supports in the general education classroom. Through  RtI and other multi-tiered systems of support, general education teachers are  able to identify and support students who may be at risk for SLD andor  struggling in the classroom Shapiro, n.d. As with all instruction and 

Specific Learning Disabilities   95 

interventions, it is important that teachers monitor student academic  progress and responsiveness to interventions McMaster, Parker,  Jung,  2012.  Curriculum-based measurements CBMs created by Fuchs, Deno, and  Mirkin 1984 over 30 years ago continue to be the dominant research-based  assessment tools used by educators and school psychologists nationwide  Jenkins, Schulze, Marti,  Harbaugh, 2017. CBMs are informal assessments  probes that measure student progress aligned with the curriculum in  writing, reading, and mathematics. It takes some time to become familiar  with the process; however, the investment made changes teaching and  learning and elevates it to another level Hasbrouck  Ihnot, n.d. It is  essential that teachers use informal assessments to assess student academic  performance, respond to interventions, and evaluate the effectiveness of  interventions.  Final Thoughts  Students with SLD generally have difficulties in one or more content areas to  include reading, writing, and mathematics. IDEA and the emphasis of MTSS  changed the way students with SLD are identified. Struggling students receive  tiered supports in the general education classroom prior to identification for  SLD to help support their individual academic learning needs or receive  tiered supports once they have been identified. Data is collected to assess  student performance, measure student progress, and evaluate the  effectiveness of teacher instruction and interventions.  Points to Remember 

There are three main types of SLD subtypes in reading dyslexia,  writing dysgraphia, and mathematics dyscalculia. 

The exact cause of SLD remains unknown; however, researchers have  found that genetics, neurological factors, and environmental factors  may contribute to the struggles some students face. 

Common characteristics of students with SLD include academic  problems; attention deficits; lack of cognitive strategies needed for  efficient learning; oral language difficulties; poor motor abilities;  psychological process deficits and information-processing problems;  social skill deficit; and specific problems in reading, mathematics,  andor writing. 

A specific learning disability in reading is characterized by a difficulty  in word recognition, fluency, andor comprehension and difficulty 

 Chapter 8 

decoding words, while a student with SLD in writing may experience  difficulty with the general cognitive and affective processes and have  weaker memory skills, executive functioning skills, and cognitive  processing skills that makes writing more difficult. 

Students with SLD in mathematics lack the basic foundational skills  i.e., number sense, fractions, mathematics reasoning to solve more  difficult  mathematics  problems,  make  simple  mathematics  calculation errors when solving mathematics problems that require  higher order thinking skills, and have difficulty retaining information  and solving problems strategically.  References  American Psychological Association. 2018. Individuals with Disabilities Act  IDEA. Retrieved from  https:www.apa.orgadvocacyeducationideaindex.aspx  ASHA. 2018. Specific learning disabilities. Retrieved from  https:www.asha.orgadvocacyfederalidea04-law-specific-ld  Bryan, T. 1991. Social problems and learning disabilities. In B. Y. Wong Ed.,  Learning about learning disabilities pp. 195229. San Diego, CA: Academic  Press.  Bryant, D. P., Bryant, B. R., Hammill, D. D, McCray Sorrells, A.,  Kethley, C. I.  2004. Characteristic reading behaviors of poor readers who have learning  disabilities. Assessment for Effective Intervention, 294, 39-46. DOI:  10.1177073724770402900406   Center for Parent Information  Resources. 2017. Categories of disability  under IDEA. Retrieved from  https:www.parentcenterhub.orgcategoriesld  Center for Parent Information  Resources. 2015. Learning disability LD.  Retrieved from    https:www.parentcenterhub.orgld  Cimera, R. E. 2007. Learning Disabilities: What are they? Helping teachers  and parents understand the characteristics. Lanham, MD: Rowman   Littlefield  Costa, L. C., Edwards, C. N.,  Hooper, S. R. 2016. Writing disabilities and  reading disabilities in elementary school students. Learning Disability  Quarterly, 391, 17-30. DOI:10.11770731948714565461  Fuchs, L. S., Deno, S. L.,  Mirkin, P. K. 1984. The effects of frequent  curriculum-based measurement and evaluation of pedagogy, student  achievement and student awareness of learning. American Educational  Research Journal, 212, 449460. DOI: 10,310200028312021002449  Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L. S.,  Compton, D. L. 2004. Identifying reading  disabilities by responsiveness-to-instruction: specifying measures and  criteria. Learning Disability Quarterly, 274, 216-227. DOI: 10.23071593674 

Specific Learning Disabilities   97 

Gardner, R., Heward, W. L.,  Grossi, T. A. 1994. Effects of response cards on  student participation and academic achievement: A systematic replication  with inner-city students during whole-class science instruction. Journal of  Applied Behavior Analysis, 271, 63-71. DOI: 10.1901jaba.1994.27-63  Geary, D. C. 2004. Math and learning disabilities. Journal of Learning  Disabilities, 371, 4-15. DOI: 10.117700222194040370010201  Gersten, R., Chard, D. J., Jayanthi, M., Baker, S. K., Morphy, P., Flojo, J. 2008.  Math instruction for students with learning disabilities or difficulty learning  mathematics: A synthesis of the intervention research. Review of Education  Research, 793, 1202-1242. DOI: 10.31020034654309334431   Graham, S., Collins, A. A.,  Rigby-Wills, H. 2017. Writing characteristics of  students with learning disabilities and typically achieving peers: A metaanalysis. Exceptional Children, 832, 199-218. DOI:  10.11770014402916664070  Hasbrouck, J.  Ihnot, C. n.d. Curriculum-based measurement: From skeptic  to advocate. Retrieved from  http:www.rtinetwork.orgessentialassessmentprogresscbm-advocate  Ihori, D.  Olvera, P. 2015. Discrepancies, responses, and patterns: Selecting  a method of assessment for specific learning disabilities. Contemporary  School Psychology, 191, 1-11. DOI:10.10007s40688-014-0042-6  Jenkins, J., Schulze, M., Marti, A.,  Harbough, A. G. 2017. Curriculum-based  measurement of reading growth: Weekly versus intermittent progress  monitoring. Exceptional Children, 841, 42. DOI:  10.11770014402917708216  Jensen, E. 2009. Teaching with poverty in mind: What being poor does to kids  brains and what schools can do about it. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.  Katusic, S. K., Colligan, R. C., Weaver, A. L.,  Barbaresi, W. J. 2009. The  forgotten learning disability: Epidemiology of written-language disorder in a  population-based birth cohort. Pediatrics, 1235, 13061313. DOI:  10.1542peds.2008-2098  Lambert, M., Cartledge, G., Heward, W. L.,  Lo, Y. 2006. Effects of response  cards on disruptive behavior and academic responding during mathematics  lessons by fourth-grade urban students. Journal of Positive Behavior  Interventions, 82, 88-99. DOI: 10.117710983007060080020701  Lyon, G., Shaywitz, S. E.,  Shaywitz, B. A. 2003. A definition of dyslexia.  Annals of Dyslexia, 531, 114. DOI: 10.1007s11881-003-0001-9  Maccini, P.,  Hughes, C. A. 2000. Effects of a problem-solving strategy on  the introductory algebra performance of secondary. Learning Disabilities  Research  Practice, 151, 10-21. DOI: 10.1207SLDRP15012.  Maccini, P.  Ruhl, K. L. 2000. Effects of a graduated instructional sequence  on the algebraic subtraction of integers by secondary students with learning  disabilities. Education  Treatment of Children, 234, 465-489. Retrieved  from https:www.jstor.orgstable42899634  McMaster, K. L., Parker, D.,  Jung, P. 2012. Using curriculum-based  measurement for beginning writers within a response to intervention  framework. Reading Psychology, 331-2, 190-216. DOI:  10.108002702711.2012.631867 

 Chapter 8 

National Center for Education Statistics NCES, 2018. Children and youth  with disabilities. Retrieved from  https:nces.ed.govprogramscoeindicatorcgg.asp  Peltier, C.  Vannest, K. J. 2016. Utilizing the star strategy to improve the  mathematical problem-solving abilities of students with emotional and  behavioral disorders. Beyond Behavior, 251, 9-15. DOI:  10.1177107429561602500103  Pennington, B.F. 1991. Diagnosing Learning Disorders: A Neuropsychological  Framework. New York: Guilford.  Rao, S. 2003. Neuropsychological aspects of learning disabilities. In P.  Karanth  J. Rozario eds., Learning Disabilities in India: Willing the Mind  to Learn pp. 51-61. New Delhi: Sage Publications.  Reschly, D. J. 2014. Response to intervention and the identification of  specific learning disabilities. Topics in Language Disorders, 341, 39-58.  DOI:10.1097TLD.0000000000000003  Restori, A. F., Katz, G. S.,  Lee, H. B. 2009. A Critique of the IQ   Achievement discrepancy model for identifying specific learning  disabilities. Europe's Journal of Psychology, 54, 128-145. DOI:  10.1037e676802011-009  Schwab, J. R., Tucci, S.,  Jolivette, K. 2013. Integrating schema-based  instruction and response cards for students with learning disabilities and  challenging behaviors. Beyond Behavior, 223, 24-30.  DOI:10.1177107429561302200304  Shapiro, E.S. n.d. Tiered instruction and intervention in a response-tointervention model. Retrieved from  http:www.rtinetwork.orgessentialtieredinstructiontiered-instructionand-intervention-rti-model  Shaywitz, S. E.,  Shaywitz, B. A. 2005. Dyslexia specific reading disability.  Biological Psychiatry, 5711, 13011309. DOI: 10.1542pir.24-5-147  Silver, A.A.  Haggin, R.A. 2002. Disorders of learning in childhood. New York:  John Wiley and Sons.  Snowling, M.J. 2013. Early identification and interventions for dyslexia: A  contemporary view. Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs, 131,  714. DOI: 10.1111j.1471-3802.2012.01262.x  Swanson, L., Harris, K.R.,  Graham, S. 2013. Handbook of learning  disabilities 2nd ed. New York, NY: Guilford.  Swanson, H.L., Lussier, C.  Orosco, M. 2013. Effects of cognitive strategy  interventions and cognitive moderators on word problem solving in  children at risk for problem solving difficulties. Learning Disabilities  Research  Practice, 284, 170183. DOI:10.1111ldrp.12019   Zirkel, P. A.  Thomas, L. B. 2010. State Laws and Guidelines for  Implementing RTI. Teaching Exceptional Children, 431, 60-73. DOI:  10.1177004005991004300107 

Chapter 9 

Other Health Impairments with an  Emphasis on ADHD  Nicholas D. Young, PhD, EdD,  American International College,  Jennifer M. Innocenti, MA,  American International College,  Kristen Bonanno-Sotiropoulos, EdD,  Bay Path University  According to the Individuals with Disabilities Educational Improvement Act  of 2004, the disability category, Other Health Impairment is defined as  having limited strength, vitality or alertness, including a heightened  alertness to environmental stimuli, that results in limited alertness with  respect to the educational environment, that: a is due to chronic or acute  health problems such as asthma, attention deficit disorder or attention deficit  hyperactivity disorder, diabetes, epilepsy, a heart condition, hemophilia, lead  poisoning, leukemia, nephritis, rheumatic fever, and sickle-cell anemia; and  b adversely affects a childs educational performance Center for Parent  Information  Resources, 2017, n.p. Approximately 14 of students  receiving special education services are doing so under this category  National Center for Educational Statistics, 2018. Although the most common  disability in this category is attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, or ADHD,  there are quite a few other medical conditions andor disorders that are also  included such as Tourettes syndrome, heart conditions, bipolar, fetal alcohol  syndrome, and rheumatic fever National Dissemination Center for Children  with Disabilities NICHCY, 2012. Several others common conditions  include: 

Diabetes is a medical condition where the body has difficulty either  using or producing insulin effectively. Diabetes causes such  symptoms as excessive thirst and urination, blurry vision, fatigue,  and irritability. There are approximately 23.6 million school-aged  children affected by diabetes. 

 Chapter 9 

Epilepsy is a condition that causes seizures, which alters the way an  individuals brain works. Seizures trigger brain cells to malfunction,  causing unconsciousness, and changes in physical movements.  When a student with epilepsy has a seizure, they may experience  unresponsiveness, involuntary body movements, blackouts, and  incontinence. 

Hemophilia is a blood disorder which causes the individuals blood  not to clot right away; therefore, a cut may take a longer to stop  bleeding. Students with hemophilia may also experience abnormal  menstrual cycles, frequent bruising, and nosebleeds. 

Lead poisoning refers to the slow build-up of lead in the bloodstream  through exposure to materials that contain lead. Lead poisoning can  result in very serious mental and physical symptoms including  anemia, weight loss, abdominal pain, vomiting, sluggishness,  irritability, and learning problems. 

Leukemia is cancer in the blood and bone marrow and occurs when  an abundance of abnormal white blood cells is produced. Students  with leukemia experience symptoms such as tiredness, shortness of  breath, fevers, night sweats, paleness, achy bones and joints,  bruising, and slow healing of cuts. 

Nephritis refers to a condition where an individuals kidneys are  inflamed as a result of infection or an autoimmune disease, such as  lupus. Symptoms include high levels of protein in the blood, swelling  and weight gain, and decreased urine output. 

National Dissemination Center for Children with Disabilities  NICHCY, 2012.  Special Education Services for Medical Issues Under Other Health  Impairments  The medical conditions associated with this disability area may require that  diagnosed students receive medical supports while attending school or may  miss more school than a typical peer resulting in missed instructional time  Center for Parent Information  Research, 2015. Students might have  frequent doctor visits, hospitalizations, andor sick days. Teachers need to be  aware of this and continually work with families and health care providers to  ensure students are supported to maintain their educational requirements  and performance.  When a student is found eligible for special education under other health  impairments, there are several related services that may be especially 

Other Health Impairments with an Emphasis on ADHD   101 

important such as medical services, school health services, and school  nursing services NICHCY, 2012. These are assessed at the time of an IEP  meeting and determined with the assistance of licensed medical providers  based on the need for related services during the school day so that the  student is able to access the curriculum NICHCY, 2012; Yell, 2016.  Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder  Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ADHD is considered to be a chronic  neurodevelopmental disorder that is defined by hyperactivity, inattention,  and impulsivity Usami, 2016. ADHD is further associated with other  impairments such as social, emotional, andor cognitive impairments, family  issues, academic performance, health risks, and suicidal ideation Barkley,  2006. The impairments play a significant part in child development that,  when not addressed in childhood, may lead to disruptive behavioral patterns  that are prolonged and are harder to correct and impede a students academic  performance throughout his or her entire school career Bell, 2011. Without  effective treatment, childrens and adolescents chances of crimecriminal  justice contact, substance abuse, child abuse, accidents with severe injuries,  traffic violations, and adult mental illnesspsychiatric disorders increase  significantly Barkley, 2006.  Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder ADHD refers to a persistent  pattern of intention andor hyperactivity-impulsivity that is more frequently  displayed and more severe than is typically observed in individuals at a  comparable level of development American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p.  61. ADHD requires a diagnosis from a licensed psychiatrist Bell, 2011.  According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2018,  approximately 6.1 million school-aged children are diagnosed as having  ADHD, which accounts for 9.4 of school-aged children. Further data reveals  that 2 out of 3 children diagnosed with ADHD also have a comorbid  behavioral, mental, or emotional disorder as well Centers for Disease Control   Prevention, 2018.   The American Psychological Association, or APA, 2013 noted that boys are  2 to 9 times more likely to receive an ADHD diagnosis than girls and, through  twin studies, ADHD is reported to be highly heritable. In 65 of children  diagnosed with ADHD, the symptoms have carried through adulthood  Wolraich et al., 2005. Curtis 2014 noted that students who grew up in a  very structured environment, tend to mask the symptoms associated with  ADHD and other psychiatric disorders.   Approximately 80 of children who have a diagnosis of ADHD are also likely  to have at least one other psychiatric disorder and 50 are likely to have two 

 Chapter 9 

psychiatric disorders, known as a comorbid disorder Barkley, 2006. Common  comorbid disorders include oppositional defiant disorder ODD, conduct  disorder CD; then anxiety disorder AD, and major depressive disorder  MDD, and as of 2016, bipolar disorder BD, severe mood disorder SMD,  and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder DMDD have been considered,  primarily due to symptoms expressed in late childhood and adolescents  Usami, 2016.   Comorbid disorders are becoming more prevalent due to the increased use  of mood stabilizers and antipsychotics for children Waxmonsky et al., 2013.  Emotional instability is a primary deficit in the diagnosis of ADHD, which can  influence mood. Symptoms of students with ADHD and Severe Mood  Dysregulation SMD experience higher rates of aggression, prominent  affective lability, and hostile interpretation of neutral stimuli that disrupt  school, home, and peer relations Waxmonsky et al., 2013. The National  Institute of Mental Health NIMH 2017 has created a diagnosis of SMD to  address a possible construct for students who do not meet the criteria for a  mood disorder but experience some symptoms. The criteria to receive a SMD  diagnosis includes a persistently abnormally irritable or sad mood,  developmentally inappropriate levels of reactivity to stimuli three or more  times per week, and evidence of persistent hyperarousal that begins prior to  the age of 12 Waxmonsky et al., 2013.  Symptoms of ADHD can present in three different aspects: inattention,  hyperactivity, and impulsivity National Institute of Mental Health, n.d.  Younger children diagnosed with ADHD are typically found to be hyperactive  and once children begin to attend school, symptoms of inattentiveness  increase Alsalamah, 2017. Extensive research has found that children with  ADHD, suffer from learning difficulties including organization, memory, and  deficits in executive functioning, including problem-solving and critical  thinking Alsalamah, 2017; Birchwood  Daley, 2012; Kulkarni, 2015; Salami,  Ashayeri, Estaki, Farzad,  Entezar, 2017; Scholtens, Rydell, Yang-Wallentin,  2013.   Students with ADHD are at a higher risk for absenteeism, course failure,  drug and substance abuse, and dropping out of school Scholtens et al., 2013.  The disruptive behavior further causes impairment in daily living activities  and struggles within the home. In adolescents, students untreated for ADHD  exhibit more criminaldeviant behaviors and in later life, often drop out of  high school, get more traffic violations, are unemployed and have issues at  work, and experience higher marital issues Usami, 2016. 

Other Health Impairments with an Emphasis on ADHD   103 

Inattention, Hyperactivity, and Impulsivity  Research is constantly being conducted on ADHD because it is considered a  chronic disorder Usami, 2016. Brain scans have shown that there is a delay  in the frontal cortex of students diagnosed with ADHD. The frontal cortex  controls cognitive processes such as attention and motor planning Usami,  2016. Due to the cognitive impairment in early age, children begin to have  problems with speech development when compared with children of similar  age Barkley, 2006. In addition to the inattentive aspect of ADHD, children  showed increased difficulty with organization and conversational pragmatics  of their speech Barkley, 2006. Approximately 64 of children who have a  speech and language disorder are likely to be diagnosed with ADHD, and  these children had more difficulty with recall, story-telling and language tasks  and not language impairment Barkley, 2006.  There are three main subtypes to ADHD: predominantly inattentive,  predominantly hyperactiveimpulsive and combined National Institute for  Mental Health, n.d. Data collected on elementary school students found that  inattention is correlated with underachievement Tymms  Merrell, 2011.  Hyperactiveimpulsive  has  a  less  negative  association  with  underachievement, and impulsivity alone has a negative correlation with  reading and mathematics Tymms  Merrell, 2011. Tymms and Merrell  2011 note that impulsivity is inversely related to intelligence, as well as  positively linked to academic failure.  Under general circumstances, the cognitive dysfunction model and the  motivation-based dysfunction model cites that most students can delay their  reaction to something; however, students diagnosed with ADHD struggle with  delaying their reaction to a later time Tymms  Merrill, 2011. The student  tries to divert hisher attention to something else and is then perceived as  having inattention and hyperactive difficulties Tymms  Merrell, 2011.  Students who tend to be predominately impulsive are unable to delay their  reaction and blurt out answers, and this is an obvious indicator that the  student is processing the subject matter and the subject is holding the  students attention Tymms  Merrill, 2011.  When looking at inattention and hyperactivity, Imeraj et al. 2016 found  that school-aged students spent approximately 12 of their classroom time  idle with such activities as transitioning from one assignment to the next or  waiting for instructions. Idle time is a period of high delay, low structure, and  low stimulation Imeraj et al., 2016, p. 78. It has been argued that students  diagnosed with ADHD rush through assignments due to an inability to focus,  effectively increasing their idle time; yet Imeraj et al. 2016 argued that the  transition-idle time is an area of concern for interventions.  

 Chapter 9 

Students diagnosed with ADHD and students with no diagnosis were found  to engage in more sensation-seeking behavior such as hyperactivity,  noisiness, disruptive behaviors and disruption during low stimulation high  idle time that did not provide instruction and were considered to consist of  more self-paced assignmentsactivities; however, students diagnosed with  ADHD had exacerbated symptoms of hyperactivity and disruptive behaviors  than other students Imeraj et al., 2016. Parents and teacher have reported  that inattention is reduced when the student is engaging in high interest  activities, such as watching movies, playing video games, and drawing  Orban, Rapport, Friedman, Eckrich,  Kofler, 2018.   Environmental distractors significantly influence students diagnosed with  ADHD Cassuto, Ben-Simon,  Berger, 2013. Students with ADHD were  negatively impacted by an assortment of environmental factors such as  auditory, visual, and a combination of auditory and visual, while children with  no diagnosis were only affected by the combination type of environmental  distractors Cassuto et al., 2013. In studies, auditory stimuli increased  attention and focus but also increased impulsiveness Uno et al., 2006. On  the other hand, when visual noise was introduced into the session,  commission errors decreased, and omission errors increased, reaction time  was prolonged, impulsiveness improved, the childs ability to suppress  reaction was improved; however, attention and information processing speed  declined Uno et al., 2006. In summary, auditory noise improved inattention  and impulsiveness, while visual noise stimuli can aid with attention and  reduce the number of wrong answers.  Social Impairment  Students diagnosed with ADHD have significant social impairment. Students  are more apt to quarrel with friends, have low self-esteem, and poor  communication skills Wehmeier, Schacht, Barkely, 2010. Students with  significant social impairment are more likely to have a comorbid diagnosis of  ODD or CD, which is present in about 60 percent of students with an ADHD  diagnosis Klimkeit et al., 2006. Barkley 2006 suggests that the social  impairment begins in childhood and occurs because children and  adolescents have problems with sharing, cooperating with their peers, and  taking turns; whereby, interaction tends to be self-centered, intrusive,  commanding, impulsive, and hostile. This social impairment can result in  children diagnosed with ADHD having limited to no close friends by third  grade Wehmeier et al., 2010. Students diagnosed with ADHD are more likely  to be the class clown, disruptive in social settings, express their frustration  and anger, and show less empathy and guilt Wehmeier et al., 2010. 

Other Health Impairments with an Emphasis on ADHD   105 

Due to the aforementioned characteristics, approximately 56 of these  students were rejected not only by their peers but also in a social setting;  therefore, these students gravitate towards other peers with deviant behaviors  such as hitting, stealing, lying, back talking, running away Barkley, 2006;  Hoza et al., 2005. Children diagnosed with ADHD are more likely to be  bullied, beaten up, and assaulted with a weapon by late adolescence and girls  diagnosed with ADHD are more likely to be sexually assaulted Barkley, 2006.  Students diagnosed with ADHD do not have high incidences of sexual  disorders; yet, they are more likely to engage in the practice of noncontraception usage, are more likely to have casual sex with multiple  partners, and riskier sexual behaviors that lead to four times greater sexually  transmitted diseasesinfections and a 37:1 chance of teenage pregnancy  Barkley, 2006.  Bullying has increased over the years and has caused great harm, enough so  that it is now considered a significant public health problem that can have  astronomical shortand long-term psychological effects on individuals  Espelage  Holt, 2013; Young, Michael  Smolinski, 2019. A self-report  survey was provided to children at the age of 8 and showed male victims  exhibited significantly more depressive symptoms by the age of 18 as well as  suicidal ideation and, equally as concerning, frequent victimization by  bullying increased anxiety disorders Brunstein-Klomek et al., 2009.  Direct bullying is described as experiencing physical and verbal aggression  such as kicking, hitting, threatening, name-calling, and insulting, while  indirect bullying is characterized as social isolation to include behaviors such  as ignoring, excluding, and backbiting van der Wal, Wit, and Hirasing 2003.  Many of the issues surrounded by bullying overlap with the characterization  of students diagnosed with ADHD. Behavioral characteristics of bullies are  externalizing behaviors such as defiant, disruptive behaviors; social  competence; academic challenges; and negative attitudes and self-cognitions  Young et al., 2019. Behavioral characteristics of victims include internalizing  behaviors such as depression, anxiety, withdrawal and avoidance; negative  self-related cognitions; and lower social skills Espelage  Holt, 2013; Young et  al., 2019. Bully-victim behavioral characteristics have comorbid internalizing  and externalizing behaviors and negative attitudes about themselves  Espelage  Hold, 2013. Bullies, victims, and bully-victims are linked to  symptoms associated with depression, as well as suicidal thoughtsideation  and behaviors Espelage  Holt, 2013.  Espelage and Holt 2013 argued that assessing for depression and suicidal  ideation along with bullying can be an overwhelming burden on school  officials and should be monitored by all professionals in the childs life to  include coaches, teachers, pediatricians, parents, and community leaders. 

 Chapter 9 

Assessing for bullying should be standard practice for schools and  pediatricians with the use of suicidal ideation assessments that can be  provided to students; however, teachers may need to engage in a more  overview scan Espelage  Holt, 2013. The professionals in the students life,  therefore, need to determine a baseline of the individuals behavior and  mentally note any changes in the behavior that were not prompted such as  missing more classes, attending more, doing homework assignments or lack  thereof, giving things back that were borrowed, more external behaviors,  more internal behaviors, change in weight andor appetite Espelage  Holt,  2013.  Emotional Impairment  Emotional impairment, or internal behaviors, include poor self-regulation of  emotion, excessive emotional expression such as anger and aggression,  reduced empathy, decreased arousal to stimulation, and problems coping  with frustration Barkley, 2006. Emotional impairment not only affects the  student, but negatively impacts the family in ways such as hostility and  aggression towards parent and child and marital issues Barkley, 2006. Due to  an emotional impairment such as low self-esteem, lack of self-confidence,  poor self-perception, and a distorted sense of self, students are at an  increased risk of experiencing anxiety and depression Elia, Ambrosini,  Berrettini, 2008. Due to the sensation of anxiety, these students tend to worry  more about their competence and their quality of performance, which is  expressed through their quickness to panic, constant need of reassurance,  and are socially phobic, shy, and avoid interacting with unknown people Elia  et al., 2008. Students diagnosed with ADHD may experience weeks to  months of unhappiness and are unable to find any pleasure in activities with  a persistent irritable mood APA, 2018. Depressive symptoms include  hypersomnia, hyposomnia, loss of energy, significant change in appetite, and  feelings of worthlessness APA, 2013.  Barkley 2006 notes that executive function EF is the humans capacity to  self-organize and engage in goal-directed actions and self-regulation. The EF  further aids individuals with planning, perception of time, decision making,  inhibition and thinking, and organizing Barkley, 2006. Common and  recognizable components to EF are working memory verbal and non-verbal,  inhibition, generativity fluency, goal-directed inventiveness, and selfregulation of emotions Barkley, 2006. Due to an emotional impairment and  limited EF, ADHD individuals are more likely to be impulsive, have severe  emotional reactions towards events, thus making them less able to moderate  or manipulate or suppress emotional reactions Barkley, 2006. 

Other Health Impairments with an Emphasis on ADHD   107 

ADHD and Daily Life Struggles  Parents and teachers have expressed a students inattention as Doesnt seem  to listen, daydreams, fails to finish assigned tasks, often loses things, cant  concentrate, easily distracted, cant work independently of supervision,  requires more redirection, shifts from one uncompleted activity to another,  confused or seems to be in a fog Barkley, 2006, p. 77. Both parents and  teachers have noticed that the students behaviors tend to fluctuate  throughout the day; whereby, certain symptoms such as becoming more  demanding, noisy, disorganized, disruptive, or impulsive that are associated  with ADHD are more prevalent than externalized behaviors Barkley, 2006.  Parents and teachers need to observe the children to determine what  behaviors are more prominent during which periods of the day Usami, 2016.  Usami 2016 noted that parents have expressed their distress and struggles  with their children; for example 

Oftentimes their children will get up early in the morning and wash  their face, groom themselves, and get dressed with little to no effort  or prompts, then the student will start to act inappropriately at  breakfast, resulting in quarrels with the parents andor siblings.  

While at school, some of the students would behave well while  others did not.  

Due to their social impairment, individuals diagnosed with ADHD  had few friends that accepted them.  

Many times, teachers would correct or redirect students for their  disruptive behavior and then students would not discuss the events  that unfolded at school.  

The student would struggle with his or her homework at home.  

Once the parents return home, the student with ADHD would not  enjoy any family involvementfamily time, continue to quarrel with  their parents andor siblings, would not talk with an inside voice  and would be disruptive during dinnertime.  

After dinnertime, most students with ADHD would play, study, play  sports, or engage in private lessons. When it gets closer to bedtime,  the individual with ADHD will become argumentative, hostile, and  uncooperative i.e., refusing to brush his or her teeth, changing into  pajamas and preparing for the next day, while older students stayed  out passed curfew. 

 Chapter 9 

Other parents have reported that they are uncomfortable with taking  their childrenteen diagnosed with ADHD out in public due to their  disruptive and argumentative behavior.  Due to the struggle of being a parent with a child diagnosed with ADHD,  parents have reported increased stress due to the external behaviors such as  missing work and losing money due to being called by the school for their  students behavior and they are emotionally frustrated due to the  argumentative and hostile interactions with the student Usami, 2016.  Parents also reported that their children diagnosed with a comorbid  disorder such as ODD experienced more severe behavior outbursts in the  evening Usami, 2016. Inattention and ODD symptoms in girls were a greater  family burden than that of boys Usami, 2016. ODD symptoms include losing  temper frequently, easily annoyed, expresses anger and resentment,  argumentative with authority figures, refuses to comply with instructions by  authority figures, deliberately annoys others, blames others for their mistakes,  and tends to be vindictive and spiteful APA, 2013.  Conduct disorder CD is characterized by aggression towards people and  animals such as bulliesintimidatesthreatens others, initiates physical fights,  uses weapons, physically cruel to people and animals, steals from victims,  forces sexual activity on others, deliberately engages in destruction of  property like fire setting, burglarizes homes, lies, steals, stays out past curfew  prior to age of 13, runs away from home overnight, and truancy in school  prior to age of 13 APA, 2013.  Pelham, Gnagy, and Greiner 2016 noted that ADHD is considered the most  common diagnosis in mental health clinics; and ADHD has received the most  referrals by primary care physicians. ADHD is considered the most common  diagnosis in special education due to inattention and impulsivity causing  learning impairment; as well as the most common symptoms associated with  behavioral problems in regular classrooms; therefore, the treatment for  ADHD is relatively expensive Pelham et al., 2016.   A significant difficulty for parents is trying to control the symptoms of their  children with ADHD due to their lack of knowledge about the disability.  Ideally, ADHD can be treated solely by a clinician; however, the student will  lack in significant areas of emotion regulation, anger and aggression Pelham  et al., 2016. One of the most effective methods for treating ADHD is for  parents and children to attend a summer treatment program Pelham et al.,  2016. The program is ideal for ages 7-12 years old, where coaching, role-play  and practice, modeling, and feedbackreinforcement are utilized to provide  training in anger management, coping with anger, bullying, peer mediation,  social skills Pelham et al., 2016. Parents should attend a simultaneous group 

Other Health Impairments with an Emphasis on ADHD   109 

where they learn about the disability and learn how to implement behavior  modification interventions with their child to improve externalized behaviors  at home Waxmonsky et al., 2013.  There is currently no data to determine how much the family endures due  to lost wages for treating their children for ADHD, yet the annual cost for  children with ADHD in an education setting is approximately 13.6 billion  and an estimated societal annual cost for the treatment of ADHD was  approximately 52. 4 billion annually in 2007 Pelham, Foster  Robb, 2007.  Jensen et al., 2005 noted that insured children with ADHD and their family  members spend approximately 2,461 annually versus families without  someone having an ADHD diagnosis spend approximately 1,220 annually.  According to Pelham et al., 2016 the treatment for ADHD is considered to be  the fourth highest disorder to treat.  Cognitive Impairment  Barkley 2006 suggested that cognitive impairment in students diagnosed  with ADHD was represented through intellectual development: gifted, low  intelligence, have mild intellectual retardation, or learn more slowly. Due to  the disruptive behaviors and behavioral inhibitions and impaired EF, there is  a negative relationship between ADHD and IQ, which involves the EF that  consist of working memory, internalization of speech, the development of  verbal thought and is lacking in children diagnosed with ADHD Barkley,  2006.  Orban et al. 2018 postulate that children with ADHD struggle in school  and many other aspects of their life due to the areas of the brain that are  affected such as working memory. The brain does not process material in the  same way that non-ADHD students do. Essentially, students diagnosed with  ADHD may prefer certain subject areas art and music over other areas  math due to the way teacher instruction is provided Orban et al., 2018.  Students diagnosed with ADHD need constant reassurance from their  teachers while math tends to be taught and then self-pace methods are  utilized Orban et al., 2018.  The cognitive impairment may be significant in the classroom; however,  students may be able to identify their own feelings about their behaviors  using self-monitoring techniques Klimkeit et al., 2006. Zucker, Morris,  Ingram, Morris, and Bakeman 2002 reported that many researchers argue  that due to the cognitive impairment and lack of self-perception, students will  respond to questions about their thoughts, emotions, and behaviors in an  impulsive manner and spur-of-the-moment feelings; however, Klimkeit et al.,  2006 found that students were aware of their emotions and their behaviors  and suffered from anxiety because they do not fully understand how to 

 Chapter 9 

behave in social settings. Parents and teachers tend to make their reports on  the behaviors that are distressing to them external behaviors and do not  consider the students point of view internal perception of behaviors  Klimkeit et al., 2006. Students diagnosed with ADHD reported that they had  more difficulty with concentration, they were more behaviorally disturbed,  and experienced more social problems when compared to students that were  not diagnosed with ADHD; yet, students diagnosed with ADHD did not report  less interest in school than the non-ADHD students Klimkeit et al., 2006.  School Life  In elementary school, the core focus for students is the standardized  achievement test, in middle school the focus is on completing homework  assignments, as well as returning homework assignments, while in high  school the focus is on GPA as a means to gauge academic success and college  admittance Kent et al., 2011. Students ages 14-18 diagnosed with  childhood ADHD had an average GPA of 2.75 compared to the non-ADHD  peer whose average GPA was 3.0 Kent et al., 2011. The correlation between  ADHD and grades is limited as accounting for the core course difficulty for  students diagnosed with ADHD versus non-ADHD has yet to be established  Kent et al., 2011. Students diagnosed with ADHD in childhood were also  more likely to repeat a grade than their peers and placed in remedial or basic  level courses Kent et al., 2011.  Attendance is a significant factor for students diagnosed with ADHD. Kent et  al. 2011 noted that students diagnosed with ADHD tend to have either more  absenteeism or tardiness due to lack of time management. On average,  students diagnosed with ADHD had a 2.4 dayyear difference in absences  than non-ADHD students, while teachers reported tardiness at a rate of 4.6  for elementary school, 12.2 for middle school, and 21.7 for high school  students Kent et al., 2011. Students poor academic standing and increased  tardinessabsenteeism may correlate with the high drop-out rate of high  school students diagnosed with ADHD Able et al., 2007. On average,  approximately 9 of students diagnosed with ADHD graduate from high  school Able et al., 2007.  Research has shown several strategies for increasing outcomes for students  diagnosed with ADHD, including self-monitoring strategies, combination  therapy for executive functioning and sensory integration, and self-regulation  strategy development Alsalamah, 2017; Barnard-Brak, Sulak,  Fearon, 2011;  Bell, 2011; Shimizu, Bueno,  Miranda, 2014; Young, Noonan, BonannoSotiropoulos, 2018. 

Other Health Impairments with an Emphasis on ADHD   111 

Strategies for Increasing Positive Outcomes  Self-Monitoring Strategy  Self-monitoring strategy is a highly effective technique used to increase  student achievement in many content areas as students attempt to use skills  such as choice making, decision making, self-advocacy, goal setting, selfefficacy, problem solving, self-knowledge, and self-managementregulation  as well as to increase appropriate behavior and social interactions  Alsalamah, 2017; Wehmeyer, Palmer, Agran, Mithaug,  Martin, 2000. This  strategy requires that students think about and record their own behaviors in  relation to a previously specified criteria Alsalaham, 2017; Bell, 2011; Bruhn,  McDaniel, Kreigh, 2015. There have been several studies that indicated the  effectiveness of self-monitoring strategies within reading and math  performance, as well as influenced positive behavior specifically for students  with ADHD Alsalaham, 2017. Most studies revealed positive outcomes in  academic performance and appropriate behavior for these students  Alsalaham, 2017; Bell, 2011; Bruhn et al., 2015.  Combination Therapy Executive Function and Sensory Integration  According to Salami et al. 2017, development of executive functioning skills  such as organization and problem-solving have been shown to increase  academic performance for students diagnosed with ADHD, as well as develop  and improve social abilities. Sensory integration is beneficial for the  prevention of excessive movement and improved balance for this population  of students as well, and teaching sensory integration interventions has been  reported to improve anger management Salami et al., 2017.  Self-Regulation Strategy Development Approach  Self-regulation strategy development SRSD is an evidence-based approach  used to assist in developing both the writing skills and motivation of students  with writing difficulties Young, Noonan,  Bonanno-Sotiropoulos, 2018.  Meta-analyses have proven that SRSD has the strongest impact of any  strategies instruction approach in writing and is among the strongest  currently researched interventions for writing Harris  Graham, 2013, p. 74.  SRSD has also been found to be very effective for students with attention  deficit hyperactivity disorder ADHD. Students with ADHD, similar to  students with LD, experience deficits with executive functioning and working  memory Young, Bonanno-Sotiropoulos  Smolinski, 2018. SRSD combines  both explicit instruction, along with opportunities for supported independent  practice. Explicit instruction in goal setting, self-monitoring, self-instruction, 

 Chapter 9 

and self-reinforcement are prevalent in the SRSD approach Ennis, Jolivette,  Terry, Frederick,  Alberto, 2015.  There are six stages for implementation of the self-regulation strategy  development approach Ennis et al., 2015. These stages include building  background knowledge, teacher discussion of the strategies involved, teacher  modeling of the strategies, student memorization of the strategies, teacher  support during the writing process and use of the strategies, and independent  practice Ennis, et al., 2015; De La Paz  Sherman, 2013; Johnson, Hancock,  Carter,  Pool, 2012; Young, Bonanno-Sotiropoulos,  Smolinski, 2018.  When building background knowledge, teachers need to understand the  unique writing abilities and provide appropriate foundational knowledge as  needed. Once background knowledge has been discussed, the teacher must  discuss the purpose of the writing strategies that will be taught Harris   Graham, 2013. Discussions should begin with the identification of what it is  that good writers do, should occur between teacher and students, as well as  peer-to-peer, and should be focused around the strategies identified as good  writing Young, Noonan, Bonanno-Sotiropoulos, 2018.   Discussions should also incorporate visuals such as charts or graphic  organizers in order to support strategy development and memory throughout  the process Young, Noonan, Bonanno-Sotiropoulos, 2018. After discussions  have occurred, the teacher should model how to utilize the specific strategy.  Modeling the writing process out loud, similar to a read aloudthink aloud,  allows the students to comprehend the thought process behind the strategy  Harris  Graham, 2013; Young, Noonan, Bonanno-Sotiropoulos, 2018. The  next period, memorization, involves student practice using the strategy or  strategies learned.   Practice should be supported through partner, group, and individual  opportunities, as well as utilization of mnemonic devices. Once students have  memorized the strategies, teachers should provide scaffolded support  throughout the writing process Harris  Graham, 2013. Guided support  includes such practices as collaborative writing, the use of prompting, as well  as self-monitoring strategies. Finally, independent practice is achieved when  students can independently use the strategies, including self-monitoring and  goal setting. Young, Bonanno-Sotiropoulos,  Smolinski, 2018.  Final Thoughts  ADHD affects nearly every aspect of an individuals life to include the  individuals self-esteem, self-confidence, increases anxiety and depression  internal  behaviors,  increases  inattention,  hyperactivity,  anger  and  aggression, promotes social isolationimpairment, emotional impairment, 

Other Health Impairments with an Emphasis on ADHD   113 

poor academics, greater risk of dropping out of school, and risky sexual  behavior external behaviors Barkley, 2006; Hoza et al., 2005; Wehmeier et  al., 2010. The behaviors cause conflict within the family, affect employment  opportunities and relationships. Individuals diagnosed with ADHD tend to  seek friendship with individuals with deviant behaviors Usami, 2016. The  symptoms that characterize ADHD throughout early education endeavors  persist throughout college and adulthood, despite believing that ADHD  would resolve during adolescence Barkley, 2006; Thomas et al., 2015.  Students diagnosed with ADHD have significant social and emotional  impairment Barkley, 2006. Social impairment includes lack of social  supportfriends, social isolation, being bullied or being the bully, hostile and  aggressive towards others. Emotional impairment can include a mood  disorder MDD, BP, dysregulation of emotions, feelings of worthlessness, low  self-esteem, and lack of self-confidence to name a few Barkley, 2006. Many  times, a combination of social impairment, emotional impairment, and a  mood disorder could be enough for the student to exhibit suicidal ideation  Espelage  Holt, 2013.  Curtis 2014 noted that parents who implemented structure throughout the  childs life masked symptoms associated with ADHD and other psychiatric  disorders; thus, causing impairment in late adolescence and young  adulthood. Parents who experienced symptoms associated with ADHD were  encouraged to attend STP to help learn about the disability, as well as learn  how to enforce the change in behavior to reduce the symptoms associated  with ADHD and other psychiatric disorderscomorbid disorders. The annual  cost of treatment for ADHD is nearly double for households when compared  to other households without an ADHD diagnosis.   Several strategies for increasing outcomes for students diagnosed with  ADHD included self-monitoring strategies, combination therapy for executive  functioning  and  sensory  integration,  and  self-regulation  strategy  development Alsalamah, 2017; Young, Noonan, Bonanno-Sotiropoulos,  2018. Treating students for ADHD as early as possible is ideal to build time  management skills, become goal-directed, learn to control their emotions and  behaviors, improve focus and inattention, and find appropriate outlets for  their hyperactivity. The self-monitoring strategy helps improve academic  achievements, decision making, and goal setting Wehmeyer et al., 2000.   Combination therapy improves the students EF to help the student become  a more effective organizer and problem-solver Alsalamah, 2017. The selfregulation strategy utilizes six stages of implementation to enhance ones  working memory Barnard-Brak, Sulak,  Fearon, 2011; Shimizu, Bueno,   Miranda, 2014. ADHD has many moving parts; therefore, it is imperative for 

 Chapter 9 

educators to work with the parents and the students to maximize the  treatment interventions for students with ADHD.  Without appropriate treatment, individuals diagnosed with ADHD go on to  report higher rates of unemployment due to being terminated from their job  because of procrastination, lack of time management, lack of motivation,  mood liability, low self-esteem and increased anxiety Able et al., 2007.  Individuals diagnosed with ADHD report 33.5 receiving some college with  no degree, 26.1 hold a college degree and 29.3 obtained a post-secondary  degree. When compared to their counterpart of non-ADHD individuals 32.8  reported some college, 23.8 reported having a college degree, and 22.7  obtained a post-secondary degree Able et al., 2007.  Points to Remember 

Other health impairment disabilities include, but are not limited to,  chronic or acute health problems such as asthma, attention deficit  disorder or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, diabetes, epilepsy, a  heart condition, hemophilia, lead poisoning, leukemia, nephritis,  rheumatic fever, and sickle-cell anemia. 

Attention-deficithyperactivity disorder ADHD is a hereditary  neurological development that is characterized by severe and  persistent hyperactivity, impulsiveness, and inattention. 

Approximately 6.1 million school-aged children are diagnosed with  ADHD. 
out of 3 students that are diagnosed with ADHD have a comorbid  disorder i.e., behavioral, mental, or emotional. 

ADHD affects the family; causes social, emotional, and cognitive  impairment; can lead to a comorbid diagnosis, cause other health  factors, and suicidal ideation, along with risky sexual behavior, traffic  violations, criminal activity, unemployment and relationship issues. 

Families that have a member who carry an ADHD diagnosis, have  medical expenses that are doubled annually as compared to those  with a non-ADHD family member. 

Effective treatment in the school setting consists of self-monitoring  strategies, combined therapy EF and sensory integration, and selfregulatory strategy development. 

Other Health Impairments with an Emphasis on ADHD   115 

References  Able, S. L., Johnston, J. A., Adler, L. A.,  Windle, R. W. 2007. Functional and  psychosocial impairment in adults with undiagnosed adhd. Psychological  Medicine, 37, 97-107. DOI: 10.1017S0033291706008713  Alsalamah, A. 2017. Use of self-monitoring strategy among students with  attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: A systematic review. Journal of  Education and Practice, 814, 118-125. Retrieved from  https:files.eric.ed.govfulltextEJ1143820.pdf  American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic and statistical manual of  mental disorders 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.  Barkley, R.A. 2006. Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: a handbook for  diagnosis and treatment 3rd ed. New York, NY: The Guilford Press  Barnard-Brak, L., Sulak, T.,  Fearon, D. 2011. Coexisting disorders and  academic achievement among children with ADHD. Journal of Attention  Disorders, 156, 506-515. DOI: 10.11771087054710369667  Bell, A. 2011. Critical review of ADHD diagnostic criteria: What to address in  the DSM-V. Journal of Attention Disorders, 151, 3-10.  DOI:10.11771087054710365982  Birchwood, J.  Daley, D. 2012. Brief report: the impact of attention deficit  hyperactivity disorder adhd symptoms on academic performance in  adolescent community sample. Journal of Adolescence, 351, 225-231. DOI:  10.1016.j.adolescence.2010.08.011  Bruhn, A., McDaniel, S.,  Kreigh, C. 2015. Self-monitoring interventions for  students with behavior problems: a systematic review of current research.  Behavioral Disorders, 402, 102-121. DOI: 10.17988BD-13-45.1  Brunstein-Komek, A., Sourander, A., Niemel, S., Kumpulainen, K. Piha, J.,  Tamminen, T.,   Gould., M. S. 2009. Childhood bullying behaviors as a  risk for suicide attempts and completed suicides: a population-based birth  cohort study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent  Psychiatry, 483, 254-261. DOI: 10.1097CHI.0b013e318196b91f  Cassuto, H., Ben-Simon, A.,  Berger, I. 2013. Using environmental  distractors in the diagnosis of ADHD. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,  7805, 1-10. DOI: 10.3389fnhum.2013.00805  Center for Parent Information  Resources. 2015. Other health impairment.  Retrieved from    https:www.parentcenterhub.orgohi  Center for Parent Information and Resources. 2017. Categories of Disability  under IDEA. Retrieved from https:www.parentcenterhub.orgcategories  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2018. Attentiondeficithyperactivity disorder ADHD. Retrieved from  https:www.cdc.govncbdddadhddata.html  Curtis, D. F. 2014. Structured dyadic behavioral therapy processes for adhd  intervention. Psychotherapy, 511, 110-116. DOI: 10.1037a033984  De La Paz, S.,  Sherman, C.K. 2013. Revising strategy instruction in  inclusive setting: effects for English learners and novice writers. Learning  Disabilities Research  Practice, 283, 129-141. DOI: 10.1111ldrp.12011 

 Chapter 9 

Elia, J., Ambrosini, P.,  Berrettini, W. 2008. ADHD characteristics: I.  Concurrent co-morbidity patterns in children  adolescents. Child and  Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health, 215, 1-9. DOI: 10.118617532000-2-15  Ennis, R.P., Jolivette, K., Terry, N.P., Fredrick, L.D.,  Alberto, P.A. 2015.  Classwide teacher implementation of self-regulated strategy development  for writing with students with EBD in a residential facility. Journal of  Behavioral Education, 241, 88-111. DOI: 10.1007s10864-014-9207-7  Espelage, D. L.  Holt, M. K. 2013. Suicidal ideation and school bullying  experiences after controlling for depression and delinquency. Journal of  Adolescent Health, 53, 527-531. DOI: 10.1016j.jadohealth.2012.09.017  Harris, K.R.,  Graham, S. 2013. An adjective is a word hanging down from a  noun: learning to write and students with learning disabilities. Annals of  Dyslexia, 631, 65-79. DOI: 10.1007s11881-011-0057-x  Hoza, B., Mrug, S., Gerdes, A.C., Hinshaw, S.P., Bukowski, W.M.,   Arnold,  L.E. 2005. What aspects of peer relationships are impaired in children with  attention-deficithyperactivity disorder? Journal of Counseling and Clinical  Psychology, 733, 411-423. DOI: 10.370022-006X.73.3.411  Imeraj, L., Antrop, I., Roeyers, H., Deboutte, D., Deschepper, E., Bal, S.,   Sonuga-Barke, E. 2016. The impact of idle time in the classroom:  differential effects on children with ADHD. Journal of Attention Disorders, 20  1, 71-81. DOI: 10.11771087054713478464  Jensen, P. S., Garcia, J. A., Glied, S., Crowe, M., Foster, M., Schlander, M.,    Wells, K. 2005. Cost-effectiveness of adhd treatments: finding from the  multimodel treatment study of children with adhd. American Journal of  Psychiatry, 162, 1628-1636.   DOI: 10.1176appi.ajp.162.9.1628  Johnson, E.S., Hancock, C., Carter, D.R.,  Pool, J.L. 2012. Self-regulated  strategy development as tier 2 writing intervention. Intervention in School  and Clinic, 484, 218-222. DOI: 10.11771053451212462880  Kent, K.M., Pelham, Jr. W.E., Molina, B.S.G., Sibley, M.H., Waschbusch, D.A.,  Yu, J.,   Karch, K.M. 2011. The academic experience of male high school  students with ADHD. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 393, 451-462.  DOI: 10.1007s10802-010-9472-4.  Klimkeit, E., Graham, C., Lee, P., Morling, M., Russo, D., Tongue, B. 2006.  Children should be seen and heard: self-report of feelings and behaviors in  primary-school-aged children with ADHD. Journal of Attention  Disorders,102, 181-191. DOI: 10.11771087054706289926  National Center for Educational Statistics. 2018. Children and youth with  disabilities. Retrieved from  https:nces.ed.govprogramscoeindicatorcgg.asp  National Dissemination Center for Children with Disabilities NICHCY.  2012. Other health impairments. Disability factsheet 15. U.S. Office of  Special Education Programs. Retrieved from  https:files.eric.ed.govfulltextED572701.pdf  National Institute of Mental Health. n.d. Attention deficit hyperactivity  disorder. Retrieved from 

Other Health Impairments with an Emphasis on ADHD   117 

https:www.nimh.nih.govhealthtopicsattention-deficit-hyperactivitydisorder-adhdindex.shtml  National Institute of Mental Health. 2017. Disruptive mood dysregulation  disorder. Retrieved from  https:www.nimh.nih.govhealthtopicsdisruptive-mood-dysregulationdisorder-dmdddisruptive-mood-dysregulation-disorder.shtml  Orban, S.A., Rapport, M.D., Friedman, L.M., Eckrich, S.J.,  Kofler, M.J. 2018.  Inattentive behavior in boys with ADHD during classroom instruction: the  mediating role of working memory process. Journal of Abnormal Child  Psychology, 464, 713-727. DOI: 10.1007s10802-017-0338-x  Pelham, W.E., Foster, E.M.,  Robb, J.A. 2007. The economic impact of  attention deficithyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents.  Ambulatory Pediatrics, 71, 121-131. DOI: 10.1016j.ambp2006.08.002  Pelham, W. E., Gnagy, E. M.,  Greiner, A. R. 2016. Summer treatment  program for children with adhd PowerPoint slides. Retrieved from  https:ccf.fiu.eduassetspdfspelham-stp-overview-handout.pdf  Salami, F., Ashayeri, H., Estaki, M., Farzad, V.,  Entezar, R. 2017. Studying  the effects of combination therapy based on the executive function and  sensory integration child-centered on the symptoms of attention deficit  hyperactivity disorder ADHD. International Education Studies, 104. 7077. DOI: 10.5539ies.v10n4p70  Shimizu, V., Bueno, O.,  Miranda, M. 2014. Sensory processing abilities of  children with ADHD. Brazilian Journal of Physical Therapy, 184. 343-352.  DOI: 10.1590bjpt-rbf.2014.0043  Thomas, M., Rostain, A., Corso, R., Babcock, T.,  Madhoo, M. 2015. ADHD  in the college setting: current perceptions and future vision. Journal of  Attention Disorders, 198, 643-654. DOI: 10.11771087054714527789  Tymms, P.  Merrell, C. 2011. ADHD and academic attainment: Is there an  advantage in impulsivity? Learning and Individual Differences, 216, 753758. DOI: 10.1016j.lindif.2011.07.014  Uno, M., Abe, J., Sawai, C., Sakaue, Y., Nishitani, A., Yasuda, Y.,   Takeuchi,  Y. 2006. Effects of additional auditory and visual stimuli on continuous  performance test noise-generated CPT in ADHD children  usefulness of  noise-generated CPT. Brain  Development, 283, 162-169. DOI:  10.1016j.braindev.2005.06.007  Usami, M. 2016. Functional consequences of attention-deficit hyperactivity  disorder on children and their families. Psychiatric and Clinical  Neuroscience, 708, 303-317. DOI: 10.1111pcn.12393  van der Wal, M. F., de Wit, C. A. M.,  Hirasing, R. A. 2003. Psychosocial  health among youth victims and offenders of direct and indirect bullying.  Pediatrics, 1116 Pt 1, 1312-1318. DOI: 10.1097.00004703-200402000-00020  Waxmonsky, J. G., Wymbs, F. A., Pariseau, M. E., Belin, P. J., Waschbusch, D. A.,  Babocsai, L.,   Pelham, W. E. 2013. A novel group therapy for children  with adhd and severe mood dysregulation. Journal of Attention Disorder,  176, 527-541. DOI: 10.11771087054711433423  Wehmeier, P.M., Schacht, A., Barkely, R.A. 2010. Social and emotional  impairment in children and adolescents with ADHD and the impact on 

 Chapter 9 

quality of life. Journal of Adolescent Health, 463, 209-217. DOI:  10.1016j.jadohealth.2009.09.009  Wehmeyer, M.L., Palmer, S.B., Agran, M., Mithaug, D.E., Martin, J.E. 2000.  Promoting casual agency the self-determined learning model of instruction.  Exceptional Children, 664, 439-453. DOI: 10.1177001440290006600401  Wolraich, M.L., Wibbelsman, C.J., Brown, T.E., Evans, S.W., Gotlieb, E.M.,  Knight, J.R.,   Wilens, T. 2005. Attention-deficithyperactivity disorder  among adolescents: a review of the diagnosis, treatment, and clinical  implications. Pediatrics, 115, 1734-1746. DOI: 10.1542peds.2004-1959  Young, N.D., Bonnano-Sotiropoulos, K., Smolinski, J.A. 2018. Making the  grade: Promoting positive outcomes for students with learning disabilities.  Lanham, MD: Rowman  Littlefield Publishers.  Young, N.D., Michael, C.N.,  Smolinski, J.A. 2019. Securing the Schoolyard:  Protocols that Promote Safety and Positive Student Behaviors. Lanham, MD:  Roman  Littlefield.  Young, N.D., Noonan, B.T.  Bonanno-Sotiropoulos, K. 2018. Wrestling with  writing: Instructional strategies for struggling students. Lanham, MD:  Rowman  Littlefield Publishers.  Zucker, M., Morris, M.K., Ingram, S.M., Morris, R.D., Bakeman, R. 2002.  Concordance of selfand informant ratings of adults current and childhood  attention-deficithyperactivity disorder symptoms. Psychological  Assessment, 144, 379-389. DOI: 10.10371040-3590.14.4.379 

Chapter 10 

Deaf and Hard of Hearing  Michelle A. Gremp, PhD,  Eastern Kentucky University  Language connects us to the world and to other people and provides the  foundation upon which our communication and interactions with others are  built. But what is language and how is it learned? In its strictest sense,  language is a complex and dynamic system of conventional symbols that is  used in various modes for thought and communication American SpeechLanguage-Hearing Association, n.d.a. Yet for all its complexities, the ability to  understand and use language develops effortlessly for typically developing  children, and they arrive at school prepared to learn.  Children who are deaf or hard of hearing DHH and born to deaf parents  who are fluent users of American Sign Language are exposed to a full end  complete language in the same way as hearing children; however about 90   95 of children who are DHH are born to parents with typical hearing and  therefore do not enjoy this same shared-language advantage Mitchell   Karchmer, 2004. Hearing parents are typically not fluent users of sign  language, and a hearing loss deprives a child who is DHH from opportunities  to overhear conversations. As a result, children who are DHH do not exhibit  incidental language learning in the way that children with typical hearing do  Mitchell  Karchmer, 2004.  Understanding the cascading effects of this period of language deprivation  is essential for identifying and implementing evidence-based educational  interventions for children who are DHH. Before discussing these  interventions, however, an overview of key concepts is necessary as well as  introducing several topics that will assist teachers in communicating with the  variety of professionals who provide services to students who are DHH and in  the development of effective educational plans, teaching strategies, and  classroom accommodations to meet the needs of individual students who are  DHH. 

 Chapter 10 

Key Concepts of Deafness  Sound Measurement  Sound is made up of 2 physical properties, frequency and intensity, that are  perceived  physiologically  as  pitch  and  loudness,  respectively. The  combination of frequency and intensity contribute to the overall audibility of  a particular sound and are displayed visually on an audiogram Centers for  Disease Control and Prevention, 2018. Frequency is the number of sound  wave cycles that occur in a unit of time, usually a second; it is measured in  Hertz Hz and is represented on the x or horizontal axis of the audiogram  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018. The human ear can  perceive sounds with frequencies that range from the very low frequency of 20  Hz to the very high frequency of 20,000 Hz; however, the frequencies between  250 and 6,000 Hz represent those necessary for the production and reception  of speech. One way to think of the frequency range is to imagine a piano  keyboard Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018.  Lower frequency or lower pitch sounds can be heard at the far left-hand side  of the keyboard; as one makes their way toward the right-hand side of the  keyboard frequencies increase and are perceived as having a higher pitch. The  intensity of sound is a measure of the force of a sound waves vibration; it is  perceived as loudness and measured in decibels dB Centers for Disease  Control and Prevention, 2018. The dB system is based on a logarithmic rather  than linear scale which means that changes or differences in decibel levels  cannot be thought of in the same way as inches on a ruler. Inches are equally  spaced and begin at a zero point which represents no distance.   The decibel scale, however, has a relative zero point and each increase in  units is larger than the one before. The relative zero means that 0 dB  represents the softest sound that can be heard by most people at a particular  frequency Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018. People can  actually have a threshold of -5 or -10 dB which does not mean that there is a  negative sound level, rather that they are able to detect a particular sound at  a level that is 5 or 10 dB softer than most people. The logarithmic scale means  that for every increase of 3dB the acoustic power or sound intensity of a  sound is doubled Noise Help, n.d.  Anatomy and Physiology of the Ear  The ear is made up of three main sections to include the outer ear, the middle  ear, and the inner ear. Understanding the anatomy and physiology of each  section will provide an overview of the auditory pathway that transmits sound 

Deaf and Hard of Hearing   121 

from the environment to the brain where it is interpreted into meaningful  information, ranging from environmental sounds to spoken language.  Sound waves moving through the air arrive at the outer ear, or pinna, that  acts as a funnel of sorts to collect sound and then sends it down the external  auditory canal to the eardrum or tympanic membrane National Institute on  Deafness and Other Communication Disorders NIDCD, 2018a. The  tympanic membrane moves back and forth in reaction to the impact of the  sound wave and marks the boundary between the outer and middle ear. Its  rate and degree of vibration are determined by the specific frequency and  intensity characteristics of the sound wave NIDCD, 2018a.   The middle ear is an air-filled space that contains three very small bones  ossicles joined together in a chainlike fashion NIDCD, 2018a. The first  bone in the chain is the malleus which is fixed at one end to the interior side  of tympanic membrane, while the other end of the malleus attaches to the  incus which in turn attaches to the stapes, a stirrup-shaped bone whose base  rests on the opening to the inner ear knows as the oval window NIDCD,  2018a. The ossicles are set in motion in response to the vibration of the  tympanic membrane and result in a change of acoustic energy to mechanical  energy as the sound wave, with its unique frequency and intensity  characteristics still intact, makes its way to the inner ear.   The oval window, another membranous surface, moves back and forth in  response to movement of the stapes and provides the opening into the  cochlea or inner ear. The cochlea is a spiral-shaped shell divided into 3 fluidfilled chambers. Within the cochlea lies the Organ of Corti that contains  thousands of hair cells 12,000 to 15,000 outer hair cells and 3,000 inner hair  cells arranged in a tonotopic or frequency-specific manner NIDCD, 2018a.  As the sound wave travels through the fluids of the cochlear, it continues to  represent frequency and intensity and stimulates specific hair cells. These  hair cells send an electrical signal to the eighth cranial or vestibular-cochlear  nerve which carries the signal to the auditory cortices in each hemisphere of  the brain and ultimately to the brain for interpretation NIDCD, 2018a.  Degrees and Types of Hearing Loss  The properties of frequency and intensity are intrinsically tied to the  diagnosis of hearing loss and in determining and understanding the degree  and type of loss a person experiences. A person with typical hearing is able to  detect sounds with intensities ranging from -10 to 25 dB at the frequencies  important for the perception and production of speech; however, a  malfunction of any part of the auditory pathway described above can cause  the sound wave to be disrupted or distorted, resulting in a hearing loss. The 

 Chapter 10 

intensity at which a sound is audible to a person is referred to as the  threshold, and it determines a persons degree of hearing loss NIDCD,  2018a.  Hearing loss is categorized into degrees ranging from minimal with  thresholds of 16-25 dB, to mild 26-40 dB, moderate 41-55 dB, moderately  severe 56-70, severe 71-90 dB, and profound 91 dB or greater Heward,  Alber-Morgan,  Konrad, 2018. As the degree of hearing loss increases, the  ability to understand spoken language decreases. A hearing loss from mild up  through the moderate or moderately severe range affords some access to  spoken language when it is loud enough and in close proximity to the listener,  but severe and profound losses have a much greater impact on speech and  language development Lim  Goldberg, n.d. The key to improved access to  sound is proper selection and fitting of an appropriate assistive listening  device.   When a hearing loss is determined, audiologists conduct additional testing  in order to determine the type of hearing loss. Testing performed through use  of headphones or earphones is referred to as air-conduction audiometry  because sound is delivered through the air, passing through the outer and  middle to the inner ear and ultimately to the brain Lim  Goldberg, n.d. In  bone-conduction audiometry, however, the outer and middle ear pathways  are bypassed as sound is delivered by a small oscillating vibrator directly to  the inner ear.   When thresholds from bone conduction and air conduction testing are the  same, a problem with the inner ear is indicated. This type of hearing loss is  referred to as sensorineural because the problem involves the sense organ of  hearing andor the auditory nerve sending sound waves to the brain for  processing American Speech-Language-Hearing Association ASHA, n.d.b.  With a sensorineural hearing loss, the clarity of a sound signal is impacted  due to damage of the hair cells which serve as sensory receptors ASHA,  n.d.b. If, however, bone conduction thresholds are better than air conduction  thresholds i.e., smaller in number which indicates better hearing by at least  10 dB, then the type of hearing loss is conductive ASHA, n.d.b. In this case,  the problem results from the outer andor middle ear failing to accurately  transmit the sound wave to the inner ear. With a conductive hearing loss,  sounds just need to be made louder so that the fluids of the cochlea are set  into motion. Proper function of the inner ear means that the clarity of the  sound signal remains intact.   In some cases, there is a problem with both the outer andor middle ear as  well as the inner ear. Such an occurrence results in a mixed hearing loss;  problems in both conducting the sound from the air through the outer and 

Deaf and Hard of Hearing   123 

middle ear as well as identifying frequency and intensity information within  the inner ear mean that both loudness and clarity of a sound signal are  impacted ASHA, n.d.b.  The Audiogram and Assistive Listening Devices  Results from audiologic testing are graphed on an audiogram. Frequency is  displayed from low to high levels 125 to 8,000 Hz along the x axis, and  intensity is displayed from low to high levels -10 to 120 dB along the y axis  Jerger, 2013. Typically, both pure-tone thresholds and speech recognition  scores are reported on an audiogram in an attempt to estimate the listeners  ability to understand speech. The information gathered during an audiologic  exam helps an audiologist, in conjunction with parents, to make amplification  decisions. An in-depth explanation of the various types of assistive listening  devices is not possible here; however, a brief description is necessary to  highlight significant differences in the types of devices teachers commonly  encounter in the classroom.  Hearing aids are the most well-known device. A hearing aid functions by  collecting sound through a microphone, performing some conversions of that  sound, and eventually sending an amplified signal to the ear Fitzpatrick et  al., 2012. This tends to work well when merely making a sound louder  improves understanding of spoken language; however, for children with  severe or profound sensorineural hearing loss, increased loudness alone does  not provide much benefit.   In some cases, a cochlear implant is sometimes determined to be a better  choice. The implant consists of both an internal, surgically-implanted  component as well as an external component Fitzpatrick et al., 2012. Sound  is converted into an electrical signal and sent to an electrode array which has  been inserted into the cochlea Fitzpatrick et al., 2012. The signal is then sent  directly to the auditory nerve and makes its way to the brain where the sound  is interpreted.  Cochlear Implants and Hearing Aids  Over the past two decades, the DHH community has seen momentous  changes in hearing technology, including the most widely known hearing  devices such as the cochlear implant and hearing aids Luft, 2017. According  to the National Institute on Deafness and other Communication Disorders  NIDCD; 2018, a cochlear implant is a small, complex electronic device that  provides sounds to a person who is profoundly or severely hard of hearing.  Cochlear implantation has become a commonly recommended procedure for  children who are deaf as young as 12 months of age Jung  Ertmer, 2018. 

 Chapter 10 

According to Luft 2017, between 1999-2000, 5.3 of K-12 students with  DHH used cochlear implants, which increased to 15.0 within 10 years. Jung  and Ertmer 2018 report that younger children who receive cochlear  implants showed relatively more difficulty in grammatical development than  in vocabulary acquisition, even though their foundational language skills are  within the normal hearing range for developing toddlers.   A hearing aid is a small external electronic device that makes some sounds  louder so that a person with hearing loss can listen, communicate, and  participate more fully NIDCD, 2018b. The Gallaudet Research Institute  2001, 2011, states that 62.9 of DHH students used hearing aids for  instruction in 2011, which increased 4.5 from 2010. Hearing aids have  improved hearing for students within the classroom; however, according to  NIDCD 2018b, only one in five people who would benefit from a hearing aid  actually wear one.  Assistive Listening Systems  An assistive listening system ALS, also called an Assistive Listening Device  ALD, is an amplifier that brings sound directly to the ear without the  interruption of other noises National Association of the Deaf NAD; 2018.  ALSs are used by individuals with mild to profound hearing loss. Individuals  with hearing aids or cochlear implants may even use ALSs as they have been  shown to improve the quality of sound input, increasing their effectiveness  NAD, 2018. A common misconception for students who are DHH is that  technology such as hearing aids, sound amplification systems, and cochlear  implants restore hearing similarly to how glasses improve vision; however,  this is not the case Luckner  Pierce, 2013. A person who wears hearing aids,  for example, may do so to amplify sound but sound quality and clarity may  not reach normal hearing standards. Educators should take this into account  when addressing students with these accommodations.  Speech-to-Text  Given the diverse communication needs of a student who is DHH, support  services need to be tailored to the individual needs of each student. The  standard for translating speech-to-inaudible communication would be  through sign language and the use of an interpreter. One of the hurdles of  having a dedicated visual communication device or aid in the classroom is  the requirement for the student to look away from any presented materials at  the front of the classroom. There are three variations for speech-to-text, two  of which involve a transcriber typing the words that they hear either using: A  a standard QWERTY keyboard or B a stenographic machine. In either case,  the transcriber can be located within the classroom or linked via an InternetDeaf and Hard of Hearing   125 

enabled application such as Skype and Google Hangout. The third option  would be to use automatic speech recognition, which is becoming more  reliable as technology advances. Many students, however, have personal  preferences that should be taken into account for deciding their speech-totext method. Research has shown that retention of information improves with  the electronic speech-to-text support compared to utilizing an interpreter  Stinson  Francis, 2016.  Approaches to Communication  Perhaps one of the longest-running controversies in the field of deaf  education has centered on the right method of communication to use with  a child who is DHH. For years there have been proponents who call for the  use of ASL exclusively, while others promote the development of spoken  English skills Pittman, Sass-Lehrer,  Abrams, 2016. These views, however,  represent two extreme perspectives and promote a simplistic view of  communication. In truth, both ASL and English are languages that are  expressed through a variety of communication approaches, or systems of  communication, along a continuum of modalities from visual to auditory  Pittman et al., 2016.  Moving from most to least visual, common approaches include  bilingualbimodal, simultaneous communication, sign-supported speech,  Pidgen Signed English, cued speech auditory oral, and listening and spoken  language Pittman et al., 2016. Many children who are DHH utilize some  combination of both modalities and the incorporation of one or more of these  approaches to ensure success in specific receptive and expressive language  tasks Pittman et al., 2016.  Language learning is a naturally occurring phenomena that relies on rich  and accessible input. When there is a match in hearing status and  communication approach between parents and a child, the child is exposed  to a linguistically rich environment that fosters the development of receptive  and expressive language skills, allowing them to enter school with the  language skills needed for success. By understanding the continuum of  communication and learning to reflect on and evaluate the effectiveness of  their decisions Moeller  Mixan, 2016, parents are better equipped to assist  in the development of communication skills for the child who is DHH.   In some cases, this will require parents to join the child in the task of  intentional and explicit language instruction, for example, in learning  American Sign Language ASL Luckner, 2016. In all cases, however, it  demands that parents learn to provide meaningful language learning  opportunities that foster authentic communication. It is not the approach or 

 Chapter 10 

mode of communication as much as the quality of interactions that  influences early language development Luckner, 2016. It is, therefore,  important to seek the best approach in each situation rather than assume  there is a one-size-fits-all model for children who are DHH.  When a mismatch in hearing status or communication approach occurs at  home, that child arrives at school faced with a dual challenge of learning a  first language whether ASL or English and learning through that language as  content is introduced Easterbrooks  Beal-Alvarez, 2013. Teachers must be  aware when such mismatches occur and work with parents and other  professionals to determine the language approach that is best for each  student. They must also be prepared to provide support through the  implementation of evidence-based instructional interventions to ensure that  a students performance aligns with his or her learning potential.  Evidence-Based Instructional Interventions  Early Intervention  Early intervention is arguably the most important intervention for students  who are DHH because of its long-term impact on educational performance  and achievement. The Early Hearing Detection and Intervention EHDI  process outlines the 1,3, 6 rule which recommends that newborns are  screened for a hearing loss by 1 month of age, identified with a hearing loss by  3 months of age, and enrolled in an early intervention program by 6 months  of age American Academy of Pediatrics, 2018. When this rule is followed  language and educational outcomes for children who are DHH are greatly  improved. Without early intervention, children may very well enter school  without the essential language abilities needed to achieve academic success.  When this is the case, the task of helping these children achieve their  potential rests in great part with classroom teachers and their ability to  implement effective instructional interventions Heward et al., 2018.  Assessment as Intervention  Assessment marks the first step in the development of an appropriate  educational plan for a student who is DHH. The assessment process must  address not only academics, but also social and functional skills, as well as  aspects of the instructional environment Heward et al., 2018. The tools  outlined below provide suggestions for assessing these additional areas;  however, it must be noted that these tools identify skill level at one point in  time static assessment. As students who are DHH move from grade to grade  content becomes more complex and academic expectations increase, often  leaving these students struggling to keep up. A dynamic assessment model 

Deaf and Hard of Hearing   127 

must, therefore, be adopted to assess a students ability to acquire skills The  Outreach Center for Deafness and Blindness, 2017. With periodic  administration of these tools, educational teams will be better equipped to  determine whether a students instructional plan and accompanying services  require modification.  The Expanded Core Curriculum for Students who are Deaf or Hard of  Hearing, EDD-DHH, Iowa Department of Education, 2013 was developed  in recognition of the unique needs of students who are DHH. This document  addresses a variety of skills beyond those related to core academic subjects  including audiology, career education, communication, family education,  functional skills for educational success, self-determination and advocacy,  social-emotional skills, and technology Martin,  Clark, 2014. While the  EDD-DHH Iowa Department of Education, 2013 is not a standardized tool, it  allows an educational team to identify gaps in the development of skills that  are essential to the development of students who are DHH. As a result, direct  instruction from a teacher of the deaf or another professional in a related field  can be included as part of a students curricular modifications Johnson,  2016.   Successful classroom instruction is dependent upon students being placed  in the most appropriate environment and being able to access and  understand the method by which instruction is presented. Such is not always  the case for students who are DHH and, as a result, these learners may  encounter barriers to communication access Johnson, 2016. A variety of  checklists are available to assess student readiness and to determine the  appropriateness of the current or proposed educational setting Anderson,  Smaldino,  Spangler, 2011; Johnson, 2013. Once an appropriate placement  is determined, a students ability to access information must be assessed.   For students who are DHH, regardless of the communication approach they  utilize, their ability to learn relies on their ability to attend to and process the  information presented, a skill which can be affected by internal as well as  external factors Johnson, 2013. For students who access instruction  auditorily, the Functional Listening Evaluation Johnson, 2013 outlines the  process for measuring noise and reverberation levels in a classroom and  determining the impact of these and other factors, such as distance from a  soundinformation source and access to visual cues, on a students listening  ability.   The Classroom Participation Questionnaire Antia, Sabers,  Stinson, 2007  can be completed by students who use any type of communication approach  and provides the teacher with an overall view of their attitudes and perceived  ability to understand instruction. Beyond learner characteristics, the acoustic 

 Chapter 10 

characteristics of a classroom can create a barrier to communication access as  well and should be assessed as part of the development of an instructional  plan for students who are DHH.   The American National Standards Institute ANSI has set the level of 35  dBA as the acceptable maximum limit of classroom ambient noise, yet a  review of numerous studies revealed that few classrooms meet such  standards Gremp  Easterbrooks, 2018. Classroom noise can be estimated  by installing a specific application on a cell phone, and findings of excessive  noise levels can be addressed with simple sound reduction techniques such  as adding carpet squares to the floor and closing hallway doors TrueAudio,  2017.  Meaningful and Explicit Instruction  Successful implementation of evidence-based instructional interventions for  students who are DHH is contingent upon an educators ability to provide  meaningful, explicit instruction. Meaningful instruction focuses on creating a  learning situation in which the concept to be learned is important i.e.,  meaningful to the learner and combines the concept of active learning  Bonwell  Eison, 1991 with Piagets theory of cognitive development  McLeod, 2018a. Teachers provide a meaningful context by involving  students in doing and thinking about the things they are doing Bonwell   Eison, 1991, p. 1.  Explicit instruction of language and concepts must be provided to support  these learning experiences. Students who are DHH may not overhear spoken  language or may lack exposure to a completely signed language system; thus,  they are often unable to benefit from incidental learning opportunities that  surround them each day McAnally, Rose,  Quigley, 2007. It is not  uncommon, therefore, for students who are DHH to enter school without  having learned the language and vocabulary associated with the everyday  routines and special events they have actually experienced. These  experiences and the language that accompanies them are essential in the  development of schemata, or the storage and organization of memories,  because learning occurs when new information is encountered through  additional experiences or written text and then compared to existing schema  McAnally et al., 2007.  It is essential, then, for teachers of students who are DHH to provide  meaningful experiences and explicit instruction Hollingsworth  Ybarra,  2017. Meaningful experiences provide the opportunity to teach vocabulary,  content, and language, but they must be well planned and based upon true  learning objectives; merely completing an activity is not sufficient McAnally  et al., 2007. While field trips and cooking activities can certainly qualify as 

Deaf and Hard of Hearing   129 

meaningful activities, the goal cannot be the visit itself or the yummy dessert  that was made; rather, goals must be based on measurable outcomes.  Extending the previous examples, possible objectives for these activities  might be 

Upon returning from a trip to the zoo, students will match animal  names to the proper category mammals, amphibians, reptiles, birds,  fish with 80 accuracy. 

After making brownies, students will correct sequence sentence  strips describing the steps.  Explicit instruction shares many qualities with direct instruction and follows  a series of sequenced activities beginning with a teacher model, followed by  opportunities for guided practice that include specific teacher feedback and,  finally, opportunities for independent practice Hollingsworth  Ybarra,  2017.  Key  terms,  unfamiliar  words,  mathematical  processes,  and  comprehension strategies can all be taught using explicit instruction  techniques. Meaningful and explicit instruction can be integrated across a  broad range of topics and provides the means for successfully implementing a  wide range of evidence-based interventions Hollingsworth  Ybarra, 2017.  Teaching and Learning Interventions  Evidence-based instructional interventions can be grouped into two broad  categories, those of teaching interventions that are used by teachers to assist  students in mastering what they need to learn, and learning interventions  that are utilized by students to help them improve how to learn Weinstein   Mayer, 1986. For both types of interventions, teachers must provide explicit  instruction to help students who are DHH select and accurately execute  appropriate strategies to facilitate learning.  Teaching interventions. A primary intervention used by teachers across all  areas of education is scaffolding or the practice of sequencing lessons into  discrete steps. Based upon Vygotskys zone of proximal development ZPD  McLeod, 2018b, teachers select appropriate goals between a students  independent and frustration level of learning and provide support for  successful completion. For younger students who are DHH, instruction  focuses a great deal on the development of language skills and utilizes the  practice of modeling and imitation within a scaffolding framework McLeod,  2018b. Teachers continually work to expand the length of students signed or  spoken utterance and to increase their vocabulary skills, utilizing appropriate  practices for the students method of communication.   Acoustic highlighting is the practice of placing emphasis on certain sounds  within words or words within a sentence to make them more audible and is 

 Chapter 10 

often used to improve speech production or increase sentence length for  students learning listening and spoken language Robbins, 2016. When a  student omits a sound, word, or phrase in a sentence, the teacher provides  the correct expanded production, using acoustic highlighting to draw  attention to elements of their productions that were omitted. For students  using ASL, vocabulary or concepts can be taught through the use of  sandwiching Luckner, 2016. A teacher using the sandwiching strategy might  introduce a new word by showing a picture. Then the word would be signed,  fingerspelled, and then signed again. Printed words can be included in the  sandwich sequence as well. The incorporation of skill-related strategies into a  scaffolding framework can help provide meaningful contexts to help students  who are DHH master skills and avoid frustration Luckner, 2016.  Learning interventions. Interventions that help students who are DHH  learn how to learn are essential for overall academic success because they are  designed to promote independent learning and include cognitive,  metacognitive, and organizational strategies Wentworth Institute of  Technology, 2016. As with previous interventions, these must be explicitly  taught, and students must be able to recognize their effectiveness in order to  generalize their use to a variety of learning situations.   Cognitive strategies provide a framework for learning tasks that cannot be  completed by following step-by-step procedures Wentworth Institute of  Technology, 2016. They provide support for students who are DHH by  helping them develop internal procedures necessary to perform complex  tasks. Cognitive strategies can be used to assist with general problem-solving,  remembering, writing sentences or paragraphs, and comprehending text.  While some students develop cognitive strategies on their own, a great  number of students who are DHH do not. One of the most frequently used  methods for remembering a series of numbers or letters, such as a phone  number or the spelling of a word, is through verbal rehearsal, i.e., the  repetition of numbers or letters to oneself with inner or silent speech HattenRoberts  Lodge, 2018. This skill frequently develops later for students who  are DHH than for students with typical hearing; therefore, explicit teaching of  the strategy of repeated rehearsal can help to increase a students memory  abilities Bebko  McKinnon, 1990. Similarly, the techniques of chunking,  combining single bits of information into larger units to alleviate memory  load, mnemonics, imagery, and the key word method can all be taught as  ways to assist with recall and retrieval of information Webster, 2018.  Metacognition is an awareness of ones own thinking. When used in an  academic context metacognitive ability refers to ones ability to monitor  comprehension of content Wilson, 2014. Successful users of metacognitive  abilities ask themselves if they understand the content throughout a learning 

Deaf and Hard of Hearing   131 

activity; they recognize when breakdowns in learning occur; and they are able  to select effective strategies to get themselves back on track Wilson, 2014.  Being able to monitor their own learning is an essential skill for all students,  but perhaps even more so for students who are DHH who may overestimate  their understanding of the material or not recognize when they have missed  something McAnally et al., 2007.  To assist students who are DHH in recognizing when they dont understand,  teachers can model metacognitive strategies. Through the use of think-aloud  teachers demonstrate the thoughts and questions they have when monitoring  their own ability to work through a problem or comprehend written text  Ness, 2018. Providing students who are DHH with example questions or  checklists can facilitate implementation of metacognitive strategies and lead  to improved comprehension and achievement across a range of content  areas.   Organizational strategies are readily recognized as effective learning  interventions and include techniques such color coding or using a planner as  well as use of visual supports such as graphic organizers, pictures, and videos  Zelazo, 2018. These items allow students who are DHH to visually display  their thoughts in an organized manner and illustrate links between concepts  Spencer  Marschark, 2010. In general, students who are DHH rely to a  greater extent on visual input; therefore, by selecting appropriate visual aids  to represent and organize their thoughts, students can create supports that  ease the load on working memory and allow them to focus on deeper  understanding of content Spencer  Marschark, 2010.  Final Thoughts  Overall advances in technology have positively impacted the auditory and  communication skills of students who are DHH resulting in a greater number  of these students attending schools in their own neighborhoods and in  classrooms with peers who have typical hearing. Whether instruction is being  delivered by a highly qualified teacher of the deaf or a general education  classroom teacher, knowledge of key concepts is essential to developing a  successful educational plan for students who are DHH.  By understanding the properties of sound and classroom acoustics a  teacher can help to optimize the learning environment; likewise, familiarity  with the way sound is processed, knowledge of the types and degrees of  hearing loss, and an appreciation of the importance of early and complete  language development helps teachers to realize the unique needs of students  who are DHH. No matter what modality or communication approach is  utilized by a child who enters a classroom, teachers must recognize the 

 Chapter 10 

importance of providing meaningful, explicit instruction to support the  teaching and learning interventions that can assist students in achieving  academic and career success and in reaching their learning potential.  Points Remember 

Teachers who provide instruction to students who are DHH must have  a basic knowledge of the characteristics of sound, the auditory  pathway, degrees and types of hearing loss, and communication  approaches. 

Early intervention is essential for minimizing the impact of hearing  loss on language development and long-term educational outcomes. 

Educational interventions must include assessments to determine  appropriate educational placement and an acoustically favorable  environment to ensure communication access. 

Meaningful, explicit instruction must be incorporated across all  content areas. 

Teaching and learning interventions are both necessary to teach  students who are DHH what they need to know and how they need to  learn.  References  American Academy of Pediatrics. 2018. Program to enhance the health   development of infants and children PEHDIC. Retrieved from  https:www.aap.orgen-usadvocacy-and-policyaap-healthinitiativesPEHDICPagesEarly-Hearing-Detection-and-Intervention.aspx  American Speech-Language-Hearing Association ASHA. n.d.a. Language.  Retrieved from https:www.asha.orgpolicyrp1982-00125.htm  American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. n.d.b. Types of hearing  loss. Retrieved from https:www.asha.orgpublichearingtypes-ofhearing-loss  Anderson, K., Smaldino, J.,  Spangler, C. 2011. Listening inventory for  education LIFE-Revised. Retrieved from  http:successforkidswithhearingloss.comtests   Anita, S., Sabers, D.,  Stinson, M. 2007. Validity and reliability of the  classroom participation questionnaire with deaf and hard of hearing  students in public schools. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education,  122, 158-171. DOI: 10.1093deafedenl028  Bebko, J.M.,  McKinnon, E.E. 1990. The language experience of deaf  children: its relation to spontaneous rehearsal in a memory task. Child  Development, 616, 1744-1752. DOI: 10.1111j.1467-8624.1990.tb03563.x 

Deaf and Hard of Hearing   133 

Bonwell, C.C.,  Eison, J.A. 1991. Active learning: Creating excitement in the  classroom. 1991 ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Reports. Retrieved from  https:files.eric.ed.govfulltextED336049.pdf  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2018. Hearing loss in Children:  About sound. Retrieved from  https:www.cdc.govncbdddhearinglosssound.html  Easterbrooks, S. R., Beal-Alvarez, J. 2013 Literacy instruction for students who  are deaf and hard of hearing. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.  Fitzpatrick, E.M., Olds, J., Gaboury, I., McCrae, R., Schramm, D.,  SurieuxSmith, A. 2012. Comparison of outcomes in children with hearing aids and  cochlear implants. Cochlear Implants International, 131, 5-15. DOI:  10.1179146701011X12950038111611  Gremp, M.A.  Easterbrooks, S.R. 2018. A descriptive analysis of noise in  classrooms across the U.S. and Canada for children who are deaf and hard  of hearing. The Volta Review, 1171-2, 5-31. DOI: 10.17955tvr.117.1.2.781  Hatten-Roberts, T.  Lodge, J.M. 2017. Can speaking make learning easier?  Verbal rehearsal effects on cognitive load, learning efficacy and performance.  Retrieved from  https:www.researchgate.netprofileJasonLodge2publication32602918 3CanspeakingmakelearningeasierVerbalrehearsaleffectsoncognit iveloadlearningefficacyandperformancelinks5b344a5b0f7e9b0df5d2 8de2Can-speaking-make-learning-easier-Verbal-rehearsal-effects-oncognitive-load-learning-efficacy-andperformance.pdf?originpublicationdetail  Heward, W.L., Alber-Morgan, S.R.,  Konrad, M. 2018. Exceptional children:  An introduction to special education 11th ed. New York, NY: Pearson  Hollingsworth, J.R.  Ybarra, S.E. 2017. Explicit direct instruction: The power  of the well-crafted, well-taught lesson. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin  Iowa Department of Education Bureau of Student Family Support Services.  2013. The Expanded core curriculum for students who are deaf or hard of  hearing. Retrieved from https:wvde.state.wv.usospECCDHHJanuary2013.pdf   Jerger, J. 2013. Why the audiogram is upside-down. The Hearing Review.  Retrieved from http:www.hearingreview.com201303why-theaudiogram-is-upside-down  Johnson, C.D. 2016 Educational advocacy across the curriculum. In M.P.  Moeller, D.J. Ertmer,  C. Stoel-Gammon Eds., Promoting language and  literacy in children who are deaf or hard of hearing, pp.383-408. Baltimore,  MD: Brookes Publishing  Johnson, C.D. 2013. Functional listening evaluation FLE. Retrieved from  https:www.phonakpro.comcontentdamphonakprogchqenresource scounselingtoolsdocumentschildhearingassessmentfunctionalliste ningevaluationfle2017.pdf   Jung, J.  Ertmer, D. 2018. Grammatical abilities in young cochlear implant  recipients and children with normal hearing matched by vocabulary size.  American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 272, 751-764. DOI:  10.10442018AJSLP-16--164 

 Chapter 10 

Lim, S.R.  Goldberg, D.M. n.d. Pediatric Audiology. In S. Lenihan Ed.,  Preparing to teach committing to learn: An introduction to educating  children who are deafhard of hearing. Retrieved from  http:www.infanthearing.orgebook-educating-childrendhhchapters1b20Chapter201202017.pdf   Luckner, J.L. 2016. Models for facilitating literacy development. In M.P.  Moeller, D.J. Ertmer,  C. Stoel-Gammon Eds., Promoting language and  literacy in children who are deaf or hard of hearing, pp.329-358. Baltimore,  MD: Brookes Publishing  Luckner, J.  Pierce, C. 2013. Response to intervention and students who are  deaf or hard of hearing. Deafness  Education International, 154, 222-240.  DOI: 10.11791557069x13.  Luft, P. 2017. What is different about deaf education? The effects of child and  family factors on educational services. The Journal of Special Education,  511, 27-37. DOI: 10.11770022466916660546.  Martin, F.N.  Clark, J.G. 2014. Introduction to audiology 12th ed. New York,  NY: Pearson Education, Inc.   McAnally, P., Rose, S.,  Quigley, S. P. 2007. Reading practices with children  who are deaf 2nd ed. Austin, TX: PROEd.  McLeod, S. 2018s. Piagets theory of cognitive development. Retrieved from    https:www.simplypsychology.orgpiaget.html  McLeod, S. 2018b. The zone of proximal development and scaffolding.  Retrieved from     https:www.simplypsychology.orgZone-of-Proximal-Development.html  Mitchell, R.E.,  Karchmer, M.A. 2004. Chasing the mythical ten percent:  Parental hearing status of deaf and hard of hearing students in the United  States. Sign Language Studies, 42, 138-163. Retrieved from  https:eric.ed.gov?idEJ747626  Moeller, M.P.  Mixan, K. 2016. Family-centered early intervention. In M.P.  Moeller, D.J.   Ertmer,  C. Stoel-Gammon Eds., Promoting language and literacy in  children who are deaf or hard of hearing pp.77-106. Baltimore, MD:  Brookes Publishing  National Association of the Deaf NAD 2018. Assistive listening systems and  devices. Retrieved from  https:www.nad.orgresourcestechnologyassistive-listeningassistivelistening-systems-and-devices  National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders  NIDCD. 2018a. How do we hear? Retrieved from  https:www.nidcd.nih.govhealthhow-do-we-hear  National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders NIDCD  2018b. Hearing aids. Retrieved from  https:www.nidcd.nih.govhealthhearing-aids DOI:  10.1016j.neuroimage.2012.09.076.  Ness, M. 2018. Road tested3 steps for think alouds. ASCD: Education  Update. Retrieved from 

Deaf and Hard of Hearing   135 

http:www.ascd.orgpublicationsnewsletterseducationupdatefeb18vol60num023-Steps-for-Think-Alouds.aspx  Noise Help n.d. The Decibel Scale. Retrieved from  https:www.noisehelp.comdecibel-scale.html  Pittman, P., Sass-Lehrer, M.,  Abrams, S.R. 2016. Sign language, sign  systems, and other visual modalities. In M.P. Moeller, D.J. Ertmer,  C. StoelGammon Eds., Promoting language and literacy in children who are deaf or  hard of hearing, pp. 149-180. Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing.   Robbins, A.M. 2016. Auditory-verbal therapy: A conversational competence  approach. In M.P. Moeller, D.J. Ertmer,  C. Stoel-Gammon Eds.,  Promoting language  literacy in children who are deaf or hard of hearing,  pp.181-212. Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing  Spencer, P.E.,  Marschark, M. 2010. Evidence-based practice in educating  deaf and hard-of-hearing students. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.   Stinson, M.  Francis, P. 2016. Speech to text in the classroom. Retrieved from  http:www.raisingandeducatingdeafchildren.org20160111speech-totext-in-the-classroom  The Outreach Center for Deafness and Blindness. 2017. Guidelines for the  assessment and educational evaluation of students who are deaf or hard of  hearing. Retrieved from  https:deafandblindoutreach.orgupdocGuidelines-for-Assessmentand-Educational-Evaluation-HH-2017.pdf  TrueAudio. 2017. What is a real time analyzer? Retrieved from  https:trueaudio.comrtafaq1.htm  Webster, J. 2018. Chunking: Breaking tasks into manageable parts. Retrieved  from https:www.thoughtco.comchunk-breaking-tasks-into-manageableparts-3110858  Weinstein, C.F.  Mayer, R.F. 1986. The teaching of learning strategies. In M  C. Wittrock Ed., Handbook of research on teaching, pp.315-327. New York,  NY: MacMillan.  Wentworth Institute of technology. 2016. Cognitive learning strategies.  Retrieved from    https:wit.edulitengagelearning-strategies  Wilson, D. 2014. Metacognition: the gift that keeps giving. edutopia.  Retrieved from https:www.edutopia.orgblogmetacognition-gift-thatkeeps-giving-donna-wilson-marcus-conyers  Zelazo, P.D. 2018. nderstanding executive functioning issues. Retrieved from  https:www.understood.orgenlearning-attention-issueschild-learningdisabilitiesexecutive-functioning-issuesunderstanding-executivefunctioning-issues 

Chapter 11 

Visual Impairment and Deaf-Blindness  Nicholas D. Young,  American International College,  Kara Johnson, MEd,  Endicott College  Language, whether it be written or verbalized, is the foundation for all  learning and is the basis for expression of needs and interaction with others.  Children who are deaf-blind or visually impaired VI face considerable  challenges in the development of language skills in order to succeed in school  Mosca, Kritzinger,  van der Linde, 2015. These populations are increasingly  educated within regular education classrooms along with their typical peers;  however, most professionals do not have the skill set to be able to effectively  teach students with such needs Luckner  Pierce, 2013. As required by law,  schools must create educational environments that are conducive to meeting  the unique needs of all students in order for them to receive appropriate  educational services and be successful IDEA, 2004.  Communication and Academic Delays  According to the Individuals with Disabilities Act, this category is defined as  an impairment in vision that, even with correction, adversely affects a childs  educational performance. The term includes both partial sight and blindness  Special Education Guide, 2018. The latest data shows that there are over  63,500 students under the age of 21 in the United States who are legally blind  or have an impairment that affects their ability to access traditional  academics American Foundation for the Blind, 2017.  In the educational setting, vision is a primary sense for which most  academic strategies are based. This can make learning challenging for  students  with  a  visual  impairment  when  teaching  practices  and  accommodations are not adjusted to meet their needs. Students with visual  impairment can and do succeed but often at different rates and in different  sequences than typical students American Foundation for the Blind, 2018a.  For students with a visual impairment, strategies must be modified to reflect  the childs visual, auditory, and tactilevision capabilities. 

 Chapter 11 

Instructional Practices and Accommodations  In the visual impairment VI community, the controversial issue remains on  whether placement of individuals with visual impairments is best served by  regular schools with a wide variety of students, including those with and  without disabilities, or schools designed specifically for visually impaired  learners Johnson-Jones, 2017; Jordan, 2015. Proponents of regular public  schools argue that with qualified teachers who know how to teach students  who are visually impaired as well as the use of research-based teaching  methods, these students can be successful Johnson-Jones, 2017; Jordan,  2015.  Response to Intervention RtI for Students with VI  The number of districts and schools in the United States implementing RtI  continues to increase Shah, 2011; Samuels, 2016. RtI may be an effective  intervention model for students who are visually impaired. For students who  are visually impaired, data-driven decision-making teams that meet on a  regular basis and use data to guide discussions are imperative to ensuring the  educational program is meeting the students needs. There are several  evaluations that should be conducted annually to determine the learning  medium that students who are visually impaired are most successful with, as  this plays an integral part in the RtI and learning process Jones, Smith,  Hensley-Maloney,  Gansle, 2015.  Tier 1. Districts implementing RtI with students who are visually impaired  may have to redesign the framework in order to meet the individual needs of  this population. Within Tier 1, or the primary level, the core curriculum with  implementation in the general education setting is taught on a daily basis.  The use of concrete math aids such as a talking calculator or manipulatives  can increase computation accuracy within Tier 1 Jones et al., 2015.  Educators must understand that although a student with a visual impairment  may require direct instruction by a specialized teacher, it does not mean the  student should be automatically placed in Tier 2 Jones et al., 2015.   Tier 2. The Secondary level, or Tier 2, is composed of more supplemental  interventions that are more individualized and require more frequent  assessment. Instruction for a student with a visual impairment at this level  may include specialized instruction by a low-vision specialist, occupational  therapist, or reading specialist Jones et al., 2015. Tier 3, or the tertiary level,  is only implemented when Tier 1 and Tier 2 supports are not effective Jones  et al., 2015.   Tier 3. Instruction at the third, or tertiary level, focuses on a more  specialized curriculum that addresses practical life skills for a student. 

Visual Impairment and Deaf-Blindness   139 

Students with a visual impairment may require more intensive reading  intervention given that they often miss valuable opportunities for incidental  learning that their typical peers are exposed to at a much higher rate Jones et  al., 2015. They may also require vocabulary instruction prior to reading  fluency and comprehension interventions in order to be successful Jones et  al., 2015.  Accommodations for students with VI  Screen reader. A screen reader is a software program that allows blind or  visually impaired users to read the text that is displayed on the screen using a  speech synthesizer of braille display. Screen readers are currently compatible  with different computer operating systems. They enable the user to  determine how much and what type of information within a sentence should  be read andor defined out loud by the commands the user inputs American  Foundation for the Blind, 2018b.  Text-to-speech. Text-to-speech, abbreviated as TTS, the software can be a  useful tool for students with a visual impairment. It is a form of speech  synthesis that converts text on a computer into speech, or spoken voice,  output. Most TTS software enables the students to control the voice speed as  well as raise and lower the volume American Foundation for the Blind,  2018c.   Braille. Braille is a system of raised dots that can be read with the fingers by  people who are blind or who have low vision American Foundation for the  Blind, 2018d. Braille is not considered its own language, as the many other  languages, such as English, Arabic and Spanish, incorporate the coding  system into the native language and provide a means of literacy for all  American Foundation for the Blind, 2018d. Braille is produced on a  braillewriter, which creates the raised dot systems on a page. Technology  advancements have enabled students who are blind and visually impaired to  access software programs and portable electronic braille devices to save and  edit their writing within educational settings American Foundation for the  Blind, 2018d. The advancements in technology enable the software to dictate  the typed braille back to them verbally, display tactually, or produce a hard  copy on a desktop computer-driven braille embosser American Foundation  for the Blind, 2018d.   Enlarged print. Some students with a visual impairment are able to read  regular printed materials using a device, such as a magnifying glass, to enlarge  the words as they read. For other students, the print itself may be enlarged  American Printing House for the Blind, 2009. When enlarging print for  students with a visual impairment, there are certain factors that should be 

 Chapter 11 

taken into account, such as print size, shading and contrast, font and type of  paper, as these all affect a students ability to read print well American  Printing House for the Blind, 2009. Additional considerations, such as the  rate at which text is read and overall fatigue from reading print should be  taken into account for students with a visual impairment American Printing  House for the Blind, 2009.   Tactile maps. The educational goals for most students, including those who  have a visual impairment, are for them to be able to effectively communicate,  demonstrate social competence, exhibit an employable skill set, and personal  independence American Foundation for the Blind, 2018a. For students with  a visual impairment, use of tactile maps might be the critical missing  component in order for them to become independent in navigating an  environment or new geographical location, such as a college campus or  community Feucht  Holmgren, 2018. Tactile maps facilitate orientation  and mobility OM, a critical skill for people who are visually impaired.  Although the Americans with Disabilities Education Act ADA 1990  mandates that OM services must be provided, it should be noted that timely  and sufficient services can be difficult to obtain due to limited resources and  professionals qualified to provide these services Feucht  Holmgren, 2018.  Legal Mandate: Alice-Cogswell Macy Act  Although IDEA has proven to be effective for most students with disabilities, it  has not been beneficial in advancing the deaf, hard of hearing, deaf-blind,  blind, and visually impaired community National Association of the Deaf,  2018. In anticipation for the next reauthorization of IDEA, organizations for  the blind and DHH joined together and developed the Cogswell-Macy Act  National Association of the Deaf, 2018. The Cogswell-Sullivan Macy Act was  presented to both Congress and the Senate in 2017, but was not considered,  as the newest redevelopment of IDEA had not arrived for discussion  American Foundation for the Blind, 2018e.  The Cogswell-Sullivan Macy Act will ensure that every child who is deaf or  deaf-blind, blind, or visually impaired, regardless of whether they have  additional disabilities, will be properly counted and served American  Foundation for the Blind, 2018e. There currently remains a large discrepancy  between the National Center for Education Statistics from the U.S.  Department of Education and the Office of Special Education Programs  regarding the number of students who are deaf and blind National  Association of the Deaf, 2018. The Cogswell-Sullivan Macy Act will also  ensure that the U.S. Department of Education is holding states and schools  accountable by making sure students who are DHH or VI are being served by  qualified personnel, are properly evaluated, and engage in planning with 

Visual Impairment and Deaf-Blindness   141 

states to be sure that they can, in fact, meet each childs specialized needs  Conference for Educational Administrators of Schools  Programs for the  Deaf CEASD 2017.  Final Thoughts  Students who are visually impaired often do not bring the same extensive  written or verbalized language skills to the educational setting that their  typical peers do Mosca et al., 2015. These gaps in skills can greatly affect  their ability to learn; however, with appropriate accommodations and  modifications tailored to their learning profiles and needs, students who are  visually impaired can and do learn. RtI provides a framework for educators to  identify students in need of supplemental intervention and provide targeted  interventions to meet the needs of all learners. For students who are visually  impaired, specific accommodations that have been determined appropriate  for the students learning profile are used within the RtI model. It is essential  for educators to take into account the individual needs of students with visual  impairments in order to implement appropriate accommodations and  instructional practices.  Points to Remember 

Students who are visually impaired are entering classrooms with  varied foundations of language skills, whether it is auditory or visual.  

Students have individual preferences and accommodations based on  need and educators should this take into account when planning  lessons and interventions. 

RtI is an effective framework for educators to evaluate student progress  as they incorporate learning mediums throughout their curricula,  especially for students with visual impairments whose needs are  specific to their disability. 

There are many different technological accommodations for students  who are visually impaired; the selection of which may be restricted by  availability and financial feasibility.  

Educator awareness and early intervention for students who are  visually impaired is critical to ensure long-term academic success. 

 Chapter 11 

References  American Foundation for the Blind. 2017. Children and youth with vision  loss. Retrieved from http:www.afb.orginfoblindness-statisticschildrenand-youthchildren-and-youth-with-vision-loss235population16  American Foundation for the Blind. 2018a. Educating students with visual  impairments for inclusion in society. Retrieved from  http:www.afb.orginfoteachersinclusive-education35  American Foundation for the Blind. 2018b. Screen readers. Retrieved from  http:www.afb.orgprodBrowseCatResults.aspx?CatID49  American Foundation for the Blind. 2018c. Screen readers and text to speech  synthesizers. Retrieved from  http:www.afb.orgprodBrowseCatResults.aspx?CatID49  American Foundation for the Blind. 2018d. What is braille? Retrieved from    http:www.afb.orginfoliving-with-vision-lossbraillewhat-is-braille123  American Foundation for the Blind. 2018e. Take Action: The Alice Cogswell  and Anne Sullivan Macy Act. Retrieved from http:www.afb.orginfogetconnectedtake-action12  American Printing House for the Blind. 2009. Making tests accessible for  students with visual impairments. Retrieved from  https:www.aph.orgfilestestsTest-Access-Making-Tests-Accessible-forStudents-with-Visual-Impairments-4th-2009.docx  Brown, J.E.  Doolittle, J. 2008. A cultural, linguistic, and ecological  framework for response to intervention with English language learners.  Teaching Exceptional Children, 405, 66-72. DOI:  10.1177004005990804000509  Conference for Educational Administrators of Schools  Programs for the  Deaf CEASD. 2017. The Alice Cogswell and Anne Sullivan Macy Act.  Retrieved from http:www.ceasd.orgchild-firstalice-cogswell  Feucht, F.  Holmgren, C. 2018. Developing tactile maps for students with  visual impairments: A case study for customizing accommodations. Journal  of Visual Impairment  Blindness, 143-155. Retrieved from  https:files.eric.ed.govfulltextEJ1175989.pdf  Jones, B.A., Smith, H.H., Hensley-Maloney, L.,  Gansle, K.A. 2015. Applying  response to intervention to identify learning disabilities in students with  visual impairments. Intervention in School and Clinic, 511, 28-36. DOI:  10.11771053451215577475.  Johnson-Jones, K.J. 2017. Educating students with visual impairments in the  general education setting. Retrieved from  https:aquila.usm.educgiviewcontent.cgi?article2328contextdisserta tions  Jordan, J. 2015. Satisfaction of students with visual impairments within  different school settings. Retrieved from  https:commons.lib.jmu.educgiviewcontent.cgi?refererhttps:www.go ogle.comhttpsredir1article1013contextedspec201019 

Visual Impairment and Deaf-Blindness   143 

Kuhl, P.  Rivera-Gaxiola, M. 2008. Neural substrates of language acquisition.  Annual Review of Neuroscience, 311, 511-534. DOI:  10.1146annurev.neuro.30051606.094321  Luckner, J.  Pierce, C. 2013. Response to intervention and students who are  deaf or hard of hearing. Deafness  Education International, 154, 222-240.  DOI: 10.11791557069x13.  Mosca, R. Kritzinger, A.,  van der Linde, J. 2015. Language and  communication development in preschool children with visual impairment:  A systematic review. South African Journal of communication Disorders,  621, e1-e10. Retrieved from  https:www.ncbi.nlm.nih.govpmcarticlesPMC5843051  National Association of the Deaf NAD 2018. Assistive listening systems and  devices. Retrieved from  https:www.nad.orgresourcestechnologyassistive-listeningassistivelistening-systems-and-devices  National Center for Education Statistics NCES 2018. Digest of Education  Facts. Retrieved from  https:nces.ed.govprogramsdigestd17tablesdt17204.60.asp?current yes  Samuels, C.A. 2016. RTI expands, encounters growing pains. Education  Week, 3615, 4-9. Retrieved from  https:www.edweek.orgewarticles20161214rti-expands-encountersgrowing-pains.html  Shah, N. 2011. Survey of school, district workers shows wider use of RTI.  Education Week. Retrieved from  http:blogs.edweek.orgedweekspeced201108yetanotherstudysho wsthe.html  Special Education Guide. 2018. Visual impairment. Retrieved from    https:www.specialeducationguide.comdisability-profilesvisualimpairment  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2014. NIDCD fact sheet:  Speech and language developmental milestones. Retrieved from  https:www.nidcd.nih.govsitesdefaultfilesDocumentshealthvoiceNI DCD-Speech-Language-Dev-Milestones.pdf 

Chapter 12 

Traumatic Brain Injury  Ann Marie Leonard-Zabel, D.Ed.,  ABSNP, Curry College and NEALAC Clinic  Traumatic brain injury TBI is a public health problem across all ages and in  all populations; even in North America and Europe, where TBI incidence is  lower than in poor regions. Since the rate is increasing rapidly in low-income  and middle-income countries mostly due to road traffic accidents, TBI is  predicted to become the third leading cause of global mortality and disability  by 2020, according to the World Health Organization Tabish  Syed, 2015. In  the U.S.A. about 2.2 million individuals are affected annually by a TBI causing  more than 50,000 deaths and 280,000 hospitalizations Centers for Disease  Control and Prevention, 2017. The direct and indirect costs associated with  TBI is estimated to be 60 million dollars with a more significant number of  patients suffering moderate to severe functional disabilities requiring  intensive care and various medical and neuro-behavioral supports Stocchetti   Zanier, 2016.  What would you do if you had a student come into your classroom at the  beginning of the school year after suffering a traumatic brain injury over the  summer? Would you seek assistance from the guidance department, school  psychologist, 504 accommodation team, special education team, school  nurse, pediatrician, or family? Would you seek additional information to  implement strategies or approaches that would assist your student to feel  comfortable to learn?  Lets take a look at the case of Steve, a rising 9th grade student. Steve will  be entering your classroom at the beginning of the school year. He  experienced a TBI as an outgrowth of a car accident over the summer  school break. He suffered a closed head injury requiring rest; medication  for pain, nausea, and vertigo; and stress-reduction techniques to help  with any agitation he may experience. He was hospitalized for seven  hours and discharged.   Over the summer Steve kept his medical appointments and was able to  be medically cleared to return to school but with physical  accommodations to help with psychomotor agitation and any 

 Chapter 12 

headaches causing him to appear less attentive and engaged within the  learning process. Parents asked for medical accommodations that  included periodic breaks and to have a quiet area for Steve to debrief if  he appears fidgety and agitated; however, he was noted by his physician  to experience short-term memory, working memory, and long-term  retrieval coupled with executive functioning problems. Based on this  case, many approaches can assist school professionals as to how to teach  Steve to his best ability.  Defining Traumatic Brain Injury  A child or youth with a brain injury may qualify for special education services  under the disability category of Traumatic Brain Injury TBI. According to the  Individuals with Disabilities Education Act,  Traumatic Brain Injury means an acquired injury to the brain caused by  an external physical force, resulting in total or partial functional  disability or psychosocial impairment, or both, that adversely affects a  childs educational performance. Traumatic brain injury applies to open  or closed head injuries resulting in impairments in one or more areas,  such as cognition; language; memory; attention; reasoning; abstract  thinking; judgment; problem-solving; sensory, perceptual, and motor  abilities; psychosocial behavior; physical functions; information  processing; and speech. Traumatic Brain Injury does not apply to brain  injuries that are congenital or degenerative, or to brain injuries induced  by birth trauma Center for Parent Information  Resources, 2017,  n.p.  A traumatic brain injury in children and youth is an injury to the brain and  brain system networks that usually results from a direct blow to the head  Kolb, Wishaw,  Teskey, 2016. TBI occurs generally from the individual's  head making an impact with an object such as with automobile or  recreational accidents and sports injuries, among others Kolb et al., 2016.  Traumatic brain injury TBI is the leading cause of disability and death in  children and adolescents within the U.S. between the ages of 0-4 and 15-19  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018. In an average year, about  62,000 children sustain brain injuries requiring hospitalization and nearly  565,000 children, including youth, are treated within hospital emergency  rooms for brain injury and later released Centers for Disease Control and  Prevention, 2018. Traumatic brain injuries often result in death or severely  injured for those newborn to 14 years of age Centers for Disease Control and  Prevention, 2018. 

Traumatic Brain Injury   147 

The number of TBI are staggering with regards to the impact of injury for  children and youth. Falls are the leading cause of TBI for small children ages  0-4 with roughly 1,300 children experiencing severe brain injury or even death  at the hands of child abusers every year Centers for Disease Control and  Prevention, 2017. The highest rate of TBI injury includes adolescents ages 1519 due to a variety of factors such as not wearing a seat belt when riding in a  car with others, riding with a reckless driver, use of drugs and alcohol,  involvement in a physical fights, engaging in contact sports, among others.  Males are two to three times more likely to receive a TBI than females, even  though females are currently climbing in the number of injuries to the brain  Leonard-Zabel, 2018; Shi et al., 2009.  There are three diagnostic categories involved with a TBI moving from mild,  to moderate, and finally severe Brain Injury Alliance Utah, n.d. A  concussion is a mild traumatic brain injury that occurs as a result of a forced  blow to the head resulting in stretching and tearing the cells creating  temporary changes on the cellular level thereby disrupting normal brain  functioning Brain Injury Alliance Utah, n.d. Loss of consciousness usually  does not occur. A concussion usually cannot be seen on brain imaging tools  such as CT scan or MRI; thus, concussions are often described as an "invisible  injury" that others minimize or dismiss its diagnosis Brain Injury Alliance  Utah, n.d. Most concussions resolve in 1 to 3 weeks when a student follows  the medical orders of rest Goldman  Kramer, 2016.   Post-Concussion Syndrome is a complex disorder in which various  symptoms such as headaches and dizziness can last for weeks, months or  sometimes a year or more after the injury that caused the concussion  American Association of Neurological Surgeons, 2018. A Second Impact  Syndrome is a rare and potentially fatal event when a second "hit" occurs  before the brain has fully healed, resulting in brain swelling, severe brain  injury, or even death American Association of Neurological Surgeons, 2018;  Cantu  Hyman, 2012.  Federal Regulations Involving Traumatic Brain Injury  Children and youth with traumatic brain injury TBI may or may not have an  Individualized Educational Plan IEP depending if the individual's injury is  adversely impacting the ability to make adequate and effective progress  Center for Parent Information  Resources, 2017. This would be formally  measured, not only by medical and behavioral means but by a variety of  assessments as part of a special education evaluation. This may include, but is  not limited to, cognitive and achievement testing, speech and language  evaluations, occupational and physical therapy screenings, adaptive physical  education  scales,  social-emotional  and  personality  testing,  and 

 Chapter 12 

neuropsychological testssubtests Leonard-Zabel, 2018. To be considered  for special education services under IDEA-2014, the TBI student needs to  meet the federal definition and meet the eligibility criteria of special  education. Each state has specific laws connected to special education  requirements and may require documentation such as a hospital discharge  summary andor pediatricianneurologist report Lipkin  Okamoto, 2015.  Some states may require the input of a licensed professional who is qualified  to make the diagnosis of TBI on the multidisciplinary evaluation team.  A TBI severity level is not required for a student to receive services or  physical accommodations under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973  Bowen, 2008. To qualify for Section 504 accommodations, the TBI student  needs to be determined to have a physical andor mental impairment that  substantially limits one or more major life activities e.g., such as learning,  and have a documented record of such impairment, or be regarded as having  such  an  impairment  per  individual  state  regulations  specifying  documentation or a specialized team membership to make the determination  Jantz et al., 2014.  When a Student Returns to School After Initial Medical Treatment of TBI  When an individual sustains a TBI, there are many people who are involved,  directly and indirectly, in the students return to school to include: 

Survivors and their parents, siblings, extended families and friends; 

Healthcare providers, including surgeons, physicians, counselors,  rehabilitation therapists, social workers, personal care attendants,  andor lawyers; 

Insurance companies that issue health insurance; 

Educators at every level involving regular andor special education; 

Government agencies that administer health and social programs  such as Medicaid, State  

Childrens Health Insurance Program SCHIP, Supplemental  Nutritional  Assistance  Program  SNAP,  and  Vocational  Rehabilitation involving transition from high school to the world of  work. The Brain Injury Association of America 2018.  When a student with a TBI returns to school, maintaining an understanding  of the extent of the individual's post-level of psycho-educational functioning  will be vital to implementing transition services or learning modifications  andor accommodations for successful adaptation to the educational arena  Leonard-Zabel, 2018. If parents, professionals, and the student are having 

Traumatic Brain Injury   149 

difficulties understanding the recovery process and rate of learning, it could  lead to misunderstanding and high expectations when academic expectations  are too much for the individual healing from an injury.  When reviewing the case of Steve, for example, who was introduced at  the beginning of this chapter, his return to school could involve  professionals seeing him walk and talk without losing his balance. Logic  could dictate that he has recovered from the gross motor weaknesses  initially sustained from his TBI; however, the professionals may not see  when he walks from one end of the school building to another to attend  a class that he may lose his balance due to growing fatigue or that he  may become disoriented and lost on his way to class due to intermittent  vertigo as a result of a compromised vestibular system.  According to Jantz et al. 2014, the following may occur and cause parents  and professionals to react due to inaccuracies surrounding TBI: 

reluctance to be involved in the individuals transition process; 

inaccurate expectations of the cognitive potential of the individual; 

possible minimization of reported strengths or weaknesses with  learning; 

premature  or  unsuccessful  attempts  to  resume  pre-injury  educational sports activities; 

resistance  to  educational  intervention  efforts  and  setting  unreasonable or unattainable goals; 

an unrealistic level of expectation to have one participate in learning  or physical activities when not fully recovered; 

unreasonable or inappropriate comparison to peer performance; 

feeling helpless leading to frustration, self-blame, and anger for lack  of progress; 

feelings of despair, helplessness, low self-esteemworth, anxiety or  depression; 

incorrect or immature responses to inappropriate behaviors or social  interactions; 

misconceptions of behaviors; and 

a one-size-fits-all or a cookie cutter-approach based on previous  experiences with TBI and  

not customized to the particular individual's needs. 

 Chapter 12 

Possible Learning and Behavioral Consequences of Traumatic Brain  Injury  Depending on the level of injury and the impact it has on the individuals  educational, personal, and social life, there may be neurological andor  cognitive impairments, personality or behavioral changes, and even lifestyle  consequences that occur.  Neurological Impairment motor, sensory, and autonomic  Motor function impairments can impact gross motor coordination, balance,  walking, hand function-grip strength and coordination, and oral motor  speech production Morrison, 2010. A possible sensory loss may be affected  involving taste, touch, smell, sight and hearing acuity Morrison, 2010. There  are sleep disturbances that may impact deep restorative sleep such as  insomnia, fatigue, restless legs, and level of pain. There can be medical  complications such as head-onset epilepsy, hydrocephalus with pressure and  fluid treated with a shunt, benign hydrocephalus not needing a shunt,  hematoma, and heterotopic ossification HO which is the presence of bone  in soft tissue where bone usually does not exist as a direct result of injury or  trauma impacting musculoskeletal, central nervous system, andor spinal  cord injury Morrison, 2010.  Cognitive Impairment  The brain is a system of interconnections in which injuries to specific sites of  the brain could impact the entire brain system. Despite this, many facets of  cognitive development can be affected and cause the child or youth to have  difficulties with learning and ruled-governed behavior. Memory impairment  can impact new learning and create havoc with attention and concentration  reducing speed and flexibility of thought processing Leonard-Zabel, 2018.  Injury to the brain can affect higher-order thinking and reasoning and impair  the individuals problem-solving ability especially involving rule-governed  behavior. Executive functioning skills can be impacted leading to difficulties  with planning, organization, and making good decisions Morrison, 2010.  Language problems could occur, involving dysphasia, word finding  challenges, and trouble with reading and writing. Further difficulty with ageappropriate judgment and safety awareness can be affected depending on the  level of severity of the injury Morrison, 2010; Leonard-Zabel, 2018.  Personality and Behavioral Changes  Mood or anxiety, as well as depression, can all occur at once or individually  even months and years after a TBI. Impaired social and coping skills coupled 

Traumatic Brain Injury   151 

with reduced self-esteem can lead to difficulties adjusting to everyday  demands and activities Leonard-Zabel, 2018. There could be altered  emotional self-control with poor frustration tolerance. Anger and aggression  may escalate necessitating anger management precautions both at home and  in school Morrison, 2010. There can be denial on what the student can do  with the increasing overload on the cognitive learning system. Self-centered  behavior may occur due to rigid wants and desires coupled with lack of  reading verbal or nonverbal cues of others who also have needs and desires.  Depending on the level of injury, the individual may appear apathetic and  amotivational, leading others to believe the individual is lazy or lacks the  ability to care about progress with learning. Most of all, professionals who are  not fully aware of the after effects of TBI may confuse these symptoms with a  suspicion of substance use or abuse Morrison, 2010: Leonard-Zabel, 2018.  Common Lifestyle Consequences  Following the TBI event, the child or youth may experience variable academic  achievement and appear to have gaps with previously learned material as  well as new or novel material. What once was a good grasp of learning and  consistent abilities across the academic domains may appear scattered and  lackluster with work produced Leonard-Zabel, 2018. This is commonly due  to fatigue, inconsistent energy levels, and variable attention and  concentration. There may be a lack of transportation alternatives with the  school or family to stay after for additional learning or come in early to be  tutored. The child or youth may experience inadequate recreational  opportunities especially if he or she cannot resume his or her favorite  activities.  Many individuals who have a TBI experience hypersensitivity in which they  may have difficulties maintaining interpersonal relationships, which results  in a loss of friends as a result of injury limitations or mood issues LeonardZabel, 2018. For adolescents, there may be a breakdown of established love  relationships that could result in breakups. There is grieving on the part of the  child and youth along with their family concerning the loss of preinjury roles  or independence Morrison, 2010. There is compassion fatigue on the part of  parents andor educational professionalsstaff, which may impact patience  and understanding. Morrison, 2010; Leonard-Zabel, 2018.  Exploring Memory to Understand Its Function to Learning  Children and youth with TBI experience complications with short-term,  working memory and long-term retrieval Dehn, 2010. Short-term memory is  the immediate processing of information whereas working memory is the  powerhouse of the memory system and processes on the average 5 to 7 pieces 

 Chapter 12 

of information at a given time. Short-term memory is thought to be  embedded within the working memory system. It can operate independently  from working memory, but whatever short-term memory content is being  managed by the brain, working memory is performing as the "executor" of  the brain, performing executive functioning skills sets necessary for planning,  foresight ability, and ruled-governed ability.  Working memory is one of the significant features of cognitive processing  that underlies thinking and learning. By utilizing the contents of various  memory storage files, working memory assists individuals to determine and  put together coherent thoughts and ideas. On the other hand, long-term  retrieval is unlimited when information is successfully transferred from  working memory Dehn, 2010; Leonard-Zabel, 2018. Overall, when reading a  medical or neuropsychological report, please keep in mind that short-term,  working memory and long-term memory are areas that can be impacted  significantly by TBI insult for quite some time in the healing brain. Therefore,  it is of utmost importance to understand what specific roles each aspect of  memory presents within the learning process in order to provide effective  instruction and lessen frustration to the student Leonard-Zabel, 2018.  Relationship with Academic Learning Involving Short and Working  Memory  The similarities between short-term memory and working memory involve  encoding of information, are susceptible to interference, connected to longterm memory, both are necessary for learning, and can be monitored well if  parents and professionals know what to look for. Short term memory works  on immediate storage of information with an average span of seven items; it  passively holds onto information and requires little effort; it uses nonexecutive function skills, has automatic processing; it is involved in the  encoding of information, not retrieval; and is enhanced by simple strategies  Dehn, 2010. The working memorys main function is processing with the  average capacity of items stored is seven, plus or minus two; and it actively  manipulates information for eventual long-term storage; there is effortful  processing, it is involved in encoding and retrieval; and is enhanced by  elaborate strategies Dehn, 2010.  Relationship with Academic Learning Involving Shortand Long-Term  Memory  Similar attributes between short-term memory and long-term memory  involve verbal and visual components necessary for learning, interact with  working memory, aid in the transformation of information, are affected by  strategies and can be affected by interference making retained information 

Traumatic Brain Injury   153 

difficult to encode appropriately, can function automatically and monitor  each other, are related to other cognitive processes, and when both not  working to their maximum capacity can cause forgetting. The differences  between shortand long-term memory are clear in that short-term memory  has very limited storage capacity, retains information for just a few seconds,  has conscious access to content, depends on attentional capacity,  immediately forgets if encoding is interrupted, is agreeable to simple  strategies, and has easy access to information Dehn, 2010. Long-term  memory, on the other hand, has limitless capacity, retains information from  minutes to years, not all content has conscious access, is less dependent on  attention, tends to be forgotten if not used, retrieval can be extended,  agreeable to elaborate strategies, and difficulty in accessing information  Dehn, 2010.  Learning and Behavioral Processes Associated with   Executive Functions that may be Impacted by a TBIConcussive Injury  Within the developing brain of children and youth, TBI can impact every facet  of attention and learning achievement. Executive functioning, performed by  the prefrontal cortex in the brain, has a strong connection to overall memory;  therefore, there are myriad skills that may be impacted from the aftereffects  of a TBI Christofori  Grafman, 2017. If the TBI is more moderate or severe,  the student with TBI may experience the inability to sustain prolonged  attention and focus, have frustration with increased complexity, experience  the inability to sequence multiple steps towards a goal e.g., such as packing a  suitcase, have over-reliance on routines, loss of spontaneity, deep  perseveration e.g., getting stuck in a mental rut, have concrete thinking,  experience difficulty understanding metaphor and humor and difficulty  linking ideas such as abstraction Leonard-Zabel, 2018.  Environmental Triggers-Precipitators of Negative Behaviors in the  Student with TBI  Children and youth who suffer the effects of TBI experience numerous  environmental triggers that may impact the learning process as well as  behavioral adjustment; for example, high levels of stimulation e.g., noise and  simultaneous activities, each of which demands the child's attention  Goldman  Kramer, 2016. Crowded classes can lead students with TBI to  become overstimulated, which in turn may decrease cognitive processing and  increase emotional distress.  Rapid classroom pacing can result in dyscontrol for many students with TBI.  Lack of predictability can cause anxiousness; thus, students with TBI need a  clear structure of information. Due to deficits in the childs and youths ability 

 Chapter 12 

to think flexibly and to problem solve, a student with TBI may respond  negatively to unexpected changes Goldman  Kramer, 2016. Physical and  cognitive demands within school settings may overwhelm the student to the  point of an emotional outburst. These types of outbursts are more common as  the students level of fatigue increases throughout the day. Negative social  input is a common precipitator of challenging behaviors. The individual with  a TBI is surrounded by fellow students and teachers, who may either become  part of the problem through ridicule, rigid demands and the like or part of  the solution through positive social supports Goldman  Kramer, 2016.  Students with TBI may feel anxious without knowing exactly why Model  Systems Knowledge Translation Center MSKTC, 2018. They may worry and  become anxious about not achieving similarly to their peers or become  worried about making too many mistakes and are concerned about  anticipated criticism. Anxiety may heighten when being in crowds, being  rushed, or a sudden change of plans occur. Panic attacks and sudden onset of  anxiety may occur as a result of a very stressful situation or can be caused by  replaying their injury in their minds eye over and over if many questions are  asked as to what happened or what caused an accident or injury MSKTC,  2018. Difficulty reasoning, even when attending and concentrating, can be  contributing factors making it difficult for the student with TBI to solve  problems and feel overwhelmed. If there are too many demands and pressure  on the student with TBI, this can increase their anxiety to overdrive MSKTC,  2018.   Feelings of sadness, frustration, and loss are widespread after the injury and  depression may set in well after the TBI MSKTC, 2018. Often these feeling  appear during the later stages of recovery especially after the student  becomes aware of the long-term situation of healing. Symptoms of  depression can include feeling sad, weepy, feeling worthless, having changes  in sleep patterns, may gradually withdraw from others and want to be alone  more, loss of interest or pleasure in things once gratifying, feeling tired and  sluggish, and may have suicide ideation or thoughts of suicide. Temper  outbursts and irritability often are described as having a "short fuse" or  "flying off the handle." The child or youth with TBI may yell, use challenging  language, throw objects, slam their fists into things, slam doors, or threaten or  hurt another MSKTC, 2018.   In order to assist the student with TBI to lower anxious, depressive, or  irritability coupled with temper outbursts it is important to 

reduce the environmental demands and unnecessary stressors.  Provide reassurances to calm the individual.  

Traumatic Brain Injury   155 

add structured activities into daily routine and prepare the  individual for the transition to the next event or activity well ahead of  time.  

allow light exercise to elevate mood if the physician agrees.  

reduce stress and decrease irritating situations to lower temper  outbursts and irritability.  

teach and positively reinforce basic anger management such as selfcalming strategies, relaxation and better communication methods.  

try not to argue with the child or youth with TBI and not to take it  personally.  

do not try to argue with the student with TBI during an outburst.  Instead, let the student have a few minutes of quiet down time. Being  irritable and getting angry easily is possibly due to the TBI.   MSKTC, 2018; Leonard-Zabel, 2018  Accommodations and Modifications to the Learning Process  Physical Symptoms  Depending on the level of TBI and the comfort of the student, there are ways  to adjust the academic and environmental setting when in school. When a  headache, light-headedness, andor dizziness occurs, provide frequent rest  breaks, identify irritants and reduce or eliminate exposure, provide rest in the  nurse's office, give more time to leave the seat and for moving around the  building, provide an elevator pass, and provide a copy of class notes Golman   Kramer, 2016. Visual symptoms such as sensitivity to bright lights or  blurred vision can be helped by reducing the exposure to technology,  reducing the brightness on the computer screen, allowing the student to wear  sunglasses, and possibly provide audio material. With noisy environments,  allow lunch in a quiet place or area, have the student temporarily avoid noisy  classes, consider early dismissal to avoid crowded hallways, and consider  noise reduction headphones Goldman  Kramer, 2016.  Effective Instruction  Challenges to learning new tasks and using cognitive resources are by far a  belabored and frustrating task for the student with a TBI. Difficulty keeping  pace with work demands, retaining and recalling learned materials, and  difficulty processing, especially verbal information, are just a few of these  concerns to address for remediation Young, Jean,  Citro, 2018a; Young, Jean,   Citro, 2018b. A variety of instructional approaches are available to parents 

 Chapter 12 

and professionals to reduce frustration and foster learning comfort for the  student with TBI to include communication supports, environmental and  organization supports, motivational supports, social supports, use of a hidden  instruction curriculum, knowwant to knowlearned charts, note taking and  organizational support side modeling, speak and spin approach to combat  any bullying that may occur due to vulnerability, communication  applications, visual schedules and social skills applications along with reward  tracking applications Young et al., 2018a; Young et al., 2018b.  Technology Interventions to Aid in Educational Planning  There are hundreds of technology applications, programs, and websites to  assist educators and parents for children and youth who have experienced a  TBI. A few suggestions of technological applications that may support the  student with learning include text to speech and speech to text applications,  behavior trackers, breathingmeditationmindfulness applications, recorders  that suppress ambient background noise while recording conversations in  noisy environments and can slow down conversations to a manageable pace,  and audiobook applications Brainline, 2018; Young et al., 2018b. There are  also a number of applications to assist with daily work tasks such as  timefatigueenergy management, goal setting, note-taking and recording,  brainstorming and graphic organizer, calendars, picture planners, as well as  word prediction and other text functions Young et al., 2018b.  There are also a variety of websites and centers that are able to assist those  with TBI. 

The Wisconsin Assistive Technology Initiative WATI is a recognized  leader in the provision of statewide support for assistive technology  services and offers a wealth of practitioner helpful resources  http:www.watt.org. 

The National Assistive Technology AT Research Institute conducts  AT research, translates theory to practice and provides resources  http:natri.uky.edu. 

The Quality Indicators for Assistive Technology QIAT is a website  including recent work to develop a comprehensive set of quality  indicators for effective assistive technology services http:www.  qiat.org. 

The TAM Technology and Media Division of the Council for  Exceptional Children offers a variety of information about assistive  technology  and  special  education  instructional  technology  http:www.tamcec.org. 

Traumatic Brain Injury   157 

Trace Research and Design Center includes software toolkits and  many disability-related articles and papers http:trace.wisc.edu  worldcomputeraccessmultisharewar:htm. 

The Family Village is a website designed to provide information for  families with children with disabilities. It offers extensive resources  on Assistive Technology AT http:www.familyvillage.wisc.edu. 

Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology of North  America  RESNA.  This  project  provides  information  and  consultation to Assistive Technology AT programs. Please locate the  AT program in your state and read articles relating to legislation and  AT http:www.resna.org.  

ABLEDATA  provides  objective  information  about  assistive  technology products and rehabilitation equipment available from  domestic and international sources http:www.abledata.com.  

CAST researches and develops ways to support all learners according  to their strengths and needs through Universal Design for Learning  http:www.cast.org. 

TECH MATRIX provides matrices to serve as a resource that matches  technology tools with supporting literature on promising practices  for the instruction of K-8 mathematics and reading for students with  disabilities http:www.techmatrix.org. 

News-2-you.com is a weekly newspaper for ACC users and emergent  readers. Communication symbols are used along with the text  http:news-2-you.com.  Finally, the following websites might prove useful to those with TBI as well  as those who are there to help an afflicted individual. 

Brain Steps: http:www.brainsteps.net  

Kids with Brain Injury: http:www.cokidswithbrainjury.com  

Brain Line: www.brainline.orgcontent201109brainstars.html  

The Concussion Toolkit: http:www.riil.orgfiles3940873  2535Concussions in the concussion-toolkit 

Concussion  Care:  http:wwwchop.educenter-programs  concussion-care-minds-matter.Vnre9dBiefQ 

 Chapter 12 

Final Thoughts  Traumatic brain injury TBI is a devastating injury that can be life changing  affecting a students educational and social-emotional adjustment. Children  and youth who experience a TBI need nurturance, patience, kindness and  true understanding of their issues to aid them with adjusting to difficulties in  the educational arena. The use of technology can be an asset to many  students with TBI to assist them in managing everyday life demands and  events. It is vital to their educational career for professionals and parents to  work toward their healing process and have realistic expectations in order for  students with TBI to foster a self-esteem and self-worth that is realistic for  them.  Points to Remember 

It is important to understand what a traumatic brain injury TBI is  and how it can impact all facets of a students educational and  personal life. 

TBI students may qualify for an individualized educational plan IEP  andor 504 accommodation plan depending upon eligibility criteria  involving state andor federal educational laws. 

Parents and teachers need to keep vigilant on what constitutes  inaccuracies surrounding TBI and what to do to get accurate  information for educational planning. 

Be aware of the learning and behavioral consequences of TBI  involving cognitive impairment, personality and behavioral changes,  and common lifestyle consequences when formulating school psychoeducational  and  psycho-social  adjustments  planning  and  interventions. 

Know the relationship between short-term memory, working-memory  and long-term memory retrieval as these relate to cognitive  impairment in order to develop educational interventions. 

Use of technology can be a positive method of educational and lifeskills interventions for ease of adjustment to learning demands. 

Keep in mind that the effects of TBI cannot only affect the injured but  has a major impact on families and educators on a daily basis. 

Traumatic Brain Injury   159 

References  American Association of Neurological Surgeons. 2018. Neurological  conditions and treatments. Retrieved from  https:www.aans.orgPatientsNeurosurgical-Conditions-andTreatmentsConcussion  Bowen, J. 2008. Classroom interventions for students with traumatic brain  injuries. Retrieved   from https:www.brainline.orgarticleclassroom-interventions-studentstraumatic-brain-injuries  Brain Injury Alliance Utah. n.d. Types and levels of brain injury. Retrieved  from https:biau.orgtypes-and-levels-of-brain-injury  Brain Injury Association of America 2018. Brain injury facts  statistics.  Retrieved from https:www.biausa.orgpublic-affairspublicawarenesscampaignsfact-sheet  Brainline. 2018. Assistive Technology. Retrieved from  https:www.brainline.orgtopicassistive-technology  Cantu, R.C.  Hyman, M. 2012. Concussion and our kids. Boston, MA:  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.  Center for Parent Information  Resources. 2017. Categories of disabilities  under IDEA.    Retrieved from https:www.parentcenterhub.orgcategoriestbi  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2017. Traumatic brain injury   concussion. Retrieved from  https:www.cdc.govtraumaticbraininjurygetthefacts.html  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2018. Report to Congress: The  management of traumatic brain injury in children: Opportunities for action.  National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Division of Unintentional  Injury Prevention. Atlanta, GA. Retrieved from  https:www.cdc.govtraumaticbraininjurypdfreportstocongressmanage mentoftbiinchildrenTBI-ReporttoCongress-508.pdf  Christofori, I.  Grafman, J. 2017. Executive functions after traumatic brain  injury: From deficit to recovery. Executive Functions in Health and Disease,  421-443. DOI: 10.1016B978-0-12-803676-1.00018-0  Dehn, M. J. 2010. Long-term memory problems in children and adolescents:  assessment, intervention and effective instruction. Hoboken, NJ. Wiley   Sons, Inc.  Goldman, T.K.  Kramer, R. 2016. Concussion: A Practical Guide for  Educators. Stoddard, WI: Schoolhouse Educational Services.  Jantz, P.B., Davies, S.C.,  Bigler, E.D. 2014. Working with traumatic brain  injury in schools: transition, assessment and intervention. New York, NY:  Routledge.  Kolb, B., Whishaw, I.Q.,  Teskey, G.C. 2016. An introduction to brain and  behavior. New York, NY: Worth Publishers Macmillian Learning.  Leonard-Zabel, A.M. 2018. Please help me. I am having difficulty thinking.  How traumatic brain injury impacts pediatric learning and memory within 

 Chapter 12 

the inclusive learning environment. International Symposium on Cognitive  Research  Disorders. Augustine, FL.   Lipkin, P.H.  Okamoto, J. 2015. The Individuals with Disabilities Education  Act IDEA for children with special educational needs. Pediatrics, 1366,  e1650-e1662. DOI: 10.1542peds.2015-3409  Model Systems Knowledge Translation Center MSKTC. 2018. Living with  traumatic brain injury TBI. Retrieved from https:msktc.orgtbi  Morrison, J. R. 2010. Assessing and intervening with children with traumatic  brain injury. In D. Miller Ed., Best practice in school neuropsychology:  guidelines for effective practice, assessment, and evidence-based intervention,  pp. 798-799. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley  Sons, Inc.  Shi, J., Xiang, H., Wheeler, K., Smith, G. A., Stallones, L., Groner, H. J.,  Wang,  Z. 2009. Costs, mortality likelihood and outcomes of hospitalized US  children with traumatic brain injuries. In P.B. Jantz, S.C. Davis  E.D. Bigler,  Working with Traumatic Brain Injury in Schools: Transitions, Assessment,  and Intervention. New York,NY: Routledge.   Stocchetti, N.  Zanier, E.R. 2016. Chronic impact of traumatic brain injury  on outcome and quality of life: A narrative review. Critical Care, 201, 148.    DOI: 10.1186s13054-016-1318-1   Tabish, S.A.  Syed, N. 2015. Recent advances and future trends in traumatic  brain injury. Emergency Medicine, 5, 229. DOI: 10.41722165-7548.1000229  Young, N.D., Jean, E.  Citro, T.A. 2018a. From head to heart: High quality  Teaching practices in the spotlight. Wilmington, DE: Vernon Press.  Young, N.D., Jean, E.  Citro, T.A. 2018b. Stars in the schoolhouse: Teaching  practices and approaches that make a difference. Wilmington, DE: Vernon  Press. 

Chapter 13 

Multiple Disabilities  Rachel L. Seaman-Tullis, Ph.D., BCBA-D,  University of West Georgia,  John M. Schaefer, Ph.D.,  Cleveland State University  The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act IDEA defines multiple  disabilities as concomitant impairments, the combination of which causes  such severe educational needs that cannot be accommodated in special  education programs solely for one of the impairments; however, the category  of multiple disabilities does not include deaf-blindness American  Psychological Association, 2018; Parent Center for Information  Resources,  2017. Students with multiple disabilities will sometimes be referred to as  students with severe disabilities, significant disabilities, profound disabilities,  or even students with complex needs Nakken  Vlaskamp, 2007. This  includes any combination of autism spectrum disorder, deafness, emotional  disturbance,  hearing  impairment,  intellectual  disability,  orthopedic  impairment, other health impairment, specific learning disability, speech or  language impairment, traumatic brain injury, or visual impairment. A student  who qualifies for an educational eligibility of multiple disabilities, for  example, may have a co-morbidity of intellectual disability and visual  impairment, autism and orthopedic impairment, or traumatic brain injury  and hearing impairment.  When interpreting this definition, it is important to note that not every  student who has more than one impairment receives multiple disabilities  eligibility. The combination of impairments needs to be such that it causes  the student to have severe educational needs Nakken  Vlaskamp, 2007.  Specifically, those educational needs must be severe enough that they cannot  be addressed by providing special education services for only one of the  impairments, and that the student needs specialized programs, equipment,  instruction, or resources to succeed in the classroom Nakken  Vlaskamp,  2007. This definition means that students with multiple disabilities will  present with an incredibly wide range of physical characteristics, intellectual  attributes, abilities, and severity levels. There is such a wide range of students,  however, that multiple disabilities represent approximately 2.0 percent of all 

 Chapter 13 

students having a classification in special education; with 132,000 students  .03 of students served under the multiple disability category in the 2014  school year U.S. Department of Education, 2018.  Characteristics  In addition to their educational eligibility, students with multiple disabilities  will often have one or more medical diagnoses such as Down Syndrome,  cerebral palsy, hydrocephalus, or seizure disorder Bruce, 2011. While  students with multiple disabilities are a heterogeneous group and have a wide  range of conditions and impairments, many students will have similar  characteristics such as limited speech or deficits in communication Bruce,  2011, difficulty with basic physical mobility or limited movement Chang,  Chen,  Huang, 2011, difficulty with functional and independent living skills,  dependence on others Nakken  Vlaskamp, 2007, challenging behavior e.g.,  self-injurious behavior and stereotypical behavior due to communication  deficits and sensory issues, Poppes, Van der Putten,  Vlaskamp, 2010, and  health issues such as visual impairment, epilepsy, spasticity, and  deformations Van Timmeren et al. 2016.  Shelly is a 16-year-old high school student diagnosed with intellectual  disability and an orthopedic impairment and has an educational  eligibility of multiple disabilities. Shellys teachers describe her as  having a spunky personality, and always being excited to meet new  people who come into the classroom. She loves to listen to rock music,  watch Saved By The Bell, and greet customers who come to the classs  after-school coffee cart. Due to complications with cerebral palsy, Shelly  also has difficulty expressing her wants and needs to others and is  unable to stand for extended periods of time. Shellys new teacher this  year, Mr. Ryder, is still learning how to accommodate Shellys needs and  use the most effective strategies to help her succeed.  Multiple Disabilities in the Classroom  Although deeply impactful for those that are diagnosed, multiple disabilities  is among the lowest incidence disability categories served under IDEA. For  this group of students, what a typical day looks like is largely determined by  their classroom placements. Statistics from the Office of Special Education  and Rehabilitative Services OSERS 2017 indicate that only about 13 of  students with multiple disabilities are included in general education  classrooms for 80 or more of their school day OSERS, 2017. This is the least  amount of inclusive education for any disability category. An additional 16.5  of students spend between 4079 of their day in inclusive settings OSERS, 

Multiple Disabilities   163 

2017. The remaining students spend less than 40 of their day in inclusive  settings 46 or are placed in alternative settings 24 such as separate  schools or residential facilities OSERS, 2017. Despite spending relatively  little time in general education environments, about 50 of students with  multiple disabilities still graduate with a regular high school diploma, whose  requirements are identical to those earned by students without disabilities  OSERS, 2017.  Inclusion and Co-Teaching  For the almost 30 of students with multiple disabilities spending a  significant portion 40 of their day in a general education classroom,  instruction can vary widely based on the individual childs needs and abilities  Horn  Kang, 2012. Many students with multiple disabilities participate in  reading, math, and other academic instruction along with their non-disabled  peers. Like all children, students with multiple disabilities benefit from  explicit instruction and other evidence-based instructional practices. Often  these students just need the supplemental support of the types of tools and  accommodations that we describe later in this chapter to be able to access  the curriculum Horn  Kang, 2012. Other times, especially those with  concurrent intellectual disability, students with multiple disabilities may need  the curriculum modified to be more appropriate for their cognitive level.  Browder, Mims, Spooner, Ahlgrim-Delzell, and Lee 2008 utilized universal  design  for  learning  principles  and  augmentative  and  alternative  communication AAC supports to help students with multiple disabilities  engage in shared story time with their general education classmates. Outside  of traditional academic instructional time, students with multiple disabilities  are often included for subjects such as music, art, and physical education that  may require less curriculum modification. Regardless of class content,  however, research indicates that students with multiple disabilities may  engage in more communication and social interactions while in inclusive  settings when compared to special education classrooms Foreman, ArthurKelly, Pascoe,  King, 2004.  Special Education Classroom  For the majority of children with multiple disabilities, at least part of their day  will be spent in a special education setting away from their peers without  disabilities OSERS, 2017. In these settings across low incidence disability  categories, a debate continues as to the right balance of academic skills  instruction and functional skills instruction Ayres, Lowrey, Douglas,   Sievers, 2011. Specialized instruction on individualized academic goals is  essential to improving long-term post-secondary education and employment 

 Chapter 13 

outcomes; however, students with multiple disabilities often need explicit  instruction in many functional skills that their classmates without disabilities  may not. The most important functional skills identified for students with  low-incidence disabilities, such as multiple disabilities, are communication  Andzik, Schaefer, Nichols,  Chung, 2018, activities of daily living Maes,  Lambrechts, Hostyn,  Petry, 2007, employment skills Cannella-Malone   Schaefer, 2017, and self-determination Wehmeyer, 1996.  In the Community  Unfortunately, students with multiple disabilities have consistently poorer  long-term outcomes when compared to peers without disabilities or more  mild disabilities e.g., specific learning disabilities in the areas of postsecondary education, employment, and independent living Wagner,  Newman, Cameto, Levine,  Marder, 2007. This may be due to both  structural and social barriers that students with severe disabilities face to  accessing opportunities outside of the school building Bedell et al., 2013. To  support instruction in those areas, many transition-aged, 1622-year-old  students with multiple disabilities may also receive some instruction in  community-based and employment settings. In fact, research indicates that  participating in a paid job or internship while still in high school may be a  strong contributing factor to future employment success Carter, Austin,   Trainor, 2012. The need for community-based instruction only continues to  grow as public policy U.S. Department of Labor, 2018 and advocacy  Mansell  Beadle-Brown, 2010 continue to push for more access to inclusive  living and working environments for adults with low-incidence disabilities.  Challenges and Barriers to Access  Students with multiple disabilities often face significant challenges and  barriers to participating in more fully inclusive environments and accessing  instructional supports. Significant speech and language impairments that  require AAC supports are common among students with multiple disabilities  Andzik et al., 2018. Likewise, students with multiple disabilities have a high  incidence of mobility impairments and chronic medical needs often requiring  the support of assistive technology and related services Bedell et al., 2013.  Finally, students with multiple disabilities also have a high incidence of  struggling with challenging behavior, both internalizing and externalizing  Poppen et al., 2010. These challenging behaviors can impede student  learning and the learning of other children in the environment, creating  further barriers to inclusive environments; therefore, it is important to detail  evidence-based instructional strategies, tools, and accommodations tailored 

Multiple Disabilities   165 

to support students with the complex set of challenges common to students  with multiple disabilities.  Evidence-Based Strategies  Students with multiple disabilities have a multitude of learning needs, and it  is often difficult for them to participate in the classroom without supports.  Fortunately, research has shown that students with multiple disabilities can  learn not only academic skills Spooner, Knight, Browder,  Smith, 2012, but  also communication Lancioni, Singh, OReilly,  Sigafoos, 2011, independent  living Bouck, 2010, leisure Cannella-Malone, Miller, Schaefer, Jimenez, Page,   Sabielny, 2016, social Asmus et al. 2017, and vocational skills Canella-Malone   Schaefer, 2017 when evidence-based strategies are implemented with fidelity.  These strategies and interventions can be put in place in the special  education classroom, inclusive classroom, and even the community to teach  this group of students the skills needed to be successful throughout their  lives.  Explicit Instruction  Explicit instructionsometimes referred to as systematic instruction or direct  instructionis an instructional strategy that can be used to teach almost any  type of skill, from social communication with peers to application of the  scientific method. Contrary to implicit instruction where the student is  presented with the problem and left to come to an answer on his or her own,  explicit instruction is an errorless learning strategy that uses a quick-paced  instructional script. In this type of instruction, students learn examples and  non-examples through teacher or peer modeling Bursuck  Damer, 2007.  This may look like the I do, we do, you do strategy where the student is first  shown exactly how to perform the skill i.e., the specific response, the  student practices doing the skill with guidance, and then once successful with  guidance, the student has the opportunity to perform the skill independently  Archer  Hughes, 2011.  Specific responses will fall into two main categories; discrete responses and  chained responses Spooner et al., 2012. A discrete response is a singular  response such as an answer to a math problem, a vocabulary definition, or a  simple communication response Spooner et al., 2012. A chained response  consists of multiple responses or steps, in which one response needs to be  completed before the next one can begin Spooner et al., 2012. Chained  responses are typically found in independent living skills, leisure, social, and  vocational skills as these types of skills are more complex and have multiple  steps. 

 Chapter 13 

Systematic Prompting  A prompt refers to any action or material that will increase the likelihood of a  student giving a correct response. In instruction, prompts are generally given  by an adult or peer before or as a student attempts to use a skill and can be  used in combination with explicit instruction Wong et al. 2015. Systematic  prompting can be used in any type of skill that requires a discrete response  such as the answer to a math problem, the spelling of a sight word, or the  definition of a vocabulary term. Verbal, gestural, or physical prompts can be  given to learners to assist them in acquiring or engaging in a targeted  behavior or skill.  Time delay. Time delay is a systematic prompting procedure that consists of  two strategies; simultaneous prompting and time delay Wong et al., 2015.  First, simultaneous prompting, or errorless learning is used. This means that  the prompt is given before, or at the same time as the instruction. Once the  student becomes successful with the skill, a 2 to 5-second delay is inserted.  The brief delay occurs between the opportunity to use the skill and any  additional instructions or prompts i.e., instruction, delay, prompt, student  response. The purpose of the time delay is to allow the student to respond  without having to receive a prompt and focuses on fading the use of prompts  during instructional activities Wong et al. 2015. Time delay has successfully  been used to teach skills such as word and picture recognition Browder,  Ahlgrim-Delzell, Spooner, Mims,  Baker, 2009 and telling time Falkenstine,  Collins, Schuster,  Kleinert, 2009 to students with multiple disabilities.  Using time delay to teach new skills also has several benefits such as ease of  implementation and increasing positive interactions during instruction  Wolery  Gast, 1984.  System of least prompts. The system of least prompts is a systematic  prompting procedure in which teachers use increasingly more intrusive  prompts only if necessary Cooper, Heron,  Heward, 2007. This gives the  student the opportunity to perform the response with the least amount of  assistance. If the learner is unable to give the correct response with the first  level of prompt after a set period of time e.g., 3 seconds, a more intrusive  prompt is given. If the learner is still unable to give the correct response with  this more intrusive prompt, an even more intrusive prompt is given, and so  on Cooper et al., 2007. Mims, Hudson,  Browder 2012 used a system of  least prompts to improve text-dependent listening comprehension for  students with intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder during  read-alouds of adapted grade-level biographies. While levels of prompt  intrusiveness will vary by student and skill, a least-to-most intrusive prompt  hierarchy could move from a verbal prompt, to a gestural prompt, to a model  prompt, and finally to a physical prompt if necessary. 

Multiple Disabilities   167 

Stimulus prompts. In contrast to the previously mentioned prompt types, a  stimulus prompt is a type of prompt in which the material is modified in  some way to help the student give the correct response Cooper et al., 2007.  This type of prompt can take many forms, but frequently used stimulus  prompts consist of movement prompts e.g., tapping the correct response,  positional prompts e.g., the correct response is placed closest to the learner,  and redundancy prompts e.g., color, size, or shape is paired with the correct  answer.  Task Analysis  A task analysis, or the process of dividing a complex activity or behavior into  small, manageable steps in order to assess and teach the skill, can be used to  help teach any type of chained response Wong et al. 2015. Writing a task  analysis is especially useful for teaching skills that have many steps involved  such as independent living skills e.g., cooking a meal, vocational skills e.g.,  sorting files and then alphabetizing, social skills e.g., asking a friend to play,  and leisure skills e.g., painting a picture. Task analyses can easily be used in  combination with other strategies, such as in the example below.  Shelly enjoys helping her peers with the coffee cart they run after school  to practice vocational skills; however, Mr. Ryder noticed that Shelly is not  always sure how to make the coffee orders that customers request. As  participating in the coffee cart gives Shelley the opportunity to practice  important vocational and social skills, Mr. Ryder researches strategies he  can use to help. Mr. Ryder has decided that since making coffee is a  chained response, he is going to make a task analysis of the steps that are  needed to make the three most popular drinks that are ordered, and  then use explicit instruction, systematic prompting, and visual supports  to help Shelly learn the steps for each of the drinks.  Communication  When students with multiple disabilities have difficulty with communication  or limited communication, challenging behavior can emerge because  students are unable to communicate their wants and needs, such as when a  student hits the table when he would like a snack because he is unable to  verbally communicate that he would like a snack. Evidence-based practices  such as the Picture Exchange Communication System PECS and Functional  Communication Training can help teach students who otherwise would be  unable to communicate.  Exchange Communication Systems PECS. PECS is an evidence-based  practice in which students learn to engage in communication through the use 

 Chapter 13 

of picture icons Bondy  Frost, 1994, and has been shown effective with a  wide range of learners from severe developmental disabilities CannellaMalone, Fant,  Tullis, 2010 to autism spectrum disorder Battaglia   McDonald, 2015. When implementing PECS, students are initially taught to  give a picture of a desired item to a communicative partner in exchange for  the actual desired item. PECS consists of six phases; 1 making requests  through picture exchange, 2 persistence in initiating communication 3  discrimination between pictures 4 introduction of sentence structure, 5  answering questions with a request, and 6 commenting. These phases are  taught in succession and allow a student to communicate not only their wants  and needs, but also interact with their peers Bondy  Frost, 1994.  Functional Communication Training FCT. When using FCT, an  interfering behavior that has a communicative function is replaced with a  more appropriate form of communication that accomplishes the same  function Wong et al., 2015. In the above example, the student is hitting the  table i.e., interfering behavior when he would like a snack i.e., the  communicative function because he is unable to verbally communicate that  he would like a snack. In this scenario, the replacement response i.e., the  more appropriate communication would be to teach the student to choose a  picture icon of a snack rather than hitting the table when he would like a  snack. To help the student learn that this is the appropriate response to use  when he would like a snack, the teacher would ignore the hitting behavior,  and prompt the student to use his communication system instead; ensuring  to only give the student the snack when he uses the replacement response  Wong et al., 2015.  Visual supports. When combined with systematic instruction, visual  supports have been shown to increase skill acquisition, independence, and  can be easily incorporated into systematic instruction for students with  multiple disabilities Cohen  Demchak, 2018. Visual supports are a  communication and teaching aid that refer to any visual display that supports  the students engagement in a desired behavior or skill. Examples of visual  supports include pictures, written words, objects within the environment,  arrangement of the environment or visual boundaries, schedules, maps,  labels, organization systems, and timelines Wong et al. 2015.  Tools and Accommodation  Maximizing Each Students Individualized Education Program IEP  In addition to the evidence-based instructional strategies described above,  school teams also rely on a range of tools, accommodations, and services to  support students with multiple disabilities. In order to make sure that 

Multiple Disabilities   169 

supports are available to the student and school team when needed, it is  important that these supports are explicitly laid out in a students IEP Horn   Kang, 2012. To ensure that can happen, school teams must be diligent in  evaluating and documenting their students abilities and needs. Matching the  right tool to an identified need often takes strong assessment and multiple  trial periods.  A related central theme in supporting students with multiple disabilities is  the necessity of collaborating with a team of professionals at every step of the  way from assessment and planning to implementing an educational program  Horn  Kang, 2012. Students with multiple disabilities are often supported  by a team of educators, general education teachers, special education  teachers, and paraprofessionals. Students with specific limitations are often  supported by related service providers as well. For example, a student with  complex communication needs may need a speech and language pathologist  to assess his or her communication skills to help design and implement AAC  supports. A student with physical mobility impairments may need a physical  therapist to assess his or her gross motor movements and to help design and  manage an accessible environment.  Assistive Technology  Among the most common supports for students with multiple disabilities,  assistive technology refers to a broad range of tools used to support a broad  range of needs National Institute of Child Health and Human Development,  2018. Simple tools, often referred to as low-tech, can be used to support  physical assessment such as an adapted pencil grip for a child with low grip  strength or a slant board to reposition a computer key for a child using a  wheelchair National Institute of Child Health and Human Development,  2018. More complex tools, referred to as high-tech, can often be used for  more complex tasks, such as a speech generating device that a student who is  not speaking can use to compose messages that the device will say out loud  for any typical communication partner to hear National Institute of Child  Health and Human Development, 2018.  Like other tools and accommodations, when choosing which assistive  technology may benefit a student, research recommends a thorough  assessment of the students needs, assets, and barriers Copley  Ziviani,  2005. A team-based approach to designing and implementing assistive  technology is also recommended Copley  Ziviani, 2007. Zabala 1995  suggests assessing and choosing assistive technology for a student through  guiding questions using the SETT framework. This framework asks pointed  questions about the students needs and assets, the demands and barriers  posed by the environment, the tasks that the student is going to be asked to 

 Chapter 13 

accomplish, and the available tools that might best fit the first three areas  Zabala, 1995.  Supporting Augmentative and Alternative Communication AAC  Designing meaningful communication support starts with a thorough  assessment of the students needs and partnering with a speech and language  pathologist. Large standardized developmental inventories, such as the  Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, may offer a large-scale picture of a childs  overall communication skills as compared to their typical peers Markusic   Gromisch,  2015.  More  targeted  assessment  of  specific  areas  of  communication may also be helpful in determining a students needs, such as  using the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, to assess a childs receptive  vocabulary Markusic, Gromisch, 2012.  For students who score well below their typically developing peers in  communication skills, follow-up assessment may be necessary to gather  information for planning. Chung and Douglas 2014 recommend using their  Communication Competency Inventory CCI to pinpoint areas of need for  intervention. For students with very limited or no spoken word vocabularies,  Sigafoos, Arthur-Kelly, and Butterfield 2006 recommend their Inventory or  Potential Communicative Acts IPCA. Complex cases may also benefit from  using multiple sources assessment in the planning process.  When building an intervention plan from the results of the communication  assessment, the first choice for students with multiple disabilities is between  augmenting speech the child does have and teaching the student to use an  alternative method of communication other than speech Johnston, Reichle,  Feeley,  Jones, 2012. Augmenting speech may take simple tools such as  teaching social scripts or using video models and explicit instruction to  improve a childs intelligibility and comprehensibility. Teaching a child with  multiple disabilities to use an alternative method of communicating can be  much more complicated.   These systems range from low-tech solutions, like the PECS described  above, to high-tech solutions, like a speech generating device. Regardless of  which approach a team takes, it is necessary to also teach students the social  skills necessary to use their AAC practically in their natural environment. For  example, learning to repair communication breakdowns i.e., correct a  message when it is not received or understood is imperative to making any  AAC supports used or communication skills learned function pragmatically  for children Sigafoos et al., 2006.  After conducting a communication assessment, the speech and language  pathologist and Mr. Ryder collaborate to find a way to better help Shelly 

Multiple Disabilities   171 

communicate her wants and needs. They decide that they will begin  with PECS, and then transition Shelly to a speech generating device once  she has learned to successfully engage in the reciprocal nature of  communication. They immediately develop a plan to incorporate PECS  into her daily schedule so that she will have multiple opportunities to  engage in appropriate communication throughout the day.  Mobility and Physical Access  Supporting students whose multiple disabilities present with mobility  impairments also often requires a team approach; this may require working  with physical therapists to focus on gross motor movements and  collaborating with occupational therapists to work on fine motor control and  increasing independence in functional skills. For a student with a concurrent  visual impairment, partnering with an orientation and mobility specialist may  also be helpful. A central theme in supporting mobility for students with  multiple disabilities is focusing on both technology solutions to support  access, but also considering environmental arrangement Egilson   Traustadottir, 2009. Surveying and systematically removing the physical  barriers to mobility is important to promoting independence for a student  with physical limitations. This may be as simple as measuring the width  between furniture placement in a classroom to ensure that a student will have  an unobstructed turning radius while using a wheelchair.  There are many assistive technology supports to increase a students  physical access to tasks and environments. Low tech examples include  adaptive grips for writing implements or utensils, stands to hold reading  material at eye level, or braces to help a student isolate a single finger to press  buttons on a device; while high tech solutions include two common tools to  access a computer or other digital device: switches and using scanning and  eye gaze National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 2018.  Micro-switches are simple machines that complete a circuit that can be used  to directly activate an appliance or device; for example, Lancioni and  colleagues 2006 successfully taught children with severe multiple disabilities  to use two separate micro-switches connected to devices that said yes and  no aloud. Switches can also be used with scanning software to operate a  variety of computer programs through a series of highlighting options and  making selections Bache  Derwent, 2008. Schaefer and Andzik et al. 2016  describe a systematic method of training a student to use switches starting  with teaching a simple cause and effect, through teaching a student to  discriminate between multiple switches. Similarly, eye gaze tracking has also  been used successfully with scanning software to teach individuals with 

 Chapter 13 

severe multiple disabilities to operate complicated devices, such as AAC  systems Ball et al., 2010.  Feeding, Sensory Impairment, and Medical Needs  Many children with multiple disabilities may also struggle with a combination  of feeding issues, sensory impairments and choric medical conditions. The  specific related symptoms for impacting each child will vary widely  depending on that childs diagnoses; however, they may include: pica, food  aversion, impaired shallowing, hearing impairment, visual impairment,  orthopedic impairment, and impaired breathing. These additional challenges  often lead to chronic absences from school, instructional time lost while  providing basic care making it all the more vital that instructional time is used  efficiently Zijlstra  Vlaskamp, 2005. The first step to serving a child with  multiple disabilities with associated medical needs is to seek the support of a  collaborative team of professionals with expertise in the individual childs  unique needs. Generally, these issues affecting the childs health and wellbeing will need to be addressed by a combination of instruction and medical  intervention. A child with impaired swallowing may have a gastronomy tube  through which they take in food or need the support of a ventilator to breathe  properly. These needs would have to be supported by a nurse while in school  Frazeur-Cross, Traub, Hutter-Pishgahi,  Shelton, 2004. Feeding disorders  like pica i.e., the compulsive ingestion of inedible material or food aversion  may need to be addressed through behavior intervention Matson, Hattier,  Belva,  Matson, 2013.  Final Thoughts  When given the appropriate tools, accommodations, and supports, students  with multiple disabilities can thrive in the classroom and far exceed  expectations. When equipped with the right strategies for assessment and  intervention, teachers can rise to meet the varied and complex needs of  students with multiple disabilities. This unique disability category does  present unique challenges with an infinite diversity of needs and abilities.  Perhaps more than other groups, in many important ways students with  multiple disabilities embody the adage no two children are the same. The  trick for special education teachers serving students with disabilities is to  thoroughly assess each student and have a broad enough toolkit and a diverse  enough collaborative team to be able to make the perfect match between  each need and each support. 

Multiple Disabilities   173 

Points to Remember 

Multiple disabilities encompass a heterogeneous group of students,  with a wide range of abilities. 

Proper supports and planning are key for student success. 

Collaboration with other professionals is necessary to meet the varied  needs of students with multiple disabilities. 

Using systematic instruction and other evidence-based strategies is  necessary to help students with multiple disabilities succeed in the  classroom. 

Ensuring that students have a mode of communication is crucial to  their well-being and success in the classroom.  References  American Psychological Association. 2018. Individuals with Disabilities Act  IDEA. Retrieved from  https:www.apa.orgadvocacyeducationideaindex.aspx  Andzik, N. R., Schaefer, J. M., Nichols, R.,  Chung, Y. C. 2018. National  survey describing and quantifying students with communication needs.  Developmental Neurorehabilitation, 211, 4047. DOI:  10.108017518423.2017.1339133  Archer, A.,  Hughes, C. 2011. Explicit Instruction: Effective and efficient  teaching. New York, NY: Guilford Publications.   Asmus, J.M., Carter, E.W., Moss, C.K., Biggs, E.E., Bolt, D.M., Born, T.L., .   Fesperman, E.S. 2017. Efficacy and social validity of peer network  interventions for high school students with severe disabilities. American  Journal on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 1222, 118137.  DOI: 10.13521944-7558-122.2.118  Ayres, K. M., Lowrey, K. A., Douglas, K. H.,  Sievers, C. 2011. I can identify  Saturn but I can't brush my teeth: What happens when the curricular focus  for students with severe disabilities shifts. Education and Training in Autism  and Developmental Disabilities, 461, 11-21. Retrieved from  http:www.daddcec.orgPortals0CECAutismDisabilitiesResearchPub licationsEducationTrainingDevelopmentDisabilities2011v46Journals ETADD201103v46n1p1121ICanIdentifySaturnbutICan'tBrushMyTeeth.pdf  Bache, J.,  Derwent, G. 2008. Access to computer-based leisure for  individuals with profound disabilities. NeuroRehabilitation, 23, 343350.  Ball, L. J., Nordness, A. S., Fager, S. K., Kersch, K., Mohr, B., Pattee, G. L.,   Beukelman, D. R. 2010. Eye gaze access of AAC technology for people with  amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Journal of Medical Speech-Language  Pathology, 183, 1123. Retrieved from  https:nebraska.pure.elsevier.comenpublicationseye-gaze-access-toaac-technology-for-people-with-amyotrophic-lat  

 Chapter 13 

Battaglia, D.,  McDonald, M. E. 2015. Effects of the picture exchange  communication system PECS on maladaptive behavior in children with  autism spectrum disorders ASD: A review of the literature. Journal of the  American Academy of Special Education Professionals, 8-20. Retrieved from  https:eric.ed.gov?idEJ1134153  Bedell, G., Coster, W., Law, M., Liljenquist, K., Kao, Y. C., Teplicky, R., .   Khetani, M. A. 2013. Community participation, supports, and barriers of  school-age children with and without disabilities. Archives of Physical  Medicine and Rehabilitation, 942, 315-323. DOI:  10.1016j.apmr.2012.09.024  Bondy, A. S.,  Frost, L. A. 1994. The picture exchange communication  system. Focus on Autistic Behavior, 93, 1-19.  DOI:10.1177108835769400900301  Bouck, E. C. 2010. Reports of life skills training for students with intellectual  disabilities in and out of school. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research,  5412, 1093-1103. DOI:10.1111j.1365-2788.2010.01339.x   Browder, D. M., Mims, P. J., Spooner, F., Ahlgrim-Delzell, L.,  Lee, A. 2008.  Teaching elementary students with multiple disabilities to participate in  shared stories. Research Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 331,  312. DOI: 10.2511rpsd.33.1-2.3  Browder, D. M., Ahlgrim-Delzell, L., Spooner, F., Mims, P. J.,  Baker, J. N.  2009. Using time delay to teach literacy to students with severe  developmental disabilities. Exceptional Children, 753, 343-364. DOI:  10.1177001440290907500305  Bruce, S. 2011. Severe and multiple disabilities. In J. M. Kauffman  D. P.  Hallahan Eds., Handbook of Special Education, pp. 291-303. New York,  NY: Routledge.   Bursuck, W. D.,  Damer, M. 2007. Reading instruction for students who are  at risk or have disabilities. Boston, MA: Allyn  Bacon.  Cannella-Malone, H. I., Fant, J. L.,  Tullis, C. A. 2010. Using the picture  exchange communication system to increase the social communication of  two individuals with severe developmental disabilities. Journal of  Developmental and Physical Disabilities, 222, 149-163. DOI:  10.1007s10882-009-9174-4  Cannella-Malone, H. I., Miller, O., Schaefer, J. M., Jimenez, E. D., Page, E. J.,   Sabielny, L. M. 2016. Using video prompting to teach leisure skills to  students with significant disabilities. Exceptional Children, 824, 463478.  DIO: 10.11770014402915598778  Cannella-Malone, H. I.,  Schaefer, J. M. 2017. A review of research on  teaching people with significant disabilities vocational skills. Career  Development and Transition for Exceptional Individuals, 402, 6778. DOI:  10.11772165143415583498  Carter, E. W., Austin, D.,  Trainor, A. A. 2012. Predictors of post-school  employment outcomes for young adults with severe disabilities. Journal of  Disability Policy Studies, 231, 5063. DOI: 10.11771044207311414680  Center for Parent Information  Resources. 2017. Categories of disabilities  under IDEA.  

Multiple Disabilities   175 

 Retrieved from https:www.parentcenterhub.orgcategoriestbi  Chang, Y. J., Chen, S. F.,  Huang, J. D. 2011. A Kinect-based system for  physical rehabilitation: A pilot study for young adults with motor  disabilities. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 326, 25662570. DOI:  10.1016j.ridd.2011.07.002  Chung, Y.,  Douglas, K. H. 2014. Communicative competence inventory for  students who use augmentative and alternative communication: A team  approach. Teaching Exceptional Children, 471, 5668. DOI:  10.11770040059914534620  Cohen, A.,  Demchak, M. 2018. Use of visual supports to increase task  independence in students with severe disabilities in inclusive educational  settings. Education and Training in Autism and Developmental Disabilities,  531, 8499. Retrieved from  http:daddcec.orgPortals0CECAutismDisabilitiesResearchPublicati onsEducationTrainingDevelopmentDisabilitiesFullJournalsCohen.P DF  Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E.,  Heward, W.L. 2007. Applied behavior analysis 2nd  ed. New York, NY: Pearson  Copley, J.,  Ziviani, J. 2005. Assistive technology assessment and planning  for children with multiple disabilities in educational settings. British Journal  of Occupational Therapy, 6812, 559566. DOI:  10.1177030802260506801205  Copley, J.,  Ziviani, J. 2007. Use of a team-based approach to assistive  technology assessment and planning for children with multiple disabilities:  A pilot study. Assistive Technology, 193, 109127. DOI:  10.108010400435.2007.10131869  Egilson, S.T.,  Traustadottir, R. 2009. Participation of students with physical  disabilities in the school environment. The American Journal of  Occupational Therapy, 633, 264272. Retrieved from  https:www.ncbi.nlm.nih.govpubmed19522135  Falkenstine, K.J., Collins, B.C., Schuster, J.W.,  Kleinert, H. 2009. Presenting  chained and discrete tasks as non-targeted information when teaching  discrete academic skills through small group instruction. Education and  Training in Developmental Disabilities, 441, 127-142. Retrieved from  https:eric.ed.gov?idEJ864628  Foreman, P., Arthur-Kelly, M., Pascoe, S.,  King, B.S., 2004. Evaluating  educational experiences of students with profound and multiple disabilities  in inclusive and segregated classroom settings: An Australian perspective.  Research and Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 293, 183-193.  DOI: 10.2511rpsd.29.3.183.  Frazeur-Cross, A., Traub, E. K., Hutter-Pishgahi, L.,  Shelton, G. 2004.  Elements of successful inclusion for children with significant disabilities.  Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, 243, 169183. DIO:  10.117702711214040240030401  Horn, E.  Kang, J. 2012. Supporting young children with multiple  disabilities: What do we know and what do we still need to learn? Topics in  Early Childhood Special Education, 314, 241248. DOI:  10.11770271121411426487 

 Chapter 13 

Johnston, S. S., Reichle, J., Feeley, K. M.,  Jones, E. A. 2012. AAC strategies for  individuals with moderate to severe disabilities. Brookes Publishing  Company. Baltimore, MD.  Lancioni, G. E., Singh, N. N., Oreilly, M. F.,  Sigafoos, J. 2011. Assistive  technology for behavioral interventions for persons with severeprofound  multiple disabilities: a selective overview. European Journal of Behavior  Analysis, 121, 7-26. DOI: 10.108015021149.2011.11434352  Lancioni, G. E., Singh, N. N., OReilly, M. F., Sigafoos, J., Oliva, D.,  Baccani, S.  2006. Teaching yes and no responses to children with multiple  disabilities through a program including microswitches linked to a vocal  output device. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1021, 5161. DOI:  10.2466pms.102.1.51-61  Maes, B., Lambrechts, G., Hostyn, I.,  Petry, K. 2007. Quality-enhancing  interventions for people with profound intellectual and multiple  disabilities: A review of the empirical research literature. Journal of  Intellectual and Developmental Disability, 323, 163178. DOI:  10.108013668250701549427  Mansell, J.,  Beadle-Brown, J. 2010. Deinstitutionalisation and community  living: position statement of the Comparative Policy and Practice Special  Interest Research Group of the International Association for the Scientific  Study of Intellectual Disabilities. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research,  542, 104-112. DOI: 10.111j.1365-2788.2009.01239.x  Markusic, M.  Gromisch, E.S. 2015. The Vineland adaptive behavior scale  and special needs students. Retrieved from  https:www.brighthubeducation.comspecial-ed-law13506-the-vinelandadaptive-behavior-scale  Markusic, M.  Gromisch, E.S. 2012. Understanding the Peabody picture  vocabulary test. Retrieved from  https:www.brighthubeducation.comspecial-ed-learningdisorders13495-what-is-the-peabody-picture-vocabulary-test-all-about  Matson, J. L., Hattier, M. A., Belva, B.,  Matson, M. L. 2013. Pica in persons  with developmental disabilities: Approaches to treatment. Research in  developmental disabilities, 349, 2564-2571. DOI:  10.1016j.ridd.2013.05.018  Mims, P.J., Hudson, M.E.,  Browder, D.M. 2012. Using read-alouds of gradelevel biographies and systematic prompting to promote comprehension for  students with moderate and severe developmental disabilities. Focus on  Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities, 272, 6780. DOI:  10.11771088357612446859  Nakken, H.,  Vlaskamp, C. 2007. A need for a taxonomy for profound  intellectual and multiple disabilities. Journal of Policy and Practice in  intellectual Disabilities, 42, 83-87. DOI: 10.1111j.1741-1130.2007.00104.x  National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. 2018. What are  some types of assistive devices and how are they used? Retrieved from  https:www.nichd.nih.govhealthtopicsrehabtechconditioninfodevice  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services 2017. 39th annual  report to congress on the implementation of the Individuals with Disabilities  Education Act. Retrieved from 

Multiple Disabilities   177 

https:www2.ed.govaboutreportsannualosep2017parts-b-c39tharc-for-idea.pdf  Poppes, P., Van der Putten, A.J.J.,  Vlaskamp, C. 2010. Frequency and  severity of challenging behavior in people with profound intellectual and  multiple disabilities. Research in developmental disabilities, 316, 1269 1275. DOI: 10.1016j.ridd.2010.07.017  Schlosser, R. W.,  Sigafoos, J. 2006. AAC interventions for persons with  developmental disabilities: Narrative review of comparative single subject  experimental studies. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 271, 129.  Retrieved from https:www.ncbi.nlm.nih.govpubmed16360073  Sigafoos, J., Arthur-Kelly, M.,  Butterfield, N. 2006. Enhancing Everyday  Communication for Children with Disabilities. Baltimore, MD. Brookes  Publishing Company.  Sigafoos, J., Drasgow, E., Halle, J. W., O'Reilly, M., Seely-York, S., Edrisinha, C.,   Andrews, A. 2004. Teaching VOCA use as a communicative repair  strategy. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 344, 411422.  DOI: 10.1023B:JADD.0000037  Spooner, F., Knight, V. F., Browder, D. M.,  Smith, B. R. 2012. Evidence-based  practice for teaching academics to students with severe developmental  disabilities. Remedial and Special Education, 336, 374387. DOI:  10.11770741932511421634  U.S. Department of Education 2018. National Center for Education Statistics:  Fast facts: Students with disabilities. Retrieved from  https:nces.ed.govfastfactsdisplay.asp?id64  van Timmeren, E.A., van der Putten, A.A.J., van Schrojenstein Lantman-de  Valk, H.M.J., van der Schans, C.P.,  Waninge, A. 2016. Prevalence of  reported physical health problems in people with severe or profound  intellectual and motor disabilities: a cross-sectional study of medical  records and care plans. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 6011,  1109-1118. DOI: 10.1111jir.12298  Wagner, M., Newman, L., Cameto, R., Levine, P.,  Marder, C. 2007.  Perceptions and expectations of youth with disabilities. A special topic report  of findings from the National Longitudinal Transition Study-2 NLTS2.  Retrieved from https:ies.ed.govncserpdf20073006.pdf  Wehmeyer, M. 1996. Self-determination as an educational outcome. In D.J.  Sands  M.L.   Wehmeyer Eds., Self-determination across the life span: Independence and  choice for people with disabilities pp. 1736. Baltimore, MD: Brookes.  Wolery, M.,  Gast, D. L. 1984. Effective and efficient procedures for the  transfer of stimulus control. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education,  43, 5277. DOI: 10.1177027112148400400305  Wong, C., Odom, S. L., Hume, K. A., Cox, A. W., Fettig, A., Kucharczyk, S., .   Schultz, T. R. 2015. Evidence-based practices for children, youth, and  young adults with autism spectrum disorder: Retrieved from  http:cidd.unc.eduRegistryResearchDocs31.pdf 

 Chapter 13 

Zabala, J. 1995. The SETT Framework: Critical areas to consider when making  informed assistive technology decisions. Retrieved from  https:eric.ed.gov?idED381962  Zijlstra, H. P.,  Vlaskamp, C. 2005. The Impact of Medical Conditions on the  Support of Children with Profound Intellectual and Multiple Disabilities.  Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 182, 151-161. DOI:  10.1111j.1468-3148.2005.00244.x 

About the Authors  Nicholas D. Young, PhD, EdD   Dr. Nicholas D. Young has worked in diverse educational roles for more than  30 years, serving as a teacher, counselor, principal, special education director,  graduate professor, graduate program director, graduate dean, and longtime  psychologist  and  superintendent  of  schools.  He  was  named  the  Massachusetts Superintendent of the Year; and he completed a distinguished  Fulbright program focused on the Japanese educational system through the  collegiate level. Dr. Young is the recipient of numerous other honors and  recognitions  including  the  General  Douglas  MacArthur  Award  for  distinguished civilian and military leadership and the Vice Admiral John T.  Hayward Award for exemplary scholarship. He holds several graduate degrees  including a PhD in educational administration and an EdD in educational  psychology.   Dr. Young has served in the U.S. Army and U.S. Army Reserves combined for  over 34 years; and he graduated with distinction from the U.S. Air War  College, the U.S. Army War College, and the U.S. Navy War College. After  completing a series of senior leadership assignments in the U.S. Army  Reserves as the commanding officer of the 287th Medical Company DS, the  405th Area Support Company DS, the 405th Combat Support Hospital,  and the 399th Combat Support Hospital, he transitioned to his current military  position as a faculty instructor at the U.S. Army War College in Carlisle, PA. He  currently holds the rank of Colonel.   Dr. Young is also a regular presenter at state, national, and international  conferences; and he has written many books, book chapters, andor articles  on various topics in education, counseling, and psychology. Some of his most  recent books include Acceptance, Understanding, and the Moral Imperative of  Promoting Social Justice Education in the Schoolhouse in-progress; The  Empathic Teacher: Learning and Applying the Principles of Social Justice  Education to the Classroom in-progress; Educating the Experienced:  Challenges and Best Practices in Adult Learning in-press; Securing the  Schoolyard: Protocols that Promote Safety and Positive Student Behaviors  2019; Sounding the Alarm in the Schoolhouse: Safety, Security and Student  Well-Being 2019; The Soul of the Schoolhouse: Cultivating Student  Engagement 2019; Embracing and Educating the Autistic Child: Valuing  Those Who Color Outside the Lines 2019; From Cradle to Classroom: A Guide  to Special Education for Young Children 2019; Captivating Classrooms: 

 About the Authors 

Educational Strategies to Enhance Student Engagement 2019; Potency of the  Principalship: Action-Oriented Leadership at the Heart of School Improvement  2018; Soothing the Soul: Pursuing a Life of Abundance Through a Practice of  Gratitude 2018; Dog Tags to Diploma: Understanding and Addressing the  Educational Needs of Veterans, Servicemembers, and their Families 2018;  Turbulent Times: Confronting Challenges in Emerging Adulthood 2018;  Guardians of the Next Generation: Igniting the Passion for Quality Teaching  2018; Achieving Results: Maximizing Success in the Schoolhouse 2018; From  Head to Heart: High Quality Teaching Practices in the Spotlight 2018; Stars in  the Schoolhouse: Teaching Practices and Approaches that Make a Difference  2018; Making the Grade: Promoting Positive Outcomes for Students with  Learning Disabilities 2018; Paving the Pathway for Educational Success:  Effective Classroom Interventions for Students with Learning Disabilities  2018; Wrestling with Writing: Effective Strategies for Struggling Students  2018; Floundering to Fluent: Reaching and Teaching the Struggling  Student 2018; Emotions and Education: Promoting Positive Mental Health in  Students with Learning 2018; From Lecture Hall to Laptop: Opportunities,  Challenges, and the Continuing Evolution of Virtual Learning in Higher  Education 2017; The Power of the Professoriate: Demands, Challenges, and  Opportunities in 21st Century Higher Education 2017; To Campus with  Confidence: Supporting a Successful Transition to College for Students with  Learning Disabilities 2017; Educational Entrepreneurship: Promoting PublicPrivate Partnerships for the 21st Century 2015; Beyond the Bedtime Story:  Promoting  Reading  Development  during  the  Middle  School  Years 2015; Betwixt and Between: Understanding and Meeting the Social and  Emotional Developmental Needs of Students During the Middle School  Transition  Years 2014;  Learning  Style  Perspectives:  Impact Upon the  Classroom 3rd ed., 2014; and Collapsing Educational Boundaries from  Preschool to PhD: Building Bridges Across the Educational Spectrum 2013;  Transforming Special Education Practices: A Primer for School Administrators  and Policy Makers 2012; and Powerful Partners in Student Success: Schools,  Families and Communities 2012. He also co-authored several childrens  books to include the popular series I am Full of Possibilities. Dr. Young may be  contacted directly at nyoung1191aol.com.  Angela Fain, PhD  Dr. Angela C. Fain has worked in the field of special education for the past 20  years. She received her Ph.D. and M.Ed. in special education at Georgia State  University, as well a B.S. in Therapeutic Recreation. She earned national  certification as a Nationally Certified Therapeutic Recreation Specialist TRS  and worked as a therapist for several years with children who had severe 

About the Authors   181 

emotionalbehavioral disorders SEBD andor autism. Dr. Fain has worked in  some of the most restrictive educational environments that students with  disabilities are served, as a both a TRS and special education teacher. She  worked as a clinical instructor at Georgia State University while earning her  doctorate and at the University of North Georgia while concurrently serving  as an assistant professor. She is now an assistant professor at the University of  West Georgia.  Dr. Fain is a regular presenter at state, national, and international  conferences and she is an active board member of Learning Disabilities  Worldwide. She has authored several book chapters and articles on various  topics in special education ranging from classroom management to  successful academic interventions for students with disabilities.  Teresa Allissa Citro, PhD  Dr. Citro is the Chief Executive Officer, Learning Disabilities Worldwide, Inc.  and the Founder and President of Thread of Hope, Inc. She is a graduate of  Tufts New England Medical School and Northeastern University, Boston.Dr.  Citro has co-edited several books on a wide range of topics in special  education and she co-authored a popular childrens seriesI Am Full of  Possibilities.Dr. Citro is the co-editor of two peer review journals  includingLearning Disabilities: A Contemporary Journal and Insights on  Learning DisabilitiesfromPrevailing Theories to Validated Practices. She is the  mother of two beautiful children and resides in Boston, Massachusetts.