R A M O N   R O M   L E W I S         Responding to               individual needs    The  Developmental     Management  Approach to       Classroom          Behaviour

R A M O N   R O M   L E W I S    Te  Developmental     Management  Approach to         Classroom       Behaviour     Responding to              individual needs ACER Press

First published 2008 by ACER Press, an imprint of Australian Council for Educational Research Ltd 19 Prospect Hill Road, Camberwell  Victoria, 3124, Australia www.acerpress.com.au salesacer.edu.au Text  Ramon Rom Lewis 2008 Design and typography  ACER Press 2008 This book is copyright. All rights reserved. Except under the  conditions described in the Copyright Act 1968 of Australia  and subsequent amendments, and any exceptions permitted  under the current statutory licence scheme administered by  Copyright Agency Limited www.copyright.com.au, no part  of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval  system, transmitted, broadcast or communicated in any form  or by any means, optical, digital, electronic, mechanical,  photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the written  permission of the publisher. Edited by Venetia Somerset Cover design by Bob Dog Text design by Kerry Cooke, eggplant communications Typeset by Kerry Cooke, eggplant communications Printed in Australia by Hyde Park Press National Library of Australia Cataloguing-in-Publication data: Author:	 Lewis, R. Ramon, 1946Title:	 The developmental management approach to classroom  behaviour : responding to individual needs  author,  Ramon Lewis. Publisher:	 Camberwell, Vic. : ACER Press, 2008. ISBN:	 9780864316479 pbk. Notes:	 Includes index. 

Bibliography. Subjects:	 Classroom management. 

School discipline. 

School children--Discipline. 

Behaviour modification. Dewey Number:	 371.1024

iii Contents Acknowledgments	 vi 1	 Introduction	 1 Background	 1 Authoritarian, democratic or what? 	 4 Less authoritarian practices or more democratic ones?	 5 The Post-Guru Syndrome	 7 The next step	 10 Classroom management and students values	 10 Stress and classroom management	 13 2	 Teachers aggression towards misbehaving students	 16 Disciplinary techniques used by Australian teachers	 16 Four categories of student behaviour	 16 Five kinds of power	 18 Frequency of teachers aggressive behaviour	 19 Why teachers use aggressive classroom management   techniques	 19 The ripple effect of hostility	 21 Theories that explain teacher misbehaviour	 23 Teachers self-defeating attitudes	 25 The impact of teachers aggressive classroom management	 27 Teachers coping strategies	 29 3	 Developmental management in the classroom	 32 What causes inappropriate behaviour?	 33 Avoiding disruption	 34 The pile of goodwill	 37 Setting up expectations for appropriate behaviour	 40 Classroom meetings in practice	 41 Classroom rights and responsibilities	 42

iv    Contents 4	 Responding to students manifesting Category A   behaviour	 45 General hint	 46 Specific hint	 46 Restatement of expectations	 48 I-messages	 49 Direct questions	 49 5	 Responding to students manifesting Category B   behaviour	 51 Recognising responsible behaviour	 52 When students act responsibly	 52 When students act irresponsibly	 58 Informing the students	 61 Responding to inappropriate behaviour	 63 6	 Responding to students manifesting Category C   behaviour	 71 Category C students	 72 Talking with students displaying Category C behaviour	 74 Goodwill and the talk	 86 7	 Responding to students manifesting Category D   behaviour	 88 Basic assumptions	 88 Inappropriate behaviour	 89 Sources of discouragement in the family	 91 Aims of inappropriate behaviour	 93 Dealing with student behaviour	 96 Mistaken goals	 106 8	 The Developmental Management Approach DMA	 110 Responding to A-level students: Hinting	 111 Responding to B-level students: Recognitions and   consequences 	 111 Responding to C-level students: One-on-one discussions	 112 Responding to D-level students: Mistaken goals	 113 Research support for the DMA	 114 Teachers reflecting on DMA strategies	 118

Contents    v   9	 Teacher support	 138 Development of responsible behaviour	 138 The need for teacher support	 139 Setting up a support system	 141 Characteristics of support	 144 Necessary supports	 149 Received support	 152 The unsupported	 154 10	 Conclusion	 157

References	 161 Index	 171

vi Acknowledgments Thanks are due to Dr Joel Roache, Ms Helen Neville and Mrs Elisa Allan  for their assistance in helping prepare this manuscript.	
1 Introduction Background For the last 20 years I have been working with groups of up to 115 teachers  at a time, developing programs designed to instruct them in how to help  their students behave more responsibly in class. I have provided sessions  for at least ten such groups a year; consequently, over that period I have  interacted with at least 10 000 teachers. One of the many issues these  teachers discuss is whether students are becoming increasingly difficult to  manage in schools.  To encourage reflection, I outline an authoritarian society in which  one group is elevated and given the right and responsibility to control  the behaviour of another. Historically this has meant that men controlled  women, whites controlled blacks, employers controlled employees, adults  controlled children and finally, teachers controlled students. I then ask the  extent to which teachers agree or disagree that there has been a collapse of  the authoritarian system in Australian classrooms, with a corresponding  deterioration in student behaviour and diminishing of respect for teachers  and their authority.  Recently, more teachers have been saying that increasing numbers of  parents and students are questioning their management decisions. It is no  longer surprising for a principal to receive a phone call from the parent  of a child who has just been sent from the classroom and told to go to  the Principals office, before said child even arrives at the office. These  days, students are seen by teachers as more likely to question or demand  justification for teachers judgments, and to refuse to cooperate with  requests they see as unfair. A recent example concerns Jason.  Jason was sent to the Deputy Principal DP by a classroom teacher for  talking repeatedly and arguing with the teacher. On receiving him, the DP  said, Jason, sit over there please, as there is something I need to do before  we can discuss what happened. Its OK, Ill stand, said Jason. The DP 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour repeated quietly, Jason, Ill be a minute, so please sit over there. Youre  blocking the corridor. Its OK, Ill stand, replied Jason. Approaching Jason,  leaning slightly towards him, looking strongly into his eyes and pointing to  a seat, the DP said firmly, Jason, sit over there! Its OK, Ill stand, said  Jason just as firmly. Moving even closer, the Deputy Principal responded  loudly, I said sit over there! And I said, Ill stand, Jason countered.  You can guess what happened next. The DP could be heard three streets  away as he yelled angrily at Jason, calling him names and demanding that  he do what he was told. Its interesting to analyse this situation. Did the  DP set his alarm the night before this incident thinking, I must get a  good nights sleep so tomorrow I have plenty of energy to blast Jason in  full view of at least five other school staff? I dont think so. When the  DP spoke to me regarding the incident, he said how Jason made him  angry. He never intended to yell. However, that means that Jason not only  controlled an adult, he controlled a DP. Such power can be addictive. He  will probably be back. It is not always something as dramatic as a confrontation of this type  that leads to teachers being controlled by students. Recently, I was invited  to a non-government girls secondary college to conduct professional  development sessions. I asked some of the teachers why they felt it  necessary to invest one day of the staffs time in professional development  in classroom management. They told me that some of the girls were doing  things they never used to. On asking what it was that they were doing, a  teacher stated that a girl sometimes said, No, I dont want to! At the time I was a little bemused, because the previous day I had  given professional development sessions at a school where students had  smashed the Principals plate glass windows and written obscenities on  the walls of the office. The students there also customarily told staff to  go and  have relationships, procreate or whatever. Nevertheless, for the  staff at the girls school, public resistance was uncommon and therefore  not something with which they had had a lot of experience. Consequently,  it was seen as challenging, and too often provoked a less than professional  response from teachers. Between schools, there is substantial variation in  what sets off teachers.  This variation has also been noted in cross-national comparisons. In  a study of classroom misbehaviour and management in Australia, China  and Israel, my colleagues and I found that even though Chinese teachers  report as much misbehaviour in class as do Australian and Israeli  teachers, the nature of the misbehaviour in Chinese classrooms may be  less extreme Lewis, Romi, Qui  Katz, 2005, p. 12. The term misbehaviour may be misleading. In truth, there are few  types of behaviour that are bad in all situations  even killing is not 

Introduction    3 frowned on in times of war. Consequently, although misbehaviour will  be used at times in this book, inappropriate behaviour is probably more  accurate. Misbehaviour is not off target as far the student exhibiting it  is concerned. Although it may be distracting, disruptive or disrespectful,  the behaviour is often inappropriate only from the teachers perspective.  As far as the misbehaving student is concerned, the behaviour is very  much on target as it serves a purpose and meets a need. In most cases,  the need is related strongly to a context. For example, a student who acts  inappropriately, given that the focus of classrooms is learning, may be  feeling bored, uninterested, excited, or even threatened.  The way in which many Australian students provoke teachers is not  by swearing at them or openly challenging them. Often their inappropriate  behaviour takes the form of simply ignoring the teacher or quietly resisting  the teachers attempts to manage them. One recent example was typical. I was observing a teacher give an  English class. I had done so a number of times and the students were  already used to my presence. I observed two students Jennifer and Deb  talking when they should have been listening. The teacher also saw it and  told Deb, who was in the middle of speaking, to be quiet. Deb pretended  not to hear, so the teacher repeated her demand in a louder voice. Deb  then turned to the teacher and said that she had almost finished and it  would just take a second. The teacher began to explain how Debs talking  was interfering with the other childrens opportunity to hear. Halfway  through her explanation, Jennifer, who had been taking part in the  original conversation, said something to Deb, who then totally ignored the  teacher, turned to her friend and continued the conversation. Naturally,  the teacher was not amused, nor did she remain calm.  Some more experienced teachers find students provocative behaviour  to be more stressful than do younger teachers. The main reason for this  is that, historically, they had dealt with such behaviour by assertively  demanding compliance  much like the DPs approach to Jason described  above. The trouble is, they never thought of their management techniques as techniques. It was more a case of who they were. When the  techniques worked, they worked. That is, they were competent teachers.  They were OK. Now that the same technique no longer works, it means that they are  incompetent. They are no longer OK. It is not just a case of my techniques  arent working, what else can I try? It is more akin to a crisis in psyche.  The need for confidence regarding the impact of particular strategies is  important to teachers given that the ability to manage students effectively  is a critical component of their professional identity McCormick  Shi,  1999. So critical is it that disciplinarian ranks third, after leader and 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour knowledge dispenser, among the metaphors teachers give for their work  Goddard, 2000.  Authoritarian, democratic or what? Australian teachers are not saying that all students reject the idea that  teachers have the right and responsibility to manage the classroom  behaviour of students. It seems, however, that the proportion rejecting this  notion is increasing. In the words of a teacher at one of my professional  development sessions, many students know all about their rights but  dont seem to know much about how to act responsibly.  It is not surprising that teachers are noticing that students seem more  aware of their rights than their responsibilities  A study that examined the  codes of student conduct of approximately 300 Victorian schools found  that nearly all codes referred to the rights of students, and the majority  of schools associated rights with responsibilities. However, a substantial  minority 40 made no such connection. There would appear to be an  opportunity for a far greater emphasis on the link between rights and  responsibilities.  Teachers, among others, have been instrumental in alerting students to  their rights. According to theorists such as Maurice Balson, teachers have  responded to a shift in community values by becoming more democratic  in their outlook. For example, Balson 1992, p. 124 argues that in more  authoritarian days: The roles of both teacher and student were clearly defined as those of  superior and inferior respectively and each knew what was expected  of the other in each situation. With the weakening of the authoritarian  system and the strengthening of democratic processes, the vertical  continuum of superiorityinferiority gave way to a system of social  equality, a relationship which respected the rights of individuals to decide  for themselves rather than being imposed upon.  It looks as if this is the case in Australia, as all states have abolished  corporal punishment and generally officially encourage parent and  student participation in the formulation of school management policies  Slee, 1988. After reviewing the policies of three Australian states, Balson  1992, pp. 23 concludes: It is clear that government policy guidelines  are advocating, and taking firm steps in implementing, a democratic style  of leadership in schools. However, while the rhetoric is that teachers have abolished or are  changing from authoritarian relationships to democratic ones, and there  appears to be a shift from more authoritarian to more democratic practices  in classrooms, this observation is not sufficient to justify the conclusion 

Introduction    5 that teachers have replaced their authoritarian beliefs with democratic  ones. In my opinion, the reality is very different from the rhetoric, and this  difference partly explains my reasons for writing this book. Less authoritarian practices or more democratic  ones? It seems apparent that there are fewer authoritarian practices in schools  today than there were 50 years ago. Why? Two alternative explanations  are illustrated by an example from womens liberation.  Fifty years ago, if a woman had a career it generally ran a poor second  to her husbands. It would be rare for her to spend substantial amounts  of time outside the home to advance her career if it meant her husband  would have to look after the children. Childcare was viewed as a womans  job. These days that is far less likely. One could argue that men have  reflected on the nature of their relationship with women and the rights of  women, and have concluded that women are their equals and should be  treated as such. Alternatively, it is possible to argue that any change in the power  distribution between men and women has been brought about by the  latters unwillingness to be dominated as they once were. Consequently,  men may have found that if they wish to be the dominant, or even a  functioning, partner in a relationship they have to be more skilled and  subtle in the way they go about it, giving a little bit of ground here and  there in order to maintain their overall position. The same arguments can also explain what may be currently happening  in our classrooms. Perhaps teachers have been moved to revalue the rights  of students and as a result are treating them in more democratic ways. Or  perhaps it is as Balson 1992, pp. 56 argues: Beginning with the Black Power movement, there was a series of similar  social revolts including womens liberation, the student power movement,  and the industrial power movement. All had in common a refusal by the  traditionally inferior group to accept a position of inferiority. Teachers  found that they could no longer dominate students, while parents,  males, whites and management found a similar resistance whenever they  attempted to impose their values on children, females, coloureds and  labour respectively. My professional contact with teachers and consultants leads me to  conclude that in many cases teachers are feeling forced to adopt a less  authoritarian and more democratic style. Teachers say things like students  know their rights, they wont let you order them, and they question  everything. When they talk about why they negotiate with students or allow 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour them to participate in classroom decision-making it is often represented as  a case of have to rather than want to. This attitude seems to be more  common among secondary teachers than primary elementary. It is interesting to observe the way that teachers can unintentionally  encourage students to resist their authority. They provide verbal and nonverbal cues that they dont expect to be taken seriously as an authority in  the classroom.  A common verbal sequence can sound like the following:  T:  Excuse me, Ahmud, are you talking again? Didnt I speak to you  about talking a few minutes ago? Are you ever going to listen to  me? How many times do I have to tell you? Obviously these questions were not meant to be answered, although  contemplating likely answers can be informative.  T:  Excuse me, Ahmud, are you talking again?  A:  Of course, you wouldnt be speaking to me now if I werent. T:  Didnt I speak to you about talking a few minutes ago? A:  Of course. Whats the matter? Got a memory like a goldfish? Going  senile, sir? T:  Are you ever going to listen to me? A:  It depends. What are you going to do if I dont? T:  How many times do I have to tell you? A:  Hard one, Sir. How about 17? Twenty-three? For the more challenging students such teacher questions reveal an  under-assertiveness on the part of the teacher that is quickly recognised.  The equivalent non-verbal situation relates to teachers standing side  on and leaning away when giving long-winded assertive statements.  Challenging students often have trouble with more than four words in a  row, but, being somewhat visual in their learning style, very quickly size  up the teacher who is defensive and who appears almost on the run.  In summary, many teachers seem to be seeking control techniques  that work. They are as interested in assertive techniques such as those of  Lee and Marlene Canter 1996, or to a lesser extent Bill Rogers 1992,  as they are in the more democratic practices advocated by William  Glasser 1969 and Balson 1992. If these teachers have to negotiate  with students or punish them to stay in control, they will. If they have to  allow students more say in determining class rules, or bribe them, they  will. They appear willing to adopt democratic processes, but largely for  authoritarian purposes.

Introduction    7 The Post-Guru Syndrome Many teachers using or supporting democratic techniques do not appear   to have reflected on the rights of students, or to have concluded that  students have a right to be treated more like equals. Likewise, teachers  opting for a more assertive approach to classroom management do   not seem to have reflected at length on the appropriateness of the associated techniques or on the learning theory on which the techniques are  based. Teachers appear to be interested only in their efficiency. This is a  major problem and helps to explain what I call the Post-Guru Syndrome,  or PGS.  PGS strikes school staff somewhere between two weeks and six months  after a well-known management guru has visited the school and convincingly  demonstrated how children should  be managed. He or she is an expert  and has a ready answer for all  questions. Because of their knowledge,  commitment, and charisma, gurus are  extremely impressive. In many cases,  they can not only say what to do, but  can also demonstrate it in classrooms.  Their tricks appear to work perfectly.  Nevertheless, after teachers implement  these new techniques it is often only  a short time before they become  inconsistent in the implementation of them, and finally falter. At this point,  the teachers frequently feel more powerless and despairing than they did  before the gurus visit.  It is interesting to reflect on a report by Lawrence Ingvarson 2005  that identified factors affecting the impact of professional development  programs on teachers knowledge, practice, student outcomes, and  efficacy. He reported that, in general, one-day teacher professional  development interventions have little overall long-term effect. It is my  untested assumption that his conclusion is due to the different sorts  of impact such days have on more effective and less effective teachers  respectively. Teachers who are feeling competent and confident come  away from guru-led days with a number of new and useful techniques,  which they successfully integrate into their toolbox. On the other hand,  if a teacher is struggling, any adoption of new practices is short-lived,  leading to the syndrome described above. In summary, while some teachers  improve their effectiveness, for others, it is reduced. Therefore, as noted  by Ingvarson 2005, on average there is no overall positive impact on  student behaviour and teachers management skills. PGS strikes staff between two weeks  and six months after a well-known  management guru has visited the  school and convincingly demonstrated  how children should be managed   It is often only a short time before  teachers become inconsistent in the  implementation of the techniques, and  finally falter. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour The general inability of management interventions to bring about a  change in student behaviour has also been noted in the research literature.  Hart, Wearing and Conn 1995 evaluated the impact of a 1.25 million  staff development program in Australia, called the Whole School  Approach to Discipline and Student Welfare Program. Their evaluation  involved the collection of data from over 4000 teachers in 86 schools.  They reported that over the 12-month period that schools were involved  in the intervention, there was significant improvement in management  policies. However there was no corresponding change in the mean level  of student on-task behaviour in classrooms. On a personal level, I recall working with the staff of a secondary  school in the western suburbs of Melbourne. After a series of professional  development sessions, these staff learnt how to deal with inappropriate  behaviour assertively, slowly and steadily meeting any resistance or  repeated offence with a more serious sanction. They also learnt how to  actively catch children being good and reward such behaviour. Finally,  they were shown how to defuse developing power struggles with students  and to calmly offer them choices of behaving reasonably or accepting the  consequences, meeting with them if necessary to explain their actions.  After three weeks, the principal of the school rang me excitedly to say  how the staff members were commenting on their calmness and control.  She also said that some students had approached her and said something  like, what have you done to the teachers? Theyre nicer. Nevertheless, less  than a month later she rang requesting further professional development  as teachers had regressed and were once again yelling at students.  The phenomenon of Post-Guru Syndrome can be further understood  in the light of research on the role of metacognition in education  McInerney  McInerney, 2002; White  Gunstone, 1992. The area of  metacognition, or thinking about ones thinking, is being pursued by a  group of researchers who are attempting to explain the difficulties inherent  in making permanent changes to an individuals ways of understanding  the world. Although their work began in the area of science learning in  secondary schools, the theory they propose is appropriate in explaining  the effects of PGS. In doing so, it illuminates one of the major reasons for  the gap between theory and practice highlighted earlier. According to proponents of metacognition, learners develop schemata  or frameworks for dealing with their knowledge or observations. In many  cases these schemata are inconsistent with the state of knowledge in a  given discipline and are therefore technically incorrect. When this occurs,  the learners are usually given a description of the correct paradigm, and if  they are fortunate, they are also told why their thinking is incorrect. Thus  learners may frequently adopt a new schema, and may even be able to  apply it consistently, without discarding the old, which is only temporarily 

Introduction    9 suppressed. However, if the original schema is retained, it may eventually  resurface and reassert itself. To permanently change a given learners schema it is essential for them  to reflect on the paradigm they currently hold and find it unsatisfactory in  the light of new information or observations. They then need to adapt their  view, act in the light of that adaptation, and judge their new behaviour as  satisfactory. If this isnt done, any modification made will most probably  be temporary. Applying these notions to PGS, it can be argued that the nature of many  staff development activities precludes the sort of reflection required for a  permanent shift in teachers paradigms. During professional development  sessions, teachers are often exposed for only a short time to very  convincing gurus, who through a process of show and tell demonstrate  the effectiveness of a particular approach to classroom management. Unless encouraged to do otherwise, teachers may focus on classroom  techniques rather than on the assumptions on which they are based, since  it is the techniques that appear to be of greatest relevance. Consequently,  they may not reflect on the underlying learning theories associated with  the differing models of classroom management. These teachers may appear to have come to terms with assumptions  about the potential of children for example the extent of their intellectual  and moral development and the nature of self-discipline that underlie  different approaches to classroom management. Nevertheless, their  commitment to the assumptions behind a particular model of classroom  management may be superficial at best. They may be able to temporarily  suppress their views about childrens potential to share power, and the ideal  nature of teacherstudent relationships, in order to adopt those of the guru.  They may even appear to believe in, and defend, the gurus implicit theory.  Within a short time, however, their commitment to both the techniques  and, more particularly, the related assumptions will be tested by student  behaviour that appears inconsistent with the sort of response predicted by  the approach. These student responses may be due to teachers inability to  replicate exactly the behaviour of the guru, or may indicate the limitations  of the approach. Regardless of the reason, such unexpected student  reactions can be viewed as quite threatening to teachers who thought they  had it all worked out. In the face of such threatening behaviour, it is likely  that teachers may become even more inconsistent, or unrepresentative of  the approach, and the problem will escalate.  To limit the extent of perceived threat, teachers need to be very confident  that the approach they are attempting to implement is worthwhile, and  is likely to work in the long term. To feel this confidence, they need to  have faith in the assumptions that support the approach. These vary, and  in some cases contradict each other. Without a clear understanding of, 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour and strong commitment to, the assumptions that underpin particular  approaches to classroom management, it is unlikely that a teacher will  persist in its implementation in the face of its apparent inadequacies. The next step The observations outlined above have encouraged me to adopt, adapt,  and heavily augment much of what I included in the second edition of The  Discipline Dilemma Lewis, 1997b. In the first edition 1991, I refrained  from discussing my own theoretical or practical orientations to classroom  management, preferring to allow the reader to use the material provided  to develop his or her own approach. In the second edition, I clarified my  support for more democratic processes, without highlighting the use of  specific techniques in any particular sequence.  Since completing the second edition, I have gained a lot more  experience in providing professional development in schools. I am more  conscious of many teachers immediate need for a system of management  capable of efficiently providing order in their classrooms, while promoting  appropriate student values. I believe it will be useful, therefore, to present  what I think is a comprehensive,  coherent and apparently very acceptable and successful approach for  teachers and schools that wish to help  their students act more responsibly.  This approach assumes that it  is not enough to skill up teachers in  classroom management techniques. It is also necessary to set up support  processes capable of facilitating an ongoing commitment by staff to  productive management interactions with students, particularly those who  are more challenging. It also assumes that classroom management not  only provides sufficient order to allow the teaching of reading, writing  and rithmetic. It also teaches values.  Classroom management and students values It seems increasingly important for teachers and school administrators  to understand fully that every interaction between teachers and students  is a learning experience for the students who are involved in it, or  who witness it. Values are influenced. The significant role that teachers  play in developing appropriate values in their students is recognised  internationally. The interest of some commentators  is stimulated by a  concern over a perceived decline in student values Lickona, 1996 and  behaviour Bennett, 1988; Houston, 1998.  Classroom management not only  provides sufficient order to allow  the teaching of reading, writing and  rithmetic. It also teaches values. 

Introduction    11 For others, their interest stems from a belief that preparing good  citizens, not higher test scores, has historically been the most important  purpose of our public education system Rothstein, 2000, p. 419. For  example, the last time the question of the relative importance of various  goals of schooling was put to the American community via the Phi Delta  Kappa Polls of the publics attitudes towards the public schools was in the  year 2000. The function of schooling selected as the most important in  that survey was to prepare people to become responsible citizens Rose   Gallup, 2000, p. 47. In general, interest in student responsibility is expressed in two distinct  but overlapping ways. The first emphasises students morals, character  and values Fenstermacher, 2001; Hansen, 2001; Jones  Stoodley, 1999;  Pring, 2000. The second focus of those interested in the character of  youth emphasises civics and citizenship education McDonnell, 1998;  Osler  Starkey, 2001; Pearl  Knight, 1998. Within each camp, there are also two divisions. Some see the area  of value, moral character or citizenship education as a separate part of  curriculum, added to, and augmenting, the normal curriculum. Others  argue that it is intrinsic to all aspects of the curriculum. For example,  according to Richard Pring 2001, p. 110, Picking out citizenship as a  subject in its own right fails to see that all teaching, when conceived as  a moral practice concerned with values and conceptions of what it is to  be human, necessarily is a preparation for citizenship. In Australia, both  citizenship and values are on the agenda. Regarding citizenship, a recent  federal minister for Education in Australia, Dr Brendan Nelson, has  stated: Civics and citizenship education is an important national priority.  Our democracy depends on informed participation. Schools play a crucial  role in helping to foster such participation.  The significant role that schools play in developing citizenship values  in their students is also recognised by teachers. For example, Suzanne  Mellor et al. 2001 reported that 98 per cent of 352 Australian teachers  surveyed believed that civics education matters a great deal for Australia.  In an ongoing attempt to promote appropriate curriculum materials, the  national Curriculum Corporation developed, and continues to promote, a  package entitled Discovering Democracy Curriculum Corporation, 1997.  As a result of being exposed to this curriculum, students are expected to  develop personal character traits, such as respecting individual worth  and human dignity, empathy, respect for the law, being informed about  public issues, critical mindedness and willingness to express points of  view, listen, negotiate and compromise p. 7. However, civics education  programs focusing on knowledge transmission alone have limited effect.  The values that are to be promoted have to be incorporated into the dayto-day experience of students.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour If we want greater understanding in civics, then students need  the opportunity to engage, which in turn promotes their belief and  understanding that participation and engagement are worthwhile Mellor,  Kennedy  Greenwood, 2001.  Independent of the civics debate, interest is also high with regard  to values. A 2003 study on values education, funded by the Federal  Government, focused on what values our children should learn, where and  in what context they should learn them, and what role schools should play  in their formation. The study found a number of examples of how values  can be taught to students in both state and private schools Zbar, Brown,  Bereznicki  Hooper, 2003, p. 11. The values highlighted were caring,  empathy and tolerance; peace and non-violence; respect, love, excellence,  achievement and honesty; truth, fairness and integrity p. 44. The most common values identified for schools to consider were  tolerance and understanding; respect, responsibility, social justice;  excellence; care, inclusion and trust; honesty, freedom and being ethical  pp. 15863.  Schools have always taught values and always will, but they vary in  how directly they attempt to do this. Some do it by default, allowing  the words and actions of staff and students to incidentally define what  is important and what is not. Some teach values as an add-on to the  main curriculum such as by emphasising and teaching the virtue of the  month. Some take a more holistic approach and allow particular value  positions to permeate their subject matter, whether it is Science, Maths or  English. Others try to teach values using the hidden curriculum, including   things such as the pictures that are placed on the walls or the layout  of the play areas Ainley, Batten, Collins,  Withers, 1998; Thomas,  2000. Recent work by the National Values Education Reference Group  Commonwealth of Australia, 2005 identifies nine values of significance  to Australian schooling:  1.	 Care and compassion 2.	 Doing your best 3.	 Fair go 4.	 Freedom 5.	 Honesty and trustworthiness 6.	 Integrity 7.	 Respect 8.	 Responsibility 9.	 Understanding, tolerance and inclusion. Classroom management interactions are integral to students understandings of a number of these values, including responsibility, tolerance,  care and concern for others, respect and honesty.

Introduction    13 Because values are so influenced by teachers interactions with  misbehaving students, those responsible for choosing approaches to  classroom management need to consider carefully not just the efficiency  of classroom management tricks or  techniques described in books such as  this one. They also have to understand  the sorts of values and beliefs likely  to be transmitted to students who  experience or witness these different  styles of management. Such values  are not haphazard but are consistent  with the assumptions underlying the  different approaches.  In general terms, though, none of the values implicit in the approach  to management outlined in this book would be unacceptable to school  communities in a western democratic society.  Stress and classroom management As indicated earlier, classroom management is a well-documented source  of teacher stress DeRobbio  Iwanicki, 1996; Friedman, 1995, 2006;  Keiper  Busselle, 1996. It consistently rates as among the strongest of  teacher stressors. Sometimes it is called classroom management, sometimes  discipline, and sometimes relationships with students. Regardless of the  label, it is a perceived inability to develop a good working relationship  with students that both beginning and experienced teachers identify as a  major cause of stress Veenman, Voeten,  Lem, 1987.  Teachers stress when they feel unable to maintain an atmosphere in  which students can get on with their work and teachers can teach without  unnecessary interruption. It is not surprising, then, that any failure on  a teachers part to satisfactorily  manage the classroom misbehaviour  of students can result in stress, and in  extreme cases, burnout. Nevertheless,  it needs to be noted that some stressrelated results may be tenuous because  teachers experiencing stress as a result  of other factors such as excessive  workload may perceive student behaviour more negatively Whiteman,  Young  Fisher, 1985 and therefore inflate its significance as a stressor.  Regardless, management issues rate consistently among the strongest of  teacher stressors, both locally and internationally. Those responsible for choosing  approaches to classroom management   have to understand the sorts of  values and beliefs likely to be transmitted  to students who experience or witness  these different styles of management.  Such values are not haphazard but  are consistent with the assumptions  underlying the different approaches.  Teachers stress when they feel unable  to maintain an atmosphere in which  students can get on with their work and  teachers can teach without unnecessary  interruption. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour  David Chan 1998, reporting on the stressors of over 400 teachers  in Hong Kong, notes that student behaviour management rates as the  second most important factor stressing teachers. More significantly,  perhaps, Richard Ingersoll 2001 studied approximately 6700 teachers  in the United States and says that approximately 30 per cent of the 400  or so who choose to leave the profession identify student management as  one of the reasons that caused them to give up teaching. An earlier study  in Western Australia also noted that for many Australian teachers the  stress associated with classroom management was cited as a reason for  resigning from the profession Bruce  Cacioppe, 1989. It is common for the Australian popular press to sensationalise the  problem of classroom misbehaviour and the associated teacher stress. For  example, articles entitled Safety of teachers must come first, Critical delay  on bad kid classes, or Counsellors needed for school discipline crisis  appear to suggest that school misbehaviour threatens both teachers and  students. However, inspection of many reports of student misbehaviour  does not indicate the presence of a very significant problem Fields, 1986;  Hart, Wearing  Conn, 1995; Oswald, Johnson  Whittington, 1997.  Similarly, Australian research on teacher stress and concern levels show that  they are best described as moderate IEU, 1996; Pithers  Soden, 1998. Research reporting on misbehaviour and teachers levels of concern  over management issues in Australian classrooms Lewis et al., 2005  shows that approximately two-thirds of an Australian sample of almost  500 teachers report that in the first class they will teach next week, they  expect hardly any or none of their students to misbehave. When asked  in that study to what extent is the issue of classroom management and  student misbehaviour an issue of concern to you?, 61 per cent reported  that it is no more than a minor stressor, 27 per cent said moderate and 12  per cent stated that management is a major source of stress. In summary,  although it can be seen that there is little support for the view that there  is a crisis in classroom management, over a third of Australian teachers  appear to be experiencing at least moderate levels of stress resulting from  student misbehaviour.  As stated earlier, since 1984 I have spent many hours in a professional  capacity as an adviser talking with groups of teachers about issues of  management. These teachers had sought information on the topic because  they were concerned about it. Many were frustrated because they spent  hours developing what they believed were exciting and relevant lessons  only to have student misbehaviour destroy the experience for all.  Others had very little difficulty dealing with all but a small minority of  students whom they found extremely challenging, due to these students  confrontational behaviour and apparent lack of respect for them. Not all  were concerned about their lack of control, however. Some were able to 

Introduction    15 maintain order in the classroom but felt that far too much time was being  lost in classroom management.  In addition to professional development experience with teachers,  and an awareness of relevant research literature, there is one other major  reason why I am convinced that the matter of classroom management  and relationships with students can be a very stressful part of teaching.  Although I cannot name the schools at which I have taught, I can say that  they were not easy ones in which to establish order in the classroom. I  have no doubt that schoolteachers need to concern themselves with the  unacceptable behaviour of students. Nevertheless, given the relatively  straightforward nature of most stress-inducing student behaviours, I am  confident that the approach to management highlighted in this book will,  if utilised consistently, increase student responsibility and substantially  reduce teacher stress. Having discussed the central role of classroom management in the  process of schooling and some of the problems associated with it, Chapter  2 will focus on teacher aggression towards students and its negative impact  on both students and teachers. The remainder of the book will outline  what can be done to assist teachers to use more productive disciplinary  strategies. There are two aspects to the solution offered. The first centres  on classroom management techniques able to be used with students  displaying different patterns of misbehaviour. These are techniques  capable of meeting not only the need for order in classrooms but also the  need to create responsible citizens. These are discussed in Chapters 3 to 7.  This is followed by Chapter 8, which provides research support for the  techniques recommended. The second part of a solution to the problem of  students controlling teachers focuses on how to set up a process of teacher  support capable of ensuring that teachers do not regress. This process is  the focus of Chapter 9. 
Teachers aggression   towards misbehaving   students 2 Disciplinary techniques used by Australian  teachers I recently wrote Lewis, 2006 a comprehensive review of Australian  research into the ways that students see primary and secondary teachers  dealing with classroom behaviour. It shows that primary teachers frequently  encourage their students to participate in rule formation, hint that  behaviour should improve, and praise and reward appropriate behaviour.  They often hold discussions with students about the inappropriateness of  misbehaviour and punish students who misbehave, increasing the level  of consequence if students argue or repeat the misbehaviour. Primary  teachers are rarely considered to have acted aggressively by humiliating  students or acting unfairly. Secondary teachers appear to  frequently hint and punish, only sometimes recognise appropriate behaviour  and have discussions with students,  and hardly ever involve students in  decision-making. Nevertheless, both  primary and secondary teachers are  seen, at least sometimes, to yell angrily  at students who misbehave and to keep a class in because some students  misbehave Lewis, 2001, p. 312. Four categories of student behaviour To understand these findings more fully, it is instructive to consider  four categories of student behaviour labelled Category A, B, C and D  respectively. This delineation underlies the discussion of management  Secondary teachers appear to frequently  hint and punish, only sometimes  recognise appropriate behaviour and  have discussions with students,  and hardly ever involve students in  decision-making. 

Teachers aggression towards misbehaving students      17 techniques in Chapters 3 to 5, and provides the basis for the structure of  this book. Students who manifest behaviours characteristic of the first category  Category A generally respond appropriately to the curriculum and  undertake whatever work the teacher gives them. These children usually  seem to assume that the work is important enough to attempt, and easy  enough to be mastered. Such students respond to hints such as a teacher  pausing, moving closer, inspecting the childs work or saying that there is  a problem.  Students whose behaviour places them in the second group Category  B are less interested in the work and may be less confident of their ability  to complete it. Consequently, they are occasionally distracted and can  sometimes be distracting. The behaviour of these children often improves  as a result of a teachers judicious use of recognition and rewards, as well  as punishment.  The third category of behaviour Category C comprises actions  sufficiently challenging to warrant a students occasional isolation  within the class or removal from the classroom. When such students  are isolated, the teacher usually provides an opportunity for a chat.  During this discussion, the teacher helps the students become aware of  the unreasonable impact their behaviour has on other students. Once the  child acknowledges that the behaviour is a problem, a plan or contract is  developed for avoiding repetition of such unreasonable behaviour in the  future. Although one chat will normally not be sufficient, after a number  of these chats, students who display Category C behaviour usually move  to behaviour characteristic of Categories B or A. The final type of behaviour Category D involves repeated  misbehaviour despite a teachers use of all of the above techniques.  Although some students behaviour will remain firmly within one of  the four categories AD, it is likely that others will show behaviour  patterns reflecting more than one category. The frequency and type of  misbehaviour can often be related to what is being learnt and how it  is being taught. When students are feeling competent and can see the  relevance of the work they are doing they are more likely to display  behaviour typical of Categories A or B.  However, when they are less interested in the work or feel that they  are unable to achieve, then it is possible they can move to Category C-type  behaviour. Students displaying behaviour characteristic of Category D  can be helped to improve only if radical improvement occurs in their selfconcept.  It is extremely important to understand that I am not offering a fixed  and permanent way of categorising students. In contrast, I am arguing 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour that at particular times, in particular contexts, students can display  characteristic patterns of behaviour. If handled in an appropriate manner,  students can be assisted to improve their behaviour. Therefore, if a teacher  effectively identifies the type, frequency and goal of misbehaviour, and  provides the sort of classroom management students need depending on  whether their current patterns of behaviour reflect those of Category D,  C, B or A, students can all develop Category A behaviour. In this way,  they all will become highly responsible, and learning opportunities of all  kinds will be maximised. Five kinds of power To provide a theoretical framework for interpreting how teachers attempt  to gain responsible behaviour from all students, I am going to refer briefly  to a theory of power developed by John French and Bertram Raven 1959.  This analysis of power in relationships continues to provide a valuable form  of scaffolding for those examining classroom discipline Tauber, 2007.  In dealing with the misbehaviour of students, teachers may knowingly  or unknowingly draw upon five kinds of power:  1.	 Coercive power is the power a teacher has over a student  stemming from the students desire to avoid punishment  associated with inappropriate classroom behaviour. 2. 	 Reward power is the power related to a students desire to  gain something they want. Teachers who provide the desired  recognitions and rewards for appropriate behaviour have  such power. 3.	 Legitimate power is the power that is inherent in the role  occupied by teachers, bestowed upon them by society, coming  with the position they occupy. 4.	 Referent or relationship power is the power that students  give to teachers whose relationships they value. It stems from  respect for, or liking of, the teacher. Teachers with Referent  power are trusted by students, as friends are trusted. 5.	 Expert power stems from a students belief that the teacher  has the ability to pass on important knowledge and skills, and  they will gain something valuable if they cooperate.  The findings reported earlier that secondary teachers very often use  hints and assertive strategies to respond to classroom misbehaviour  probably arise because such strategies meet the needs of students displaying  Category A and B behaviour, discussed above. Since teachers on average 

Teachers aggression towards misbehaving students      19 report that only some of their students misbehave, A and B students form  the majority of students in most classrooms. Although teachers could use  one-on-one discussions before giving out punishments such as isolation  and detention, it appears that this kind of response to misbehaviour may  be reserved for students who are unwilling to respond to the teachers  Legitimate, Coercive or Reward power.  It needs to be noted, though, that Reward power is not readily  offered to individual students. It may be argued that it is only when the  application of Legitimate power and Reward power is ignored or resisted  that teachers adopt strategies based primarily on Referent power, and try  to change students from the inside out rather than from the outside in.  Primary teachers, however, appear to rely more heavily on Referent  and Reward power than Coercive, and arguably value more highly their  relationship with students.  Frequency of teachers aggressive behaviour Despite the unproductive nature of aggressive teacher responses to the  inappropriate behaviour of students, quite a few Australian teachers  appear to be using such techniques. Both primary and secondary teachers  are seen, at least sometimes, to yell angrily at students who misbehave and  to impose detention on classes because some students misbehave.  62 of secondary students and 68 of elementary students indicate that  their teachers at least sometimes yell in anger at students who misbehave.  In addition, 42 of secondary and 35 of elementary respondents  report that their teachers at least sometimes use sarcasm, and 30 and  19 respectively report the use of putdowns. Finally, 45 and 60  of secondary and elementary teachers respectively are seen to at least  sometimes keep the class in because some students misbehave. These  figures are substantial and a cause for concern. Lewis, 2006, p. 1199 Why teachers use aggressive classroom  management techniques During a study leave year from my university, I returned to teaching fulltime as a teacher of science and maths in a secondary school. I had a  colleague, whom I shall call Mr Edwards. He was suffering a great deal  of stress from teaching. It was not because he didnt know his subject;  he knew it very well. His problem was classroom management and it  culminated in a change of schools at the end of the year.  The problem appeared to me to be partly provoked by Mr Edwards  himself. I became aware that he was screaming at his students, occasionally 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour using abusive language and sarcasm,  and frequently using group punishments like class detentions. In conversations, however, Mr Edwards  clearly indicated that he was aware of  the negative impact such techniques  might have on a teachers relationship  with students. It was not that he didnt  care about his students and their right  to be treated respectfully; he did. In his calmer moments it was clear that  he even liked the same students he abused in class.  I was not surprised by Mr Edwards behaviour because I had  chanced upon it a number of times previously with other teachers. On  many occasions, during professional development sessions on discipline  at their schools, members of staff would tell me privately that to keep  a class under control they were forced to do things that they felt very  uncomfortable about. Mostly they spoke of uncontrolled yelling on their  part, as well as sarcasm and group punishment.  To gather some systematic information on the views teachers hold  on the use of hostile management techniques, I conducted two studies.  In the first, I taped hour-long interviews with 20 teachers from ten state  secondary schools in the northern region of Melbourne. Two teachers  from each school were recommended by their principals on the basis that  they appeared to operate very different models of classroom management,  one teacher relying on Legitimate and Coercive power and the other  emphasisng Referent and Reward power. With the exception of two  teachers, all interviewees expressed a desire to avoid techniques that could  harm students psychologically.  The following quotations, each taken from a different interviewee,  represent typical responses:  I try not to make students feel less able or worth less, but at times, Im  sure it does. I try very hard not to use anger or belittling of students because of the  effect that it might have. Well, I dont like yelling, because I dont think yelling is very productive  and I dont like being yelled at myself  and I dont like making any of  the kids feel rotten. I certainly wouldnt want to apply negative psychological impact. I dont like putting kids, anyone, down. Im sure I do it sometimes, but it  is something that I would try to avoid. I became aware that he was screaming  at his students, occasionally using  abusive language and sarcasm, and  frequently using group punishments  like class detentions  In his calmer  moments it was clear that he even liked  the same students he abused in class. 

Teachers aggression towards misbehaving students      21 The two dissenters were of the view that: If  a childs behaviour was affecting the other students, I wouldnt  really hesitate to have some sort of negative effect on them, for the  benefit of the others, because there are 20 or 21 kids in a class. Despite their general desire not to use sarcasm or display anger  towards students, all the teachers interviewed acknowledged that they did  in fact do these things. Many suggested that they were very cautious and  used it only on students who required it and whom they thought probably  wouldnt be affected by it.  Some typical responses were: I would only occasionally do that use sarcasm and I would be very careful  which kid I chose  some kids are just not able to accept it, to take it. I try to bring a kid down if its the right kid, to give them a dressing down. Its only the very timid and shy students that would really shiver at it  anger, I think. Some of the other well-behaved kids you would destroy, but the kids  who dont behave, I think youd find it very difficult to have a negative  effect on them completely. The ripple effect of hostility If these teachers were correct in assuming that a targeted student could  withstand the use of sarcasm and anger without it having a great effect, it  remains to be explained why so many  students state a strong preference for  teachers to avoid these techniques  Lewis, 2006. It appears that a ripple  effect, noted by Jacob Kounin 1970,  is in operation. That is, a teachers  behaviour towards one student has an  impact on non-target students.  The teachers interviewed did not  appear to be aware of this possibility. The response of one particular  interviewee provides a dramatic example. In the early part of the interview  the teacher stated: I think every kids different. Youve got to really treat each kid differently.  There are some kids that are really bad and they seem to go out of  their way to annoy the teacher. They are not interested in their work or  There are some kids that are really bad  and they seem to go out of their way to  annoy the teacher  their joy in life is to  annoy the teachers  I use sarcasm to  get rid of them  then I can concentrate  on the kids that want to learn.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour lessons, their joy in life is to annoy the teachers  and I do use sarcasm   I use sarcasm to get rid of them. I send them to the back of the class  or even stand them outside the door, which youre not supposed to do.  But then I can concentrate on the kids that want to learn. However, this teacher later recounted the following story of his own  schooldays: Well, when I was at school I was very, very, quiet, I was very, very shy.  I still am. I went to the Collingwood Technical School and the teachers  there were very tough and if you didnt conform, they really got into you.  I remember my mate in my Maths class and the teacher said  I forget  his name  come out to the blackboard and do this equation. And this poor kid couldnt do it, and wow, the teacher bawled him  out in front of the class. His mind must have been a blank I suppose and  hes doing algebra on the blackboard, and he couldnt do a thing, and  this teacher was tearing him to shreds, and Im thinking  Oh my God,  hes going to ask me next, and Ill die. The story is particularly relevant because the teacher suggested that he  had been a well-behaved student who was rarely punished. In addition to this ripple effect of sarcasm on the bystanders in a  classroom, there is the possibility that some students those showing  Category C and D behaviour are not scared by the teachers use of  sarcasm but are excited or angered by it. Such students are also likely to  be distracted from their work, but not because they are worried that the  teacher might be sarcastic to them. On the contrary, they would welcome  the opportunity to give the teacher what he or she deserves. They dont sit  and shake, they sit and mentally rehearse the hostile response they plan to  make if the teacher is stupid enough to choose them as the next target. When the four groups of behaviour described above Categories AD  are considered, it becomes obvious that in classes where more students  display Category C and D behaviour, they are more likely to promote  and witness greater teacher aggression towards students behaving  inappropriately. However, students showing Category C and D behaviour  patterns are precisely those who are least likely to respond well to such  provocation.  Teachers who lose their tempers and yell at such students, or attempt  to quell their misbehaviour by using cutting sarcasm, are likely to escalate  the conflict. The fact that these teachers generally have a genuine regard  for their students and a desire to avoid such counterproductive techniques  does not prevent them from doing things they regret. Why, then, does it  happen?

Teachers aggression towards misbehaving students      23 Theories that explain teacher misbehaviour There are three competing yet interrelated theoretical explanations for  teachers misbehaviour towards challenging students. Each is plausible.  Attribution theory The first of the possible explanations for a teachers use of aggressive  disciplinary techniques is attribution theory the no one can be expected  to cope with these kinds of kids response. This approach is based on  attribution theory as developed by Fritz Heider 1958, Edward Jones and  Keith Davis 1965 and Harold H. Kelley 1973, and Bernard Weiners  attributional theory of achievement motivation 1985, 1994. The idea is  that teachers may use aggressive techniques with such children because kids  like this dont and cant be expected to understand, appreciate or respond  to more reasonable classroom management techniques. The reasons are  typically seen to reside in the students natures or upbringing. Consequently, when a student exhibits challenging behaviour that  teachers find confronting they may respond by giving the student what  kids of this kind deserve. According to this explanation, students who  deny a teachers legitimate authority and act in a way which they clearly  understand is irresponsible and unfair, deserve maybe, need to be put in  their place. Any resistance justifies an angry response from the teacher.  In addition, any class that acts irresponsibly deserves to be punished  as a group. Even if some students were not directly involved in the  misbehaviour, they didnt try to prevent it.  Efficacy theory The second theoretical explanation for a teachers use of aggressive  discipline techniques relates to low levels of perceived self-efficacy the  Im hopeless at this response. This view is based on Albert Banduras  theory of self-efficacy 1994. Within this conceptualisation, when teachers  view their resources emotional and professional as inadequate to deal  with the management situation they confront, they feel incompetent and  unable to cope.  Francis Fuller and Oliver Bown 1975 provide some insight into  the relevance of efficacy theory to the question of why sensible teachers  occasionally do counterproductive things to students they like. First, they  postulate that the things that concern and stress teachers generally change  as a teacher gains more experience and self-confidence. Initially, teachers  have concerns about themselves. The questions that dominate are along  the lines of: will I look right? can I appear knowledgeable? and so on.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour However, once teachers realise that they have the personal  characteristics required to occupy the role of a teacher, there is a movement  from concerns about the self to concerns about the task of teaching: how  do I question? what is an efficient way to explain a concept? It is only  when these concerns are allayed, as teachers become competent in and  confident about their teaching abilities, that the next level of concern is  reached. It is at this third level that teachers become fully aware of and  concerned about what is best for students, for example what style of  interaction and what sort of content best suits individual students. The second aspect of Fuller and Bowns model relevant to explaining  a teachers aggressive behaviour towards students is as follows. Teachers  who have graduated from focusing on concerns about themselves and the  task, and who are mainly occupied with ways of designing instruction most  relevant to students needs, will regress whenever they feel very threatened  or insecure. That is, when confronted by a situation they perceive as very  stressful, teachers may move from focusing on what is best for students  to being relatively more concerned about their own needs. At these times,  they will act to protect themselves even if it is at the expense of students. There is a second way in which efficacy theory can explain teachers  use of aggressive disciplinary techniques. Some teachers may choose  such strategies because they see it as in the interests of all including the  misbehaving student to suppress  misbehaviour in a manner they perceive  as extremely efficient. Sarcasm, for example, can quickly shut down many  students. So can yelling in anger.  Attachment theory The third of the dominant potential theoretical explanations for a teachers  aggressive and unproductive responses to challenging students is based on  attachment theory Bowlby, 1975, 1981, 1982. A teachers feelings of rejection and hurt, related to the perceived  unfairness of the behaviour of a challenging student, promote an  emotional withdrawal and often an aggressive response from the teacher.  This stuff them reaction from teachers is thought to stem from insecure  styles of attachment. Such teachers may be unable to respond to young  people with affection or support, be unable to trust them, or may need  and want emotional support from their students and be unable to cope  with apparent rejection.  Imagine an extremely dedicated mathematics teacher. For this teacher  the study of mathematics is one of the most significant pursuits in the  world. She devotes many hours to lesson preparation, working late into  the night, to ensure that her next lesson is interesting, relevant and as  engaging as possible. Through such a captivating lesson she knows she 

Teachers aggression towards misbehaving students      25 will gain great admiration from her students. However, when she presents  her baby to the class, a particularly challenging student destroys the  process she worked so hard to develop. He not only rejects her baby, but  also destroys it. The extreme sense of rejection and hurt she experiences  may cause her to react very aggressively. A study that can shed some light on explanations for teachers use  of aggressive management techniques is a survey of 507 primary and  secondary teachers in Australia Lewis, 2004.  Teachers indicated how often they used techniques such as: yell angrily at students who misbehave

keep a class in because some students misbehave

make sarcastic comments to students who misbehave, etc.

They then reported why they did these things. There were no statistically  significant differences between the support for alternative reasons provided  by primary and secondary staff. The reasons most commonly selected by  teachers were:  I do it because Im frustrated. It allows the lesson to continue. It makes the student listen to me. It puts me back in control. Between 40 and 61 per cent of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that  these were reasons that explained their aggressive disciplinary behaviour.  These findings suggest support for efficacy theory. In contrast, the reasons  least likely to be selected as relevant were: If I dont, the student wont learn to behave properly. It makes me feel better. The student deserves it for behaving so badly. Only 20 per cent of teachers agreed or strongly agreed with each of  these reasons. Consequently, there appears less support for both attribution  and attachment theory. However, much more work is required before the  contribution of the competing theories can be fully appreciated.  Teachers self-defeating attitudes Since efficacy theory appears most relevant to explaining teachers  unproductive treatment of challenging students, a brief analysis of teachers  attitudes is useful. Michael Bernard 1990 has written extensively on how 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour the level of stress associated with feelings of inadequacy depends to some  extent on a teachers attitude. He concludes that because teachers can modify  their counterproductive attitudes, the level of threat can be reduced. The counterproductive or, as Bernard calls them, irrational attitudes  are generally extreme and out of touch with reality. Imagine a teacher who  believes that all of his or her students have to do as they are told all of  the time. This teacher also believes that successful teachers should be able  to control their students behaviour completely  and it would be really  awful if even one student didnt behave as requested. Further, assume  that this teacher believes he or she needs to be in charge to avoid being a  failure, not only as a teacher but also as a person. When confronted with  inappropriate behaviour, any teacher maintaining these sorts of attitudes  is going to be very highly stressed. Relatively serious misbehaviour may be  seen as truly awful  a catastrophe that cannot be tolerated. It is likely that a teacher with such extreme attitudes would feel very  threatened if confronted by, for example, a class clown. This is because  attention-seekers are as interested in the reactions of the rest of the class to  their behaviour as they are in the reaction of the teacher. Therefore, they  may not immediately, or even ultimately, do as they are told. Similarly, a  student who frequently makes unnecessarily disrespectful challenges to a  teachers authority may also offer too much of a challenge for any teacher  with less rational attitudes. In reaction to inappropriate student behaviour, less rational teachers  frequently respond by labelling the students as hopeless, or rotten to the  core. Moreover, they may readily regress to being concerned about their  own survival and willingly deny the students rights if it means protecting  themselves. It is very unlikely that these teachers would calmly and  consciously react in a professional way, selecting an appropriate response  from the range of acceptable alternatives, keeping in mind the needs of the  individual student. An aggressive response is much more likely. If such teachers were more in touch with reality, they would recognise  that it is not possible to make students do what they are told all of the time.  Sometimes students are feeling frustrated, angry, embarrassed, depressed, or  are experiencing some other negative emotion, and do not respond logically.  A more rational attitude for a teacher to hold would run along the following  lines: I would prefer that I were able to manage the behaviour of all my  students and that they did as they were told, and I will try to find techniques  to achieve my aim. But if a student refuses to cooperate, I can manage to live  through the situation while I continue to seek a strategy that works. However, as the research reported in this chapter has shown, despite all  attempts to keep cool, the most rational teacher occasionally loses it and  acts aggressively towards misbehaving students. The question that needs to  be asked is: when they do, what effect does it have on students?

Teachers aggression towards misbehaving students      27 The impact of teachers aggressive classroom  management There is a substantial body of research from recent decades see Lewis et  al., 2005 showing that the use of aggressive strategies in the classroom  is non-productive. This includes observational studies e.g. Gottfredson,  Karweit  Gottfredson, 1989; Kounin, 1970 and surveys of teachers,  students and parents e.g. Hyman  Snook, 2000; Lewis, 2001. Results have shown that where teachers verbally abuse children,  humiliate them by the use of sarcasm, frequently and repeatedly exit them  from class, or impose arbitrary and harsh punishments, children can  experience a range of short-term and long-term negative consequences.  These include less interest in the subjects being taught Henderson, Fisher   Fraser, 2000, absences from school, withdrawal or suspension, and  an increase in high-risk behaviours  such as smoking and drug or alcohol  abuse Piekarska, 2000; Sava, 2002.  Australian studies have shown that  15-year-olds absent from school have  higher levels of psychopathology Borg,  1992, and engage in more frequent  high-risk behaviours Handelsman   Gupta, 1997. Disengagement from  schooling, frequent referrals out of  class, absences from school or exclusion have a significant impact on  future opportunities for education or access to employment.  The negative impact of teachers aggressive classroom management  techniques on students has been known for many years. A study I was  involved with approximately 20 years ago concluded:  Students who are less able to concentrate on their school work, and  who are more likely to think less positively of their teacher after their  teacher handles misbehaviour in their classroom, are likely to perceive  more of the following teacher behaviours: mistargeting, either by the  teacher choosing the wrong student or by blaming the sins of individuals  on the group; showing anger and, in the case of students attitudes to  their teacher, not providing clear and rational rules; using arbitrary or  unreasonable sanctions and moving students without warning. Once  again, teachers perceived as more supportive of appropriate classroom  behaviour are associated with more positive student attitudes. Lewis   Lovegrove, 1987a, p. 183 Furthermore, two other studies of students reports of their teachers  disciplinary behaviour and their attitudes to the subject taught by that  Where teachers verbally abuse children,  humiliate them by the use of sarcasm,  frequently and repeatedly exit them from  class, or impose arbitrary and harsh  punishments, children can experience  a range of short-term and long-term  negative consequences. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour teacher concluded that students may become less interested in subjects  taught by teachers who display anger, mistarget and punish innocent  students, and dont give warnings before issuing punishments. This occurs  even though the importance attached to the subject is not affected Lewis   Lovegrove, 1988. These results appear very consistent with those of Darrell Fisher, Barry  Fraser and others who, in a series of studies, demonstrated that students  who perceived their teachers as admonishing and strict were those with  less interest in the subject being taught e.g. Fisher, Henderson  Fraser,  1997; Henderson, Fisher  Fraser, 2000.  A replication of the earlier studies, Lewis 2001, examined the views  of over 4000 secondary students and almost 600 students in primary  schools. Once again, teacher aggression is associated with more student  dislike of the teacher and greater distraction from schoolwork.  Given the observations reported earlier, that the majority of students  see their teachers as at least sometimes providing aggressive responses to  misbehaving students, it is not surprising that secondary students are at  least some of the time distracted by their teachers classroom management  strategies and as often feel annoyed at a teacher when he or she deals with  misbehaviour. This is despite the observation that more than sometimes  they think the teachers intervention was necessary. Primary students  report about the same level of negative affect as the secondary students,  but more distraction, even though they are more likely to see the teachers  interventions as justified. It is of interest to recall that in one early study Lewis  Lovegrove,  1987b, which examined Year 9 students reaction to management, the  proportions of students more than sometimes distracted, seeing the  teachers behaviour as unjustified and feeling negative towards the teacher  were 35, 42 and 42 per cent respectively. The corresponding figures for  the same year level, almost 20 years later, are 39, 49 and 32 per cent. For  primary students the recently reported proportions are 48, 51 and 38 per  cent. It is of interest to note that the corresponding figures for students in  Israel and China are similar Lewis, Romi, Qui,  Katz, 2007. Consequently, there does not appear to be a great deal of difference  in secondary students reaction to management over time, although in  more recent times secondary teachers appear less likely to be thought  of more negatively for implementing disciplinary strategies. In general,  these proportions are very substantial and indicate that many students are  adversely affected by witnessing or experiencing the way their teachers  handle students misbehaviour in classrooms Lewis, 2007.  As stated earlier, most teachers are quite aware of the need to minimise  disciplinary techniques that distract students from their learning, and to  use these techniques infrequently at most. Even teachers who dont resort 

Teachers aggression towards misbehaving students      29 to aggressive techniques still appear to have concerns about the disciplinary  techniques they do use. In general, their ideas of best discipline practice  involves significantly more empowerment of students than is currently the  case in their classrooms Lewis, 1999; Lewis  Burman, 2006.  It appears that teachers want to decrease their dependence on a  search for student obedience and to increase their reliance on approaches  that are more inclusive of the voices of students. Put in terms of power,  they seek to reduce Legitimate and Coercive power and increase their  reliance on Referent and Reward power Lewis  Burman, 2006. Such a  position would appear to be consistent with the increasing interest in the  earlier reported relationship between schooling and the development of  appropriate citizenship attitudes and skills.  The tension between current and preferred management practice  is generally not of great concern to teachers, although those for whom  the gap is largest report the most stress Lewis, 1999. It is, however, of  interest to reflect on how teachers attempt to cope when their disciplinary  techniques are more authoritarian than they would wish. Teachers coping strategies According to Samuel Green and Margaret Ross 1996: 315, only a few  studies have been devoted to understanding the coping strategies used by  teachers. This position is reinforced by Chan 1998: 146: research studies  on teachers job-related coping behaviour and on coping as a mediator  between teacher stressors and distress have been comparatively neglected. Nevertheless, a 1999 study examined the coping behaviour of almost  300 teachers in 15 metropolitan schools in Melbourne, Australia Lewis,  1999. This study reports that the most common responses of teachers  to any stress associated with an  inability to manage classrooms as they  would like are to put more time into  their work and to seek support from  others. They also regularly reflect on  a plan of action, while putting more  effort into their relationships with  others and making time for leisure  activities. These strategies were used  either many times or almost every time by approximately 50 per cent  of teachers. There is occasional use of five other strategies: focusing on   the positive, maintaining a sense of humour, playing sport, working on  ones self-image, and attending relevant meetings. In general, between 24  and 35 per cent of teachers used these responses many times or almost  every time. The most common responses of  teachers to any stress associated with  an inability to manage classrooms as  they would like are to put more time  into their work and to seek support  from others. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour The least commonly used strategies, with the exception of seeking  professional help, are those that have been described elsewhere as  dysfunctional Lewis  Frydenberg, 2004. Strategies in this group  such as worrying, letting off steam, ignoring the issue, blaming oneself,  keeping concerns to oneself, wishful thinking, and getting sick were used  many times or almost every time by only 46 per cent of teachers. It can  be concluded that teachers most commonly respond to concern about the  gap between current and preferred classroom management practice with  productive coping strategies.  However, greater teacher concern about an inability to manage  classrooms as desired is associated with greater use of the range of  dysfunctional coping responses listed above. These strategies were  reported as used sometimes by approximately 2030 per cent of teachers  Lewis, 1999.  Surveys of teaching staff have shed interesting light on the way these  strategies are implemented. During professional development sessions I  conducted, secondary school staff said they would be cheerfully going  about getting ready for school when suddenly they would realise that  today was Thursday, and not Wednesday as they had thought. From  then on the day was ruined by worrying about the fact that they now  knew they faced the dreaded 10E that afternoon. Other staff spoke about  waking at approximately 2 a.m. to worry about the way things went, or  better, didnt go, in class the day before. While awake they would blame  themselves for things they had said and felt they shouldnt have, or things  they could have done that they didnt do. Some said that they did this at 2  a.m. while they ate comfort foods like chocolate or ice cream. One of the best manifestations of wishful thinking I have heard came  from a teacher who stated that she lay awake in the early hours of the  morning wishing that her dreaded Matthew would get hit by a bus. Not  killed, just hospitalised. Shed even send work, and correct it. A couple  of months would just about do it was September at the time. A less  dramatic version of wishful thinking was exemplified by a teacher who  lived in the hope that one particular family in the school would move  suburbs, taking their three very difficult children with them. In summary, it appears that on average teachers generally cope  productively with the stress of being less professional than they would  want to be in the area of classroom management. The most useful strategies  include dealing directly with the problem while staying socially connected,  fit, and relaxed. They are far less likely to use strategies characterised as  less productive, if not counterproductive, such as self-blame and ignoring  the problem, and very unlikely to get sick in response to their concern.  It is also clear, however, that those teachers who are most stressed  are more likely to use maladaptive strategies which may contribute to, 

Teachers aggression towards misbehaving students      31 or at least maintain, their high levels of stress. Rather than increase their  range of problem-solving responses,  they become less likely to share their  concern, and increase their use of  self-blame, wishful thinking, and so  on. It seems that such dysfunctional  strategies also undermine or negate  the benefits that accrue from the use  of more adaptive strategies such as being problem-focused and keeping fit  and relaxed, as argued by Lewis and Frydenberg 2002. The more stressed teachers are also more likely to get sick in response  to their concern. It is relevant to note that this occurs despite the fact  that they are likely to use productive strategies as often as their less  concerned peers. This outcome appears consistent with the observation of  Chan 1998, p. 147, who argues that it is recognized that not all coping  strategies are likely to reduce distress and that certain coping strategies  such as avoidance  may even exacerbate distress. It is ironic to combine knowledge about teachers coping with the  idea of Post-Guru Syndrome discussed earlier. According to PGS, many  teachers who cannot sustain the techniques displayed by a guru fall back  on techniques they would rather avoid. As a result, they become more  concerned about the realisation that they are not disciplining students in a  manner they would want. These teachers are those most likely to use selfdamaging coping responses. One could almost argue that as far as they  are concerned, it might be kinder to keep the gurus out of schools.  Having sketched the problems, what remains is to explain how they  might be addressed.  Those teachers who are most stressed  are more likely to use maladaptive  strategies which may contribute to, or at  least maintain, their high levels of stress. 
Developmental   management in   the classroom 3 As has already been explained, there are, at any time, four different patterns  of student behaviour in classrooms. Category A behaviour is generally  displayed by children who respond appropriately to the curriculum and  undertake whatever work the teacher gives them. Category B behaviour  shows a pattern whereby the student is occasionally distracted and  sometimes distracting. Category C, on the other hand, comprises kinds of  misbehaviour, and levels of persistence, sufficient to warrant a students  occasional isolation within, or removal from, the class. The final category  of behaviour, Category D, is one where student misbehaviour seems to  occur repeatedly despite teachers best efforts. The classroom management  techniques to be described in the following chapters are based on the  assumption that teachers will only become aware of which students are  displaying which patterns of behaviour by initially treating them as if they  are all in Category A.  For shorthand purposes, throughout the remainder of this text,  categories will be applied to students manifesting A, B, C or D patterns  of behaviour. That is, I will speak of Category A students or Category  D students, and so on. The risk here is that you may come to think of  students as residing permanently in a category. This is not the case. These  categories are to be used as a way of identifying the most appropriate  management strategies for a respective student. The aim of doing that is  to move students efficiently from Category D to C, to B, to A, at which  time all students will be acting responsibly. Hence the use of the term  developmental management. It is sometimes difficult to pinpoint which students, as a result of their  behaviour, should be placed in which categories. I can recall conducting  a discussion with all the teachers of a particularly challenging Year 8  class at a secondary school. As we discussed the behaviour of individual  students it seemed as if the behaviour of nine of the 24 students indicated  Category D. Subsequent experience showed it to be four. Since then I have 

Developmental management in the classroom      33 found that, with only one exception, all difficult classes with which I  have been asked to help have had no more than four students manifesting  Category D behaviour. What seems to be happening, however, is that  teachers can unwittingly provoke students at Category C, and sometimes  even Category B, to act like those at Category D. Before moving into  a discussion of managing inappropriate behaviour, in whatever category  it appears, it is useful to focus briefly on how to stimulate appropriate  behaviour, so that misbehaviour is minimised.  What causes inappropriate behaviour? Views about the causes of a students inappropriate classroom behaviour  can be placed along a continuum. At one end is the belief that the  behaviour has to do entirely with some deficiency in the student. The  assumption is that students only behave inappropriately because there  is something wrong with them. This explanation, commonly referred  to as a deficit model, highlights the students problematic psychological  make-up, or sociological factors which contribute to his or her lack of  conformity. Under the deficit model,  solving problems associated with a  childs lack of conformity involves a  variety of approaches ranging from  exercising control over the students  behaviour, to counselling. At the other end of the continuum  is the belief that the childs lack of  conformity is an expression of genuine  and justifiable dissatisfaction with an educational institution that fails to  cater for his or her legitimate needs. It proposes that if students behave  unacceptably, it is entirely the fault of the curriculum. Either the material  being covered is not seen as sufficiently relevant or interesting, or the  process of instruction is not stimulating enough to maintain the interest  and attention of students. This view focuses on solutions that require  institutional changes to curriculum content and processes, timetabling,  resources, staffstudent relationships and studentstudent relationships  Greaves, 1987. A nice way to clarify the distinction between the approaches is by  using a simple analogy, that of the proverbial square peg in a round hole.  According to the first explanation, if theres any difficulty fitting a square  peg the student into the round hole the school setting, then the teacher  has to concentrate on whittling the edges off the peg. According to the  second explanation, the pegs shape is fine and it is the shape of the hole  that must be adjusted.  The assumption is that students only  behave inappropriately because there is  something wrong with them  Another  belief proposes that if students behave  unacceptably, it is entirely the fault of  the curriculum. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour The only proponents of either extreme of this continuum seem to  be theorists. Most experienced teachers recognise that a students  inappropriate behaviour results from a combination of both factors. To some extent, teacher responses to students inappropriate behaviour  can be considered independently of changes to curriculum content and  process. It is largely this view that underlies the approach to discipline  presented in the remainder of this book. Nevertheless, the content and  process of the instruction offered by teachers is clearly relevant to the  appropriateness of the classroom behaviour of all students, although it is  probably most relevant for those in Categories C and D. Before focusing on  how teachers can usefully respond to inappropriate classroom behaviour,  therefore, I will give some attention to ways in which teachers can reduce  the likelihood of it occurring in their classroom. Avoiding disruption Since the early 1970s, there has been a growing body of literature  surrounding the work of Kounin 1970. He analysed videotapes of  teaching to identify the sorts of things teachers did that were associated  with student disruption. He labelled some of these variables quite strangely,  using terms like dangles, flip flops and thrusts; however, the concepts  behind these terms are familiar to experienced teachers. According to  Kounin, there are a number of features which consistently characterise  classrooms where little time is lost because of inappropriate behaviour.  These features can be summarised under four headings: keeping the  lesson flowing smoothly; keeping students interested; keeping students  accountable for their learning; and making students feel monitored. Keeping the lesson flowing To keep a lesson flowing smoothly there are some things that should be done  and some that should be avoided. Among the former are the following: Know exactly what you are going to do and have all the necessary resources 

ready. At the beginning of a lesson and of a topic, inform the students about the 

aims of the instruction and the activities they are going to do to achieve  them. Whenever possible, set up an accepted and fully understood pattern for 

student behaviour so that time is not repeatedly lost in negotiating with  students e.g. toilet passes, distribution of materials, roll-taking, lining up.  Let students know when an activity is about to be changed so they can 

prepare to finish what they are doing and mentally get ready for what is  about to begin.

Developmental management in the classroom      35 Always attend to the needs of the majority of the class and have them 

engaged in learning before dealing with individual students who require  special attention. In introducing a new task, give clear directions. Specify why the task is 

being done, how it connects to work already completed or about to be  undertaken, what is to be done, and an approximate time limit for the activity.  Allow students time to seek clarification before setting them to work.  Give all instructions before beginning work so you dont have to interrupt the 

students with more instructions once they have started. Having completed the dos, it is useful to consider some of the most  important donts: Dont spend more time on any activity than is required e.g. handing out 

equipment, explaining, or telling a student off. Dont interrupt a discussion on one topic to jump to a different one even if 

you later return to and complete the first topic. For example, halfway through  discussing the answer to question 4, you remember that you forgot to tell  the students some important information about the answer to question 3.  Dont interrupt yourself. Finish off your answer to question 4, then return to  question 3 and complete it. Then you can proceed to question 5. Dont allow yourself to be sidetracked into answering irrelevant questions or 

requests. This is particularly important when a new activity is being initiated. Keeping students interested A students interest in learning can be stimulated and maintained in a  number of different ways: Vary the volume, speed and tone of your voice.

Be enthusiastic about what you teach e.g. whenever possible say why it is 

useful, important, interesting andor exciting. Vary the manner in which you teach. This includes using a variety of procedures 

such as assignments, debates, excursions, guest speakers. Variability also  relates to individual lessons, which should include techniques that cater for a  range of learning styles Lazear, 1999, such as teacher explanation; teacher student discussion; role plays; studentstudent discussion in small or large  groups; individual student seatwork; and the use of media e.g. films, videos,  the overhead projector, data display, interactive whiteboard, posters, objects.  It is important, however, to ensure that the selection of a particular process is  based on its appropriateness to achieving a particular objective. Move around the room while teaching and allow students to move 

occasionally. Ensure that the lesson content is challenging but achievable, and whenever 

possible relevant to the interests of students.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Keeping students accountable for learning Students who feel that the teacher is both concerned about how much  work they do and prepared to check up on them are less likely to behave  inappropriately.  The following are some of the ways in which accountability is  manifested in the classroom: When questioning a class, dont accept the first correct answer and move 

on; take a number of answers before saying whether they are correct. Frequently, ask a question and then try to make eye contact with as many 

students as possible before selecting a respondent. After asking a question and nominating a respondent, be prepared to wait a 

little time say five seconds until the nominated student begins to answer. If a student has given an inadequate answer, taking into account the ability 

of the student, wait up to five seconds to encourage him or her to continue  the answer. Occasionally ask a student who has given a correct answer why he or she 

decided on the answer. On some occasions, have all students jot down onto scrap paper answers 

to all questions asked of the class. Then move around the room and read  out some answers. Collect andor correct all homework set.

Making students feel monitored This final feature, identified by Kounin as a characteristic of teachers  who keep the inappropriate behaviour of students to a minimum, is the  ability to have eyes in the back of your head. Some of the ways teachers  communicate this myth are as follows: Whenever possible, position yourself in the classroom so that by lifting 

your eyes you can see all or most of the classroom. For example, when  addressing a class, position yourself at a corner of the room. That way all  students are within a 90 degree sweep of your eyes. If you teach from the  centre at the front of the room, surveying an entire class requires a sweep of  almost 180 degrees. When talking with one student, do not become oblivious to the rest of 

the class. Frequently break eye contact to scan the rest of the students  approximately every five seconds. Whenever a student is seen to be  off-task, inform him or her that the behaviour has been seen and is not  acceptable. This need not be done publicly, that is, across the room. The  message may be delivered privately at another time. The important thing  is that the student knows that any inappropriate behaviour will be quickly  picked up by the teacher. 

Developmental management in the classroom      37 Obviously, to discuss adequately what constitutes good teaching  would require much more than a few pages. Further, it is obvious that  I have almost ignored curriculum content. This is not because the latter  is unimportant or irrelevant to a discussion on avoiding inappropriate  classroom behaviour, but because it is a much more contentious issue and  therefore cannot be satisfactorily dealt with in a cursory way. Nevertheless,  it would be inexcusable to avoid the discussion entirely since there is  solid evidence that good teaching reduces the likelihood of unacceptable  student behaviour. The pile of goodwill In addition to very specific processes like those already mentioned, there  is one much more general aspect of good teaching. It is critical to the  avoidance and handling of inappropriate classroom behaviour. I call it  maintaining a pile of goodwill, which is a less technical way of saying  maintain Referent Power see Chapter 2. It is those students who display  behaviour characteristic of Categories C and D who stand to gain most  from teacher goodwill, as will be explained in Chapters 6 and 7. Teacherstudent interactions are not restricted to those in which the  teacher intends to change some behaviour of the student that is seen as  unacceptable. There are, one might hope, many other opportunities for  contact between teacher and student. It is during such occasions that  students develop their basic ideas about a teacher. Most significantly, they  reach a decision about the degree of genuine concern that a teacher has  for them and for their learning. It is within such a context that students  interpret a teachers use of management techniques. Some teachers convey to students, in most of their interactions, that  they see the children as some sort of animal or as dumb adults to be trusted  only partially, or as lesser beings without dignity to be manipulated at  will, or as identity-less entities to be filled with information. In such a  situation, it is unlikely that management techniques will be successful.  For example, a teacher who does not convey a sense of connection with  and concern for a student is unlikely to engage that child in a meaningful  problem-solving discussion, during which the child is meant to express  freely his or her genuine concerns. Without trust in the teachers motives,  the students involvement will be at best superficial. Similarly, if a teacher  is coming on strong in accordance with a more authoritarian view, most  students are likely to resist if they believe that the teacher hasnt got their  best interests at heart. To build up a pile of goodwill on which to draw, you need to spend  positive time with students. This time is spent teaching them, listening to  them and encouraging them. It also means recognising their strengths, helping 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour them, accepting their help, and putting  yourself out for them. This extends  to such things as showing interest in  their lives outside the classroom and  the school, supporting their sporting  interests, showing interest in their  problems, and generally conveying to  them that you respect, value and like  them, and are genuinely interested in  their welfare. Estimating goodwill To determine the size of your pile of goodwill with any particular student,  you might ask yourself the following questions: When was the last time I did something nice for or to that child?

When was the last time I spoke to the child in a friendly, supportive 

manner? How often have that student and I spent time together talking about 

something that is important to him or her? What is the students favourite film, music, school activity, football team, 

sport, etc.? Who are the students best friends, worst enemies, or casual 

acquaintances? What does the student think of his or her schoolwork and other teachers?

What does the student feel he or she is really good at?

What is the student really interested in?

Does the student know I am aware of his or her competencies and 

interests? How often have I had the student help me in a meaningful way?

If you are unable to answer many of these questions it is likely that the  main reason is your inability andor lack of willingness to spend time with  the students in question. Often the opportunities for teachers to explore  these facets of a students life are limited. For example, secondary teachers  are often responsible for about 100 students daily. Furthermore, the teacher  may spend time with some problem students only during a detention period,  when the teacher may wish to be left alone to correct some tests or plan a  lesson. They may even use this detention time to give the students a tellingoff, damaging whatever goodwill they may have established. When you know very little about a students world it is likely, although  not necessarily the case, that your pile of goodwill is not as great as it could  be, and in many cases should be. If, on the other hand, you have interacted  To build up a pile of goodwill on which  to draw, you need to spend positive  time with students. This time is spent  teaching them, listening to them and  encouraging them. It also means  recognising their strengths, helping  them, accepting their help, and putting  yourself out for them.

Developmental management in the classroom      39 with the student in a caring, concerned and interested manner so that the  appropriate answers to the previous questions roll off your tongue, the  chances are great that the pile of goodwill is sufficient to allow you to draw  heavily on it when handling the students inappropriate behaviour. Although the need for a pile of goodwill will be obvious to some,  many teachers are unwilling or unable to invest the energy required to  earn a students trust. In many cases the reason relates to whose needs are  being met. As explained in Chapter 2, a teacher who feels threatened or  rejected may use damaging sarcasm or call students names. However, there are many far less extreme situations which inform  students that a teacher is not concerned enough about what is best for  them. For example, during seatwork, it is possible to have a quiet hum  of working noise or attempt to get absolute silence. The former is more  difficult for teachers because hums invariably increase in volume until they  begin to sound like roars. Relative silence is easier to maintain because its  easier to recognise. Although the best interests of students may be served  by having a low hum of working noise which indicates that students are  helping each other and students realise this, some teachers seek to protect  their own interests at the expense of the students by insisting on silence. It is not always self-interest on the part of teachers that prevents them  developing substantial piles of goodwill with their students. Teaching is a  very stressful profession with many competing demands on a teachers time.  In addition to being required to teach, assess and report on more and more  curriculum content, teachers have to find time for school administration.  They also need to maintain the ongoing education necessary to keep up  with advances in the material they teach and the most effective ways of  teaching it. For many teachers there just does not seem to be enough time  to take a personal interest in students. Where there is little opportunity for students to feel recognised and  respected, they may need to find ways of being noticed, and, as will be  explained in Chapter 7, one way is to exhibit chronic attention-seeking  behaviour. Consequently, teachers can spend a large amount of time in  disciplining these Category D students, leaving even less opportunity to  develop a pile of goodwill, and so the cycle continues. As stated above, the level of goodwill between teachers and students  can drop when teachers feel challenged or rejected. At such times they may  resort to the use of Legitimate power Youll do what youre told! or  Coercive power If you dont stop, youre getting a detention!. However,  when this is done in the absence of Referent power power based on your  ability to develop a relationship and Reward power, it doesnt work.  One might hypothesise that with classes of students more prone  to misbehaviour, teachers would find more need to generate Reward  power by recognising responsible behaviour, just as they find more need 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour for Coercive power, comprising punishment and aggressive responses.  However, a recent study which examined the way teachers treat classes  containing more of the misbehaving students found that teachers not only  failed to provide more recognition for appropriate behaviour, but also  failed to generate the Referent power that can arise from having productive  discussions with misbehaving students Lewis, 2006, p. 1207. The problem is that any teacher who applies Legitimate or Coercive  power in the absence of a relationship with students runs the risk of making  things worse. This is more likely if the childs behaviour is in Category C  or D than if it is in Category A or B. How then does a teacher begin to  help students to behave as responsibly as they are able? The answer is  to design a management approach that minimises overt application of  Legitimate and Coercive power while not omitting the application of  Referent and Reward power. Such a management approach is outlined in  Chapters 4 to 7. Setting up expectations for appropriate  behaviour Generally, the way in which students are meant to behave in classrooms  is enshrined in the idea of Rules. There is, however, a drawback to having  rules, even fair rules Rogers, 2002. The idea of rules reeks of Legitimate  power. Rules are things that a teacher with or without class participation  creates to control the behaviour of students in Category B, C or D. For  all Category A and most Category B students, rules have been useful and  entirely acceptable. They provide the students with protection and little  inconvenience. For students whose behaviour places them in Categories C  and D, the situation is very different. Rules represent a negative experience  associated with feelings of negation and  control. The more difficult the students,  the more likely they are to be provoked  by the concept of rules.  If you shouldnt have rules, what  then? The answer is  responsibilities  attached to rights. A teacher has to  encourage students to understand that  the main, if not only, reason he or she attempts to alter or to stop certain  student behaviour is because it interferes with the rights of other students.  There are only two major rights to be protected.  The first is that all students have a right to learn as much as possible in  classrooms. This is because schools are not malls. They are institutions of  learning. As a consequence, teachers have a responsibility to ensure that  no student is permitted to interfere with the learning of any other.  A teacher has to encourage students to  understand that the main  reason he  or she attempts to alter or to stop certain  student behaviour is because it interferes  with the rights of other students. 

Developmental management in the classroom      41 Ideally, assuming there are enough A and B students in the class,  expectations for behaviour and all decisions related to classroom  management should be handled during short classroom meetings. This is  the name given to a regular meeting of all class members at which students  establish and constantly evaluate expectations for behaviour, and discuss  the good and bad aspects of classroom routines and members behaviour.  These meetings comprise all members of the class, and all sometimes  including the teacher are given equal status and can raise issues and  express their opinions and feelings. The meetings give students valuable  opportunities to engage in a democratic decision-making process and  provide a way of planning for change. A key aspect of such meetings is the  search for consensus. According to theorists such as Rudolf Dreikurs and  Pearl Cassel 1972, or Glasser 1986, such meetings should, in part, focus  on setting expectations for appropriate student behaviour and solving  discipline problems. The meetings offer a way of establishing, among  other things, definitions and understandings of rights and responsibilities  in the classroom. In practice, such meetings are much more common in  primary schools, where students are more likely to let teachers act as  powerful agents of influence, than in secondary schools, where students  are more likely to reject the guidance of teachers. Both Glasser and Dreikurs assume that students are rational people  who will learn, by experiencing the consequences of good and bad  behavioural choices, to make good choices. They do not accept any  excuses for inappropriate behaviour, regardless of whether the causes are  attributed to conditions existing within school e.g. boring teachers or  at home e.g. broken families. Although teachers may understand the  influence of these factors on students patterns of behaviour they must  never allow inappropriate behaviour to be acceptable. Classroom meetings in practice The introduction of classroom meetings in one of my Year 8 and Year  10 science classes was initially treated with suspicion by both the school  administration and the students. The parents were informed of my  intention to introduce a little more democracy into my science classes  about two weeks before the first class meeting about halfway through  the school year. Although I offered to discuss with parents the reasons  for introducing these democratic procedures, I was not contacted by any  parent of the students in these two classes. To prepare my students for the beginning of group decision-making I  discussed with them the difference between what might usefully be called  rational and irrational obedience. I argued that, in later life, people need  to know how to participate in decision-making and obey with discretion, 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour so that they do not give the responsibility for their own behaviour to  someone else.  As part of this discussion, I referred to the methodology and results of  a well-known experiment by Stanley Milgram 1975 in which the large  majority of subjects in an experiment apparently electrocuted to death  innocent people under the instruction of a supervisor simply because they  were told to continue the experiment. In addition, I indicated the general  need of all members of a democratic society to know how to participate  in group decision-making processes. The first classroom meeting for Year 10 was somewhat weird. Despite  my insistence that they needed to exercise self-control as a group, the first  decision they took was to instruct me to be in charge. They said that as  I had managed misbehaviour reasonably well for the last six months, I  should continue to decide on appropriate classroom behaviour and act  judiciously to see that appropriate behaviour occurred. The idea was that  it my responsibility, not theirs, to ensure order in the classroom. Using a  democratic process, they used their empowerment to remove choice, not  foster it. What was left for me to do? I, of course, pulled rank and ordered  them to empower themselves.  Classroom rights and responsibilities What does one do about setting expectations if the thought of a classroom  meeting is too threatening? Recent research Lewis  Burman, 2006  indicates that teachers want to provide more opportunity than they  currently do for student voices to be heard, by way of classroom meetings.  It is clear from this study that teachers perceive that constraints exist in  schools which act to inhibit them from implementing their own ideas of  best classroom management. The most significant of these appear to be  heavy workload, lack of support from school administration, and class  and classroom size p. 12. In addition to accepting that students have the right to an opportunity  to learn, the class also needs to recognise the right of all to feel safe  physically and emotionally in the classroom. Teachers are obliged to  protect students from any harassment by classmates. Once again, if  students are a bit reticent it may be necessary to ask a direct question  such as: Do you want me to do or say anything if a classmate attempts to  physically hurt you or put you down? Having established the teachers role in protecting students rights,  it is also imperative that students identify how they should or shouldnt  behave if the rights of their classmates are to be respected. There are  two aspects to this. The first is what they should or shouldnt do if they  personally are to behave responsibly. This type of responsibility will be 

Developmental management in the classroom      43 Figure 3.1  Students rights and responsibilities The DMA Approach to Classroom Behaviour Copyright  Lewis 2008 Rights and Responsibilities in the classroom In this classroom, students and the teacher have the right to do as  much work as possible. Therefore, their Personal responsibilities include:

students should bring all their equipment to class;

students should listen when other students are speaking; 

students should be on time; 

students should attempt all work; and

Their Communal responsibilities include:

students should encourage others to bring all their equipment to class;

students should encourage classmates to listen when other students  are speaking; 

students should encourage others to be on time;

students should encourage others to attempt all work; and

In this classroom: students and the teacher have the right to feel  comfortable and safe. Therefore, their Personal responsibilities include:

students should pass all objects hand to hand;

students should speak politely; 

students should keep their hands to themselves; and

Their Communal responsibilities include:

students should encourage others to pass all objects hand to hand; 

students should encourage others to speak politely; 

students should encourage others to keep their hands to themselves;  and
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour called Personal or Individual responsibility. The second is what they  should try to encourage their classmates to do or discourage them from  doing so that all students in the class act responsibly. For example, it is  not enough for students to listen when other students are speaking. They  should also see it as reasonable that they encourage their classmates to  listen when students are speaking. That is, they should discourage friends  from interrupting their classmates. This type of responsibility will be  called Communal responsibility.  There is no need to compile a comprehensive list of responsibilities.  It is enough to flesh out the idea. Figure 3.1 page 43 outlines a typical  outcome of such a discussion. Note that the list is not fully defined. There  are unidentified expectations. The idea is that students should eventually  be prepared to judge a situation and determine if their or their classmates  behaviour is responsible or fair. There are only two criteria: does it interfere  with any students right to feel safe, or their right to learn?  As was noted strongly in Chapter 1, classroom management aims not  only to establish order but also to teach values. Hence, in a democratic  culture, the idea that students should respect the rights of others is an  essential learning outcome. The assumption that they should encourage  others in their community to act responsibly is an objective that schools  need to achieve. As explained earlier, it is only through experiential learning  that students can be expected to assimilate a genuine respect for rights.  What, then, can teachers do to see that their students protect such rights? 
Responding to   students manifesting   Category A behaviour 4 When dealing with students whose behaviour can be characterised as  belonging to Category A, teachers need to draw on their Legitimate  or Referent power. These powers are based on the understanding that  teachers are officially designated to see that students rights are protected,  and that they are acting in the best interests of all the students in the  class. Assuming that all students are in Category A implies that they may,  at worst, only have to be reminded when their behaviour is preventing  others from feeling comfortable or  from learning effectively. They may  also need to be made aware if they are  not acting to help their peers behave  in a way that is respectful of the rights  of others.  To make students aware that a  problem exists there are at least  four kinds of verbal hints teachers  could use. None of these demand anything from the student because,  once Category A students realise a problem exists, they will modify  their behaviour to become more responsible. Theorists such as Glasser  1986 and Thomas Gordon 1970 are proponents of such techniques.   The observant reader may note that although hints dont demand  compliance, the emotional pressure on a responsible student like those  in Category A becomes increasingly compelling, as the examples below  demonstrate. It should be noted that before giving a verbal hint, it is assumed that  teachers would have tried less disruptive, non-verbal hints. These might  include pausing, moving closer to students or checking their work. Legitimate and Referent powers are  based on the understanding that  teachers are officially designated to see  that students rights are protected, and  that they are acting in the best interests  of all the students in the class. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour General hint The first kind of hint is one that describes the situation in a general way.  Some hints focus on the inappropriate behaviour in an attempt to stimulate  students to stop it, whereas others emphasise the positive to encourage  students to emulate classmates who are acting responsibly. Hinting can be  directed both at Personal and at Communal responsibility.  For example, regardless of the specific nature of the inappropriate  behaviour, a teacher could say to a class:  Positive focus Personal responsibility: Some students are acting very responsibly. Just about everyone appears to be respecting their classmates rights. Negative focus Personal responsibility: Some students are ignoring the rights of their friends. I see a student who is being unfair. Positive focus Communal responsibility: Some students seem willing to discourage their friends from ignoring the  rights of other classmates. Negative focus Communal responsibility: Some students arent encouraging their friends to behave responsibly. Specific hint The second kind of hint addresses specific behaviour but is still descriptive  and doesnt present any demand. For example, if a teacher became aware  that some students were finding it difficult to concentrate because of the  noise, he or she might say: Positive focus Personal responsibility: It looks like most children are allowing others to hear. Only a few students are making it difficult for others to hear. Negative focus Personal responsibility: There is so much noise that some students cant hear my explanations.

Responding to students manifesting Category A behaviour      47 I notice that there are some students who are finding it difficult to hear  because of the noise. Positive focus Communal responsibility: It looks like most children are trying to see that their classmates allow  others to hear. Negative focus Communal responsibility: Very few students seem willing to encourage others to reduce the noise,  so that their classmates can hear the explanations. Similarly, a teacher concerned about a student throwing a stapler to  a friend might say: Positive Focus Personal responsibility: Nearly all students are being careful when passing equipment. Students are generally passing equipment in ways that keep us all  safe. Negative Focus Personal responsibility: Students are put at risk when things are thrown in the classroom. I just saw a stapler thrown in the room. Thats dangerous. Positive Focus Communal responsibility: Some students seem willing to remind their friends to be careful when  passing equipment. Negative Focus Communal responsibility: I just saw a stapler thrown in the room. No one seemed worried   about it. Finally, if a teacher were concerned about harassment he or she might  say: Positive focus Personal responsibility: Students by and large seem to know how to treat each other  respectfully. I see that most students know how to be nice to their classmates.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Negative focus Personal responsibility: Some students are talking disrespectfully to each other and someones  bound to get upset. Some students are scaring others because of the way they are treating  them.  Positive Focus Communal responsibility: I see that some of you are willing to help your friends be nice to  classmates. Negative focus Communal responsibility: Students dont seem prepared to stop others from talking disrespectfully  to their classmates. Restatement of expectations The third kind of hint focuses on re-emphasising the understanding  shared within the class about what behaviour is responsible. For example,  to encourage Category A students to communicate respectfully, teachers  could say things like: Positive Focus Personal responsibility: We said that students should talk nicely to each other, didnt we? I thought that students were expected to let their classmates get on with  their work, without interruption. Negative focus Personal responsibility: Didnt we agree that students wouldnt talk disrespectfully to each  other? I thought that classmates work was not to be interrupted. Positive Focus Communal responsibility: We said that all students should help their friends with the work.  Negative focus Communal responsibility: We agreed that we all would stop others from talking disrespectfully to  their classmates.

Responding to students manifesting Category A behaviour      49 I-messages The third kind of non-interventional statement is called an I-message  Gordon, 1970. These statements indicate the nature of the problem, the  behaviour thats causing the problem,  and how the teacher is feeling about it.  Once again, the message can be directed  at Personal or Communal responsibility  and focus on the negative or positive.  For example, using the same situations  as above a teacher may say: Positive focus Personal responsibility: Im pleased to see that some students are waiting quietly to begin. Im relieved to see that students are treating each other nicely. Negative focus Personal responsibility: Im upset that some students talk during instruction because others  miss out. I get scared when things are thrown in the classroom. Someone could  be seriously damaged. Positive focus Communal Responsibility: Its good to see some students are prepared to stop their friends from  throwing things in the classroom. Someone could have been hurt. Negative focus Communal Responsibility: Im disappointed that some students are allowing others to talk during  instruction because others cant hear and wont know what to do. Direct questions Some other more interventional hints are phrased as questions. These are  not addressed to the class but are asked of particular students. Examples  addressing the same issues as above may be: What are you doing? What should you be doing? I-messages indicate the nature of the  problem, the behaviour thats causing  the problem, and how the teacher is  feeling about it. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Should you be talking now? Throwing a stapler? Speaking to your friend  in that manner? Are you behaving responsibly? Are you being fair? Are you encouraging  your friends to be reasonable? Verbal hinting in a classroom usually combines a number of the  different types of hints above. For example, assume that a teacher is  attempting to address the class and one or two small groups of students  are still trying to complete the last activity and are therefore speaking  among themselves. To hint, a teacher may say, I notice that not all groups  are ready. Its a pity because if they continue to talk, some students wont  hear the instructions. Im disappointed that some of you didnt remind  them to get ready. Similarly, if a teacher has a number of latecomers enter  after lunch she may say, Its good to see most of you got back in time. Im  also pleased because I noticed that some of you reminded your friends to  come in. After all, we did agree that we would try to get as much work  done as possible. Obviously all hinting assumes that the students are Category A and  will correct their behaviour after the hint is given, even if it needs to be  repeated a number of times. If students dont respond appropriately they  are no longer considered Category A students, but their behaviour is now  in Category B, C or D. Until proved otherwise, we will assume that any  who show they are not in Category A are all in Category B! These students  will form the focus of the next chapter. To summarise, it is important to: 1.	 Establish expectations based on students rights to learn and to be  physically and emotionally safe. 2.	 Ensure that students articulate the need for the teacher to act to  safeguard students rights. 3.	 If possible, establish expectations for appropriate student behaviour  through classroom meetings. 4.	 Let students know when they act in a way that is respectful of, or  interferes with, students rights. 5. Address the inappropriate behaviour of Category A students with  verbal hints, namely:  General hints

Specific hints

Restatement of expectations

I-messages.

6.	 When hinting, consider whether to emphasise the behaviour you  wish to encourage or discourage and whether the focus is Personal or  Communal Responsibility.
Responding to   students manifesting   Category B behaviour 5 Three types of power most relate to the treatment of students manifesting  Category B behaviour. These are Legitimate Role-related, Reward and  Coercive Punishment power. The best-known proponents of a reward  and punishment approach are Canter and Canter 1996, who developed  and market Assertive Discipline.  Of the powers involved in this approach, the most potent is Reward.  Reward power appears to increases a teachers stock of goodwill, whereas  the implementation of punishment decreases it.  Teachers who use punishment more often are seen as more distracting  when they respond to misbehaviour. Punishment also associates with  secondary students dislike of the teacher  The use of recognitions   associates with a more positive reaction towards the teacher and a  greater belief that the teachers interventions are necessary. Lewis, 2006,  p. 1206 However, as argued above, when you provide recognition and reward  for appropriate behaviour, particularly for that of difficult students, you  need to demonstrate that it is the students behaviour that is the focus of  although as explained later, not the reason for the reward. A teacher who  rewards students when they demonstrably respect the rights of classmates  encourages the students to trust his or her motives. It is reasonable to  expect that such teachers are more likely to be accepted when they need  to deal with misbehaviour. During my conversations with school staff at professional development  sessions, many senior teachers have stated that when misbehaving  students are sent to them and they ask them what happened, the students  immediate response is, The teacher hates me! Right or wrong, students  are offering a genuine, heartfelt interpretation. They may have been  punished for behaving irresponsibly. They believe, however, that the  teacher is playing the man and not the ball and has sent them out because 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour he or she has something against them personally. Whether it is rewarding  or punishing, teachers have to constantly clarify that they are responding  to the behaviour, not playing favourites or getting even.  Recognising responsible behaviour When defining responsible or fair behaviour it is essential to be very specific  so there is no confusion about its acceptability. For example, it is not enough  to decide that the students should stop being irresponsible when what  you really want is the students to bring all necessary equipment to class  and be prepared to try set work. Increased clarity on your part allows you  to transmit a clearer request to students, which should result in a greater  likelihood of conformity by the children. The amount of clarity required  will be largely determined by the age of the students. A young student may  need to be told to Put your reader back  in the desk, take out your Maths book  and turn to the page you are up to. An  older child may be able to cope with  a more general instruction like Get  ready for Maths. Once the behavioural indicators  of responsibility are defined, it is necessary to decide the amount of  flexibility you can cope with before risking becoming inconsistent. For  example, do you want students to take turns in answering without calling  out, all the time, or only when you are at the front? What if the calling  out is a genuine attempt at the right answer? Once you have determined  the behavioural goals, the next step is deciding what consequences will  apply when the goals are achieved or not achieved.  When students act responsibly One might assume that teachers are so appreciative of students efforts  that they would automatically give recognition. As discussed in Chapter  2, however, secondary teachers only sometimes recognise students  appropriate behaviour. It appears that they take students socially  responsible behaviour for granted without realising that, by occasionally  demonstrating approval, it can be strengthened.  Everybody feels good when his or her efforts are recognised. Students  base their opinions about themselves, their self-concepts, on the way in  which others, including teachers, respond to their behaviour. For example,  they may decide whether they are good or bad, kind or cruel, nice or  nasty, liked or even likeable. They are particularly likely to be positively  influenced by a teachers descriptive praise or reward. In addition, they  will feel good about their relationship with their teacher. Whether it is rewarding or punishing,  teachers have to constantly clarify that  they are responding to the behaviour,  not playing favourites or getting even.

Responding to students manifesting Category B behaviour      53 Five types of approving responses can be identified: 1.	 very specific verbal praise, such as, John, I appreciated the way you  shared your calculator with Amera today, or Thank you for helping  your classmate 2.	 non-verbal praise such as a smile, wink or nod 3.	 communication to others such as good notes, stickers or phone calls  to parents 4.	 the provision of special privileges, like free time, access to the computer,  or being a monitor 5.	 material rewards like sweets or stationery. Each of these can be offered to individual students or the class as a  whole. To determine the most effective rewards, you can ask your students  questions like: What would you like to do more often at school? Where would you like to go more often? Who would you like to spend more time working with? If you had 2 to spend at school, what would you buy?  These and other more detailed questions can help to identify the  most effective rewards for each student. It is important that the reward  be appropriate and varied. In this context, it is useful to note that verbal  praise in classrooms is a little tricky. Research indicates that at levels above  Grade 4, students may be embarrassed by public praise, although private  praise, or praise communicated privately to parents or other teachers, is  acceptable Lewis, Lovegrove  Burman 1991. It is critical that teachers recognise responsible behaviour, whether or  not it results in achievement. Some recent research Crawford  Beaman,  2007 presents an interesting analysis of teachers use of recognitions.  She reports on surveys of 145 teachers, and direct observations of 79,  to conclude that when it comes to students academically appropriate  behaviour, teachers are quick to offer recognition. In contrast, however,  teachers dont see a need to say thank you, or offer any other sort of  recognition, when students act in a socially appropriate manner.  It seems that showing respect for the rights of classmates to learn, and  to feel emotionally and physically safe, is assumed to be an obligation  and therefore not worthy of note. However, if teachers only reward work  produced, students who require motivation to behave responsibly those  in Categories B, C and D may remain outside the reward system and  some may even try to destroy it. Ironically, those students most likely  to receive recognition Category A may be prevented from developing 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour their own intrinsic motivation and become more dependent rather than  independent learners. Despite the theoretical requirement of individualised rewards, I have  found it extremely time-consuming providing even the same rewards for  all students. The tangible rewards I settled on when teaching included  a variety of letters to parents such as: I am pleased to inform you that  students name tried very hardcooperated wellwas very helpful  in  class today. I was fascinated to note that even some boys in Year 10  were prepared to collect such a letter, as long as they were able to do so  privately. Other, tangible rewards were required in my Year 7 class, and these  were introduced as part of a points system, whereby I recognised the  individual students responsible behaviour by allotting him or her a point.  Once they had accumulated 20 points, which normally took two to  three weeks, students received a prize. Since I controlled the allotment of  points, and marked them into a folder, I was able to make sure that the  more challenging students didnt fall behind. Because I was not a natural  at recognising responsible behaviour, or even that comfortable in giving  rewards for being normal, I required a system. I based it around what  are called transitions, the moments in a lesson when I requested that  students change activities.  I was aware that work done by Kounin 1970 identified transitions as  the times when students were most likely to misbehave. During transitions,  I walked to my desk and picked up a folder containing a class list. It was  coloured bright yellow to ensure that students noticed. Whenever there  was a transition in the lesson from one kind of activity to another, I looked  for students who were ready to begin the next activity, said something  like Enzos ready, and gave the student a point. Even a Category D  student can get ready. For prizes, the students were able to select from a  collection of stationery, football cards, and some lollies. Although I found  it impossible to individualise rewards, I frequently asked students what  they would like me to put into the collection of goodies. I must admit  that I even offered sherbet to one particular, hyperactive student  then  ushered him to his next class. During a trip to America in 1995, I located a number of inner suburban  schools that used rewards as a way of dealing with very difficult students.  One of the most committed was a school in Pennsylvania, which was  concerned about absenteeism. Staff had gone to insurance companies in  the local community, who were happy to help keep kids off the streets, out  of other peoples homes, and in school. Consequently, they contributed  approximately 10 000 a term, which the school spent on a second-hand  car. This vehicle became the prize in a raffle, tickets in which were issued  to students based on their attendance records and responsible behaviour 

Responding to students manifesting Category B behaviour      55 in the classroom and the schoolyard. An evaluation of this strategy reports  that during the year in which attendance earned raffle tickets, absenteeism  dropped substantially. In addition to implementing classroom-based recognitions of  responsible behaviour, teachers can also involve parents. The most effective  rewards may be those provided by parents as a prearranged response to a  note from the teacher. For example, if a student obtains a note praising his  or her cooperation or effort, parents may allow a little more TV, pocket  money or some other privilege. It is important to emphasise the   effect of an assertive non-verbal  response. When you give students  an approving message, you should  approach them physically, lean forward,  smile, and look them in the eye to  increase the effect of your message. For  example, noticing Sarah helping another student, Igor, you might look her  squarely in the eye, smile, lean forward, and say something like, The way  you helped Igor was a pleasure to watch, keep it up! Alternatively, you  might look at Sarah and say, Well done, thats a point to you! or Thats   a class point! It needs to be understood that a fixed number of points  leads to an individual or class privilege, such as access to the computer or  free time. Because many teachers, especially secondary school teachers, are  unlikely to use recognitions and rewards frequently Lewis, 2006; Lewis  et al., 1991 it may be necessary to become very systematic.  One teacher I worked with decided to recognise good behaviour in  his Year 7 class by periodically assessing the proportion of the class that  was on task at randomly selected moments throughout the lesson, and  awarding class points accordingly: 100 per cent on task  ten points, 80  per cent  eight points, 30 per cent  three points, and so on. To assist  himself, he played a 60-minute tape containing ten randomly placed beeps  that acted as his signal to take a reading of the classs on-task behaviour.  Class points, when cashed in, provided free time for the class as a whole.  He found the system very effective and ensured students had some ongoing  recognition for their good behaviour.  Three final issues need to be emphasised when it comes to rewards  and recognitions:  1.  Reward effort, not behaviour. The first is that teachers should frequently explain that rewards are not  for responsible behaviour per se,  which all students have an obligation  When you give students an approving  message, you should approach them  physically, lean forward, smile, and look  them in the eye to increase the effect of  your message.  Reward effort, not behaviour. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour to perform. Such behaviour is designed to protect rights and is expected of  students because it is fair and reasonable. It is not optional. What needs to  be emphasised is that it is the effort required to behave responsibly that is  being recognised. Obviously, for Category A students, who fully appreciate  the rights of their classmates, know whats right, and are accustomed to  acting in a socially appropriate way, the effort is minimal.  In contrast, for Category C and D students sometimes the effort can  be enormous. When recognising effort, teachers should occasionally say  something like: We appreciate the effort youve made. I know its not  always easy to do the right thing. This way, students will not develop  the idea that they are only behaving in a particular way to receive a  reward. Rather, they will see themselves as doing what is right because it  is right, while at the same time understanding that their efforts are being  appreciated. It also prepares the ground for teachers to confront the wellbehaved students if they complain about a challenging student getting  recognition often, even though he rarely acts appropriately. This brings us  to the second issue, minimising rewards as soon as possible. 2.  Rewards and recognitions need  to be kept to a minimum. In order  to minimise the use of rewards and  recognitions it will be necessary to  convince students to give them up.  The following dialogue indicates what may need to be said to a Category  A student who has come to complain that she needs more rewards and  recognitions. Hi Cleo, Im glad you chose to speak with me. I think youre correct  about Serge getting more recognition for acting responsibly than you do.  The thing is, its not that I think hes better than you or anything like that,  its just that I think that some kids arent yet as mature or responsible  as others. These kids therefore have to make more effort if they are to  behave reasonably and protect peoples rights. Its the effort kids make  that Im recognising, not the behaviour. Everybody is obliged to respect  rights. I feel Serge needs the recognition I give him, because I think it  takes him a fair bit of effort. If you are less mature than I thought you were,  and you dont really appreciate the idea of rights, tell me what I need to  offer you as a bribe for you to be reasonable enough to act fairly. I have had conversations like this, usually with girls whom I would  have thought were in Category A. They generally accepted the situation  and were quite pleased to end the conversation. If necessary, I also made  more of an effort to catch them being good. In their case, that related  Rewards and recognitions need to be  kept to a minimum. 

Responding to students manifesting Category B behaviour      57 more to displays of Communal responsibility. Furthermore, the form of  recognition was mainly verbal, rather than tangible. In addition to trying to prevent escalation of rewards and recognition  with individual students, it is possible to minimise the nature of rewards  at a class level. When working with my Year 7, using the points system  described above, I was able to address the class after about four months  and say: Some of you are growing up. You no longer need to be bribed to do  the right thing. You know what it means to act responsibly and protect  rights. I will continue to give you points but if you dont cash in for prizes,  it just means you dont need to be bribed to do what you already know  is correct.  After my speech to that class, approximately 50 per cent stopped cashing  in. I deliberately continued giving them points for appropriate behaviour  so I could say how impressive it was when they got to 60 or more points  without cashing in. Among other things, it saved me a fortune. Teachers need to get students to do the right thing because it is the  right thing, not only because it gets recognised by others. Eventually, if  students learn that certain behaviours are responsible and, because they  require effort, that effort will be recognised, it should be possible for  teachers to use the non-interventional techniques outlined in the previous  chapter, and have students self-regulate their behaviour. They should not  require outside manipulation. However, if hints and rewards dont work,  then it will be necessary to employ Coercive power. 3.  Reward Communal responsibility more heavily than Personal  responsibility. The third issue of significance has to do with the amount  of recognition offered for the two  types of responsibility discussed in  Chapter 3 Personal and Communal.  Recent research Lewis, 2001 shows  that students are generally more  willing to do the right thing than they  are to encourage their classmates to  act responsibly. Even the majority of the most responsible students in  Australian classrooms are unlikely to encourage their classmates to be  reasonable Romi et al., 2008. This is particularly the case in secondary  schools.  Primary Year 6 students see themselves as quite responsible. They  describe themselves as likely to protect rights in the classroom, but less  likely to encourage others to do likewise. A secondary students level of  responsibility is significantly lower, with regard to their willingness to  Students are generally more willing  to do the right thing than they are to  encourage their classmates to act  responsibly.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour protect rights, and to encourage classmates to act responsibly. It is, on  average, mostly like them to do the former and only a little like them to  do the latter Lewis, 2001. Consequently, we should provide greater incentive for students  particularly those in secondary schools to encourage their classmates to  do the right thing. For example, if a student is ready and waiting at the  beginning of a lesson, it need not be acknowledged, or alternatively, one  point might be earned. However, if that student, at the beginning of the  lesson, reminds a classmate that we are waiting to begin, then it should  definitely be acknowledged with a thanks, or two points rather than one  might be earned. Similarly, a student listening while others are answering  a question may not draw recognition or reward, whereas reminding a  classmate to be quiet so others can hear will be recognised. When students act irresponsibly When a student, unaffected by hints and recognition of appropriate  behaviour, displays a lack of concern for the rights of other students,  negative consequences should follow, to convince him or her to act more  responsibly. It is essential that students know in advance the consequences  the teacher will use. This will reduce the likelihood of resistance due to  perceived unfairness. When you are choosing which consequences to use, it is advisable to  select a consequence that seems to fit the crime. Your students can more  readily see that the consequence experienced is a result of their own action.  In this way, although you are giving the child an unpleasant experience,  there is a smaller drain on the pile of goodwill. Some examples of logical  consequences are: talking excessively to a friend and preventing others from  hearing means being seated separately; failing to bring necessary books  means doing the work at home; intentionally breaking another students  ruler means buying a replacement. Nevertheless, negative consequences  are still things that students should prefer not to have happen. There are six kinds of negative consequences commonly used in  schools. The first two of these involve separation of the student from  his or her friends. The first occurs in the classroom, whereas the second  involves placing the student somewhere other than in the classroom.   This usually means in some other teachers class or some designated spot  in the school, such as in the office of a senior staff member. Separation  also comes in two forms, time-out and detention. The difference  between these two depends on who decides when the student returns to  the class. In contrast to detention, during which uncompleted work is finished,  extra work is attempted, lines are written, discussion about the behaviour 

Responding to students manifesting Category B behaviour      59 problem occurs, or the student is asked to simply sit and be bored, timeout is not to be seen as a punishment. Time-out isolation should occur in  a place where the student is comfortable and not in disgrace. The main  objective for a student who gets time-out is to plan for a better future.  Specifically, the student is required to write out a plan for his or her  future behaviour that should preclude the possibility of the inappropriate  behaviour happening again. Time-out must be seen as a response to inappropriate behaviour that  leaves the student with the choice of whether or not to behave. Therefore,  students must not be put in time-out for a set period, as this would be  tantamount to a detention. Rather, students must stay there only until  they are prepared to work out the problem. To assist them, many schools  provide a series of questions students are asked to address. The following set of questions is used by one secondary school for  which I have provided professional development:  What did you do that caused you to be in time-out?

Why did you do it?

Was it responsible?

What were likely to be some good outcomes of what you did?

What were likely to be some bad outcomes of what you did?

What could you do instead if the same situation were to recur?

What do you plan to do instead? What is more responsible? 

Once a decision has been made to act responsibly in the future, the student  is free to return and try afresh. Because time-out is not a punishment, teachers must be careful about  the language they use when sending students there. For example, it would  be inappropriate to say what I once witnessed a teacher say:  You! Get to time-out! Now!  It should sound more like:  You know that you can only stay in class if you are willing to be fair.  Please go to the time-out room. See if you can figure out how to handle  a situation like this better next time. As soon as youve got it worked out,  come and speak to me. Hopefully, it wont take too long.  Likewise, the teacher should greet the returning student pleasantly, but be  very concrete about the students plan. For example:  Its good to see you were able to sort this out. You say here that you will  act better. What exactly do you mean? What do you plan to do if  ? One of the more extreme examples of misuse of isolation with  students was shown to me in a school in Texas in 1995. The school, like 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour a number of others in America, has an ISS In School Suspension room.  On entering it, I noted the supervising teachers desk and filing cabinet  and then the corrals for students. The room contained 16 stalls. Each had  walls approximately 180 cm high and a door 150 cm high. There was  a deskshelf and chair in each cubicle. All the cubicles had been painted  with a matt black paint. So were all the walls. In this school, students on ISS entered their cubicle at the beginning  of the school day and left at the days end. At 10.30 a.m. and 2.30 p.m., a  uniformed guard and a very heavily built teacher, over 180 cm tall, would  escort students to and from the toilets. These were the only times students  left their cubicles. Lunches had to be eaten at the desks. The supervising  teacher was responsible for passing work from classroom teachers to the  students in their cubicles, returning completed work and shaking awake  any students who attempted to sleep. Students in this school could be  placed in ISS for up to three days for offences ranging from repetitive  tardiness or failure to submit homework, to physical assault. A third type of consequence involves removal of privileges such  as free time, excursions, practical work, and so on. A fourth involves  sending the student to another teacher, for example a senior teacher, yearlevel coordinator or assistant principal. A fifth relates to informing the  parents, who can provide a prearranged punishment for their child when  notified of the students behaviour in school. A sixth and possibly ultimate  consequence could be temporary suspension from school.  When dealing with Category B students, it is justifiable to use the  same hierarchy of consequences regardless of the offence. The first  response, however, should be an explanation. This highlights the way that  inappropriate behaviour interferes with the rights of others. Thereafter,  any student who fails to correct his or her behaviour is ignoring the  legitimate rights of his or her classmates and defying the legitimate  authority of the teacher, who, as explained in the previous chapter, has  been empowered by the class to deal with students who ignore rights.  Students who continue with irresponsible behaviour can then be treated  in the same way regardless of whether the initial offence was rocking  on a chair, calling out, moving around the room or swearing at a fellow  student. As mentioned earlier, when giving praise your body language should be  consistent with your spoken message. You should have a similar awareness  of your body language when telling students about the consequences you  are going to apply. This time it is advisable to look serious, move towards  students, lean towards them, and look into their eyes. Although some  teacher-oriented approaches talk of holding a students arm, in most  states in Australia this may be construed as assault, and hence should be  avoided.

Responding to students manifesting Category B behaviour      61 Informing the students As explained above, expectations for appropriate student behaviour need  to be based on the rights of students to learn as much as possible and to  be free from harassment. All consequences need to be established at the  beginning of the school year, preferably at a classroom meeting. The time  to set expectations and to inform students of the positive and negative  consequences of their behaviour is when both the students and the teacher  are calm and there is the time and opportunity to talk without interruption. After this meeting, the class expectations, the rewards and recognitions  to be provided to responsible students, and the consequences for not acting  responsibly, should be written down and put somewhere obvious. They  should also be acknowledged by the parents of each student. It is probably  wise to work out a set of increasingly punitive consequences so that students  will know what happens the first time they act irresponsibly, the second  time, and so on. In Figure 5.1 page 62 is a pro-forma that I supply to  teachers who are preparing their classroom management plan. Within the  plan, there is no attempt to describe all responsible and by implication  irresponsible behaviour. There is instead an assumption that you can  evaluate behaviour by relating it to the two rights stated on the plan. In 1995, I was invited to assist a large secondary school in Melbourne  develop an approach to discipline and student welfare. As a first step, I  surveyed the preferences of 23 members of the school council, all 104  teachers, and a 10 per cent representative sample of students and parents  for the range of consequences to be used by teachers in the school. Negative consequences most suitable for use within the secondary  school were argued to be those supported as definitely or probably  suitable by two-thirds or more of the members of the school council,  two-thirds or more of parents and at least 60 per cent of students, and  if at least two-thirds or more of teachers who were using the technique  reported that it was working well for them. In total the negative consequences supported by the school community  and perceived by staff as effective were: verbally correcting students behaviour

rearranging seating of 1 individual students or 2 the class

having a discussion with a student after class

sending a student out of class for a short cooling off period

giving yard-cleaning duty to individual students

giving lunchtime detentions to individual students

seeking help regarding individual students from 1 level coordinators or 2 

home room teachers writing a letter to parents of individual students

continued on page 63
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Figure 5.1  Pro-forma management plan Classroom Rights And Responsibilities In this classroom: 1. Students and the teacher have the right to do as much work as possible.  Therefore: students should bring encourage others to bring all their equipment 

to class students should listen encourage others to listen when students are 

speaking  students should be encourage others to be on time

students should attempt encourage others to attempt all work.

2. Students and the teacher have the right to feel comfortable and safe in  the classroom. Therefore:  students should pass encourage others to pass all objects hand  

to hand  students should speak encourage others to speak to others politely 

students should keep encourage others to keep their hands to 

themselves. If students make the effort to  respect the rights of others,  their effort will be recognised  by giving them: If students dont make the  effort to respect the rights  of others, the following will  occur in order: Students signature:. Parents signature: . The DMA Approach to Classroom Behaviour Copyright  Lewis 2008

Responding to students manifesting Category B behaviour      63 having a discussion with parents of students

making students pay restitution for property damage.

Consideration of these negative consequences shows that they bear  a close relationship to the findings of published research on the most  acceptable punishments Lewis, 2005. It would be easy to arrange a  number of these, hierarchically, into an assertive management plan. Responding to inappropriate behaviour When you need to tell students that their behaviour is interfering with the  rights of other students, four stages are recommended:  1.	 identify the student 2.	 describe the behaviour 3.	 indicate which rights are being denied 4.	 demand responsible behaviour.  The order in which these stages are communicated is very important. The  reason is that, although most Category B students feel that their teachers  like them, the same may not be true for students in Categories C and D.  Consequently, were a teacher to ask Category C or D students to  please be quiet!, it is possible they will feel he or she doesnt like them  and is acting unfairly. They may actually feel that the teacher has said I  dont like you, therefore be quiet. Even if a teacher says Youre talking,  please be quiet they may still feel that he or she said Youre talking, I  dont like you, please be quiet.  Unless teachers make clear the assumption underlying their  intervention i.e., that some behaviour is unfair because it infringes the  rights of classmates, some students may assume something less userfriendly. Finally, when explaining, it is important to put the message into  short bursts of words, as the more difficult the student is, the less likely he  or she is to be able to process more than five words in a row due to limited  listening skills Rowe  Rowe, 2006.  In the box below page 64 are listed a number of ways of explaining  various misdemeanours. When delivering these explanations, you need to choose the level of  non-verbal language to accompany the explanation. For example, to keep  the intervention low-key you may choose to address the irresponsible  behaviour some time after it occurred by waiting until the class is engaged  in seatwork. Then you could quietly crouch next to, and a little below,  the target student before quietly explaining what the problem was. In  this way, there is minimal non-verbal provocation almost essential when  dealing with C and D students.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Talking when teacher is trying to talk to class: David, youre talking. These kids cant hear. Please be quiet Please act  responsiblyPlease be fair. Calling out: David, youre calling out. Others have a right to concentrate. Please be  quiet. Not having equipment: David, you need your equipment to learn. When you borrow from others  it distracts them. Please bring all your things to class. Putting down other students: David, Cleo has a right to feel comfortable. You are not respecting her  rights. Please speak nicely. When you speak disrespectfully to Cleo, David, she feels bad. She has  a right to feel safe. Be careful how you say things. Coming late to class: David, when you come late to class you arent being fair. It distracts  others. Please come on time. Fighting: Fighting puts people at risk of being hurt. Everyone has a right to feel  safe. Please keep your hands to yourself. Eating in class: David, when you eat, others are distracted. Please dont eat in class. In contrast, you may wish to address the irresponsible behaviour from  across the classroom. If so, there should be unambiguously strong nonverbal cues: you should face towards the child, look him or her in the eye  and lean forward as you speak. Body language is very important for the  more difficult students, because, as discussed later in this book, although  they may be less literate, C and D students are more visually capable than  most students.

Responding to students manifesting Category B behaviour      65 In many cases such a verbal demand will stimulate a student response  such as, But its not my fault because  Such reactions by students  should not sidetrack you, no matter what. When confronted by an excuse  or an explanation, or even a provocative tone, you must remember that  this is not the time to address it, and that you first need to deal with  the irresponsible behaviour. Sometimes students will try to sidetrack and  control the teacher by using an insolent tone, raised voice, rolling of the  eyes or exasperated sigh. In the face of any provocative response or verbal resistance to the initial  demand, move into the second stage and calmly repeat your demand. For  example, say I understand or I hear you and then repeat your original  demand. This broken record routine or reassertion is essential to show  that your immediate aim is to stop the inappropriate behaviour. The  routine can be used a number of times if necessary. It is important to note  that at no time should you sound angry. The repetition of the demand  must be done calmly.  There are two very important reasons for calmness. The first is because  we now have evidence that the way childrens brains develop means that  even when they are acting like adults they are not using their brains in  the same way as adults Luna  Sweeney, 2004; Spear, 2000; Strauch,  2003. Brain scans demonstrate that the brain continues to develop until  the age of about 25 Giedd, 2004.  Therefore, an adolescents brain is  a work in progress. As a result, they  frequently respond more emotionally  or intuitively than an adult does, with  less regard for any natural or logical  consequences that are sure to follow.  This is particularly likely to  happen when they are under stress.  According to Beatriz Luna, when  things are running smoothly, they can act like adults. However, if they are  stressed, all that can break down. Yelling at a Category B student, or even  sounding a bit officious to a Category C or D student, may stress them to  the point that they cease to operate rationally.  The second reason to ensure you remain calm is the need to provide  an appropriate model for children. Once you become aggressive, in any  form, your belief in the rights of the student to be free from harassment  is under question. According to Gary Fenstermacher, the best way to  create responsible students is to ensure that they are around responsible  teachers: The manner of a teacher takes on particular importance, insofar  as it serves as a model for the students  as something the student will  Brain scans demonstrate that the brain  continues to develop until the age of  about 25  As a result, they frequently  respond more emotionally or intuitively  than an adult does, with less regard for  any natural or logical consequences that  are sure to follow.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour see and believe proper, or imitate, or accept as a standard for how things  will be 2001, p. 644. In conclusion, as argued by Robert Roeser, Jacquelynne Eccles and  Arnold Sameroff 2000, p. 454, Teachers need to protect adolescents  from situations they perceive as threatening to their self  or threatening  to their social image. If not, then adolescents will feel less motivated to  learn and more unhappy and will be more likely to manifest academic or  social problems. Consequently, teachers must remain calm so that both  they and the student will not become locked into a destructive cycle.  If calm repetitions dont work  and often they wont  then you  move into the third stage, which is to offer the offending student a choice.  The choice is straightforward: either stop the unacceptable behaviour or  accept an unpleasant and undesired consequence. For example, you might  say, Georgia, you have a choice, either you sit squarely on the chair or  you will stand at the back for five minutes. The choice is largely a matter  of illusion because the aim is not really to offer a choice but to stop the  inappropriate behaviour, hence the need for an increasingly punitive  hierarchy of consequences.  Therefore, in stage 3, when addressing a talker, you might say something  like, Look, Con, you have a choice. Either you stop talking to Janet or you  will be seated elsewhere. However, the choice is not a real one, because if  the first consequence fails to stop the talking and it recurs after Con has  been moved, you now say, Con, if you choose to talk, you will be moved  totally on your own and have 15 minutes detention to catch up on the  work you miss. In other words, you up the ante until the student gives in.  Given the premise that students must learn to respect rights, you have to do  whatever is necessary to make students behave responsibly.  Nevertheless, if students resist to the point that they say they will not  follow your instructions e.g. to change seats, you should not argue. It is  better to hear the resistance and calm the student by acknowledging the  reality of the situation. This will sound something like:  James, I dont intend to force you. However, if you choose not to move,  then immediately after this lesson finishes I am going to  The choice is  yours. You have ten seconds to think about it. At this point, you go about your business and see what happens.  The following dialogue illustrates the sequence of events: T:  calmnot hostile  open stance, leaning forward, eye contact,  waiting one second after saying the students name to ensure there  is eye contact and three seconds after warning to allow for the  expected compliance James  your talk is disturbing others. They  have a right to work. Please be quiet.

Responding to students manifesting Category B behaviour      67 J:  But Im talking about the work. I cant do my work if I dont talk. T:  I understand but you must be quiet. James continues talking a few seconds later. T:  James, you have a choice  you either stop talking or sit over there  where you wont bother anyone. James is quiet for a minute or two but then continues talking. T:  Please sit over there, James. J:  No, I wont. There is no way you can make me! T:  James, youre right. I cant make you. However, if you dont move, you  will have to go to Mr Mathewss room and we will talk at lunchtime. J:  I dont care! T:  James, please leave now. Ill see you at lunchtime. Stephen a  classmate, please accompany James to Mr Mathewss office.  If the students motive, excuse or explanation for the inappropriate  behaviour is so important that it needs to be discussed, he or she will resist  accordingly, and you will move through the series of consequences until you  reach one that removes the student from the classroom, or even requires  someone to come and collect the student. Any student who gets this far  becomes a Category C student. To summarise how to behave with Category  B students, Figure 5.2 page 68 outlines a plan that I have successfully  implemented in a number of very difficult primary and secondary grades. A final comment on negative consequences relates to the earlier  discussion highlighting the need to provide stronger recognition for  Communal responsibility than for Personal responsibility. We need  to explain to our students that, just as it is a very commendable act  to encourage others to behave responsibly, it is very inappropriate to  encourage others to behave irresponsibly, particularly when a teacher is  trying to do the opposite.  Consequently, any student who butts in when you are trying to manage  the inappropriate behaviour of a classmate should receive quite severe  consequences. Most teachers know the problem. They are in the midst  of addressing a student about his or her inappropriate behaviour when  another student joins in, on the side of the miscreant. Since it becomes  impossible to speak to two students at once, you are at a considerable  disadvantage. One way of dealing with this is to explain to the class, in  a calm moment, that if a student attempts to butt in, there will be a nonverbal signal from you which means please stay out of this, it is very  irresponsible to encourage others to do the wrong thing.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Figure 5.2  Setting up a system for classroom discipline Principles Base all actions on the learning and safety needs of other students. Act against the misbehaviour but show and state liking for the child. Let the child realise that antisocial behaviour results in a risk of isolation  from friends. Remain calm. Step 1 Make the expectations for appropriate behaviour very clear. Base expectations on the need for students to feel emotionally and  physically safe and to learn as much as possible. Step 2 Set up classroom as shown  with three or four seats or desks on the  door side of the room. Dont be worried about jamming up the seats in the  working block. Door	 Outside seats	 Working block seats Step 3 When appropriate behaviour occurs provide recognition. Provide some form of recognition for appropriate behaviour particularly for  students who are being punished. Encourage difficult children. Create a Transition recognition folder. Make it a bright colour. Every time  you change the nature of the activity e.g. Open your books, Move into  groups, that is, transitions ignore those who are slow and give ticks to  those who move faster. Say X is ready, Y has her book open, etc. After  20 ticks, give a reward. Step 4 When inappropriate behaviour occurs apply six sequential steps: 1.	 Provide explanation.  2.	 Reassert. 3.	 Move student to another seat in the working block of seats. 4.	 Move student to one of the outside seats until they feel they are  ready to return and act responsibly. 5.	 Move student to outside seat for remainder of lesson. 6.	 Send student out and now treat the child as a Category C student.

Responding to students manifesting Category B behaviour      69 For example, the signal could be an outstretched arm with the palm  pointing forwards. Any further student intervention and you point to the  back of the room, which means Move to the back, Ill discuss this butting  in later. Any further involvement by the student, and you point to the  door, which means Please wait outside, we will discuss this later. This  non-verbal system allows you, more or less, to maintain verbal contact  with the original target student and to overlap, that is, do two things at  once Kounin, 1970. Before moving on to discussing students who do not respond to  recognitions or punishments by becoming more responsible, I wish to  make two observations about using a systematic, stepped consequence  system. Because I generally like to maximise the freedom of students, I  initially use two explanations, followed by moving the student to another  part of the class, followed by five minutes isolation, then 15 minutes  isolation, then detention, and so on. This protracted sequence of sanctions  gives students many opportunities to exercise self-control and to learn to  act more responsibly. I find, however, that there are occasions when the gradual increase  in the severity of sanctions is a major disadvantage. When running a  discussion or conducting a demonstration, when I want students to listen  carefully and contribute efficiently to the discussion, I find that  too much  time can be lost in explanations and requests to move, and the momentum  of the lesson can be severely affected. At such times, therefore, I adopt a  modified system for such full frontal teaching. During this time I notify  students that there will be two explanations, then a detention. As long as  the students are fully aware of any switch in the sequence of sanctions,  I find they accept the change and adapt to the more severe sequence  by becoming less likely to call out or otherwise run foul of the class  expectations for appropriate behaviour. The second difficulty also relates to the inflexibility associated with  a systematic stepped series of consequences. Often I have found myself  separating and moving students for what were very minor infractions,  and resenting the fact that I seemed to have no choice but to move to the  next level of sanction when the behaviour recurred. Initially, I attempted  to overcome this problem by selective use of multiple reassertions, thereby  avoiding the more severe level of sanction. However, because it was  selective, students rightly claimed that I gave some students more leeway  than others. Ultimately, I found a way to deal with my frustration, gaining greater  flexibility of response while still maintaining the security of a system and  avoiding the legitimate criticism of my students. During times when the  students are not dependent on my directions, for example during smallgroup work or individual seatwork, I use explanations and reassertions 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour but do not graduate to more severe sanctions. Only when, and if, I feel  it is necessary to take firmer control, due to an increase in the frequency  or significance of the disruption, do I formally advise the class that we  are moving into our six-step system. I am then able to systematically  maintain a hierarchy of sanctions like separation, isolation, detention,  and contacting parents, until it feels right to relax my hold and quietly  revert to explanations and reassertion. In this way, I can slip in and out  of the system at will, thereby gaining greater flexibility in my response to  inappropriate student behaviour. You may need to consider using a number of systems, each with a  different set of punishments, rewards and recognitions. Then at particular  stages of a lesson, or during particular lessons, it would be possible to  indicate to students which approach you are implementing. The approach  described here allows for considerable flexibility. The core of it is that in  responding to the needs of Category B students, teachers should develop  at least one set of both positive encouraging and negative discouraging  consequences to follow responsible and irresponsible behaviours  respectively, inform students of the respective consequences, and not allow  any reactions by a student to prevent them from calmly and assertively  acting to protect students rights. Under no circumstances should they  allow students to control them. If students fail to respond to hints, rewards and punishments, they are  no longer considered as belonging to Category B, but need to be viewed as  Category C students. The way teachers should work with such students is  to talk with them, as shown in the next chapter, so that they can be helped  to act more responsibly.
6 Responding to   students manifesting   Category C behaviour As indicated in Chapters 4 and 5, some students wont respect their  classmates learning and safety rights, regardless of teacher hints,  explanations, recognitions and rewards, or punishments. These students  will ultimately be asked to leave the room. This will be done in a calm  way and only after they have either repeatedly acted irresponsibly or have  overtly refused to cooperate. Another rare possibility is that they have acted in a way that is very  damaging to themselves, to others, or to equipment. In such a case, there  may be no explanation or intermediate steps. For example, one can  hardly imagine a situation where one student is hitting another with a  machete and the teacher says: Michael, you are hitting Teo and putting  his blood all over the floor. He may get seriously hurt. Also, someone  could slip on the blood. Please put down the hatchet. The reason for the  removal of a student is not retribution for the inappropriateness of his   or her behaviour. Exiting a student is simply an admission that this  student is currently unable or unwilling to act in the best interests of his  or her classmates.  If this were to happen occasionally, it does not mean that the student  needs to be considered as a Category C. It may simply be a question  of increasing your pile of goodwill with the student by showing more  interest in him or her as an individual. It may be that you are forgetting  to catch the student acting responsibly, and taking advantage of the  opportunity to say something nice. It may mean that you need to  reconsider the kinds of rewards or consequences you are using with that  particular student. You may even have to engage in an unnatural act and  be nice to a Neanderthal when hes acting normal. If, however, despite  your attempts to keep the student in the room and in Category B, he  or she has to leave the room twice in a week, or four times in a month,  then it is essential that the teacher and student have a talk, the nature of  which I will outline below. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Category C students It is interesting to reflect on what currently occurs in many schools I visit.  When students repeatedly act irresponsibly or overtly refuse to cooperate  they are asked often ordered to leave the room. Sometimes teachers are  able to do this respectfully and sometimes not. Voices are raised, fingers  are pointed, doors are slammed. The student is frequently told to report to  a senior teacher, such as a deputy principal or year coordinator. These are  usually very experienced teachers. They know that it is not very useful to  pull rank with these students, especially when they are already excited.  So, rather than lay on Legitimate and Coercive power, which they  correctly surmise will not work well on this student at this time, they  attempt to have a conversation with the student which sometimes sounds  like the following:  T:	 Ah Megan, not again. What happened this time? M:	 She hates me! T:	 Come on, Megan, your teacher doesnt hate you. All shes trying to  do is teach your friends what theyve come here to learn, and keep  them feeling safe while theyre doing it. I reckon youre a good kid.  I know how well you are doing in Drama and Music, for example.  Do you think you can stay out of trouble for the rest of the day if I  send you back? I tell you what. If you can stay out of trouble for the  rest of today and tomorrow, and dont let me down, come and see  me at the end of tomorrow and Ill give you a bag of chips. Do you  agree? Can you just go back and be normal? M:	 Yeah. T:	 OK. Now go back and stay out of trouble. Clearly, this experienced senior teacher has done what the research  discussed in Chapters 1 and 2 would recommend: use Reward and  Referent power. It is also what nearly all the teachers participating in my  professional development programs say is most likely to work with more  challenging students. Nevertheless, when the student returns to class the  dialogue often sounds like this: T:	 Megan, what are you doing back here? I sent you to Mr Black. M:	 Yeah. He spoke to me and said to come back and to be normal. T:	 What else did Mr Black do? Was there a detention? M:	 No! No! He didnt punish me. He said hed give me a bag of chips!

Responding to students manifesting Category C behaviour      73 At this point, the teacher usually thinks or says something like Bloody  administration. They never support you in this school.  To ensure that the Referent power of teachers is maximised, it is  essential that any student who is asked to leave class often enough to be  considered a Category C student speaks only with the teacher who asked  him or her to leave. In some schools with which I consult, the senior  teacher will mind, but not talk with, the student. In others, the teacher  sets seatwork and the senior teacher will come and look after the class  while the teacher talks with the exited student. In yet others, the student  is sent to the back of the room of a cooperating teacher. This could be a  private or school-wide arrangement. In one school Ive worked with, teachers who exit students send them  to the schools reception area. When they arrive, a secretary checks a list  of available classes and sends the student to sit in the back of a class  where the students are at least two years older or younger than the exited  student. The Assistant Principal developed a form which indicates only  the time students are exited from the classroom, the time they arrive at  reception, the time they arrive at the other class and what work they  are expected to do. The Assistant Principal said he deliberately left off  any reference to what student misbehaviour led to the exit as its entirely  between the teacher and the student. Its nobody elses business.  Of course, if exited students misbehave in the new class they are  then sent to a senior teacher; otherwise they are ignored. It really doesnt  matter where a student is sent, as long as he or she is ignored, and as long  as the student is not sent to a place where other exited students have been  sent. In each case, the student is free to work or to contemplate what  went wrong and what needs now to be done. Some schools provide a  worksheet, which includes questions like those detailed in Chapter 3, to  facilitate such reflection a detailed example of such a worksheet is given  in Figure 9.3.  The student should gain nothing by being exited. If it becomes a badge  of courage to join other exited students often Category D students, then  there is something to be gained by being sent out. Three incidents, which  occurred in separate Victorian secondary schools, illustrate the problem.  In one, 13 students from four Year 9 classes arranged one day to  meet in the schools time-out room at a predetermined time. The second  incident was reported in the following words by an observer participating  in a research study on classroom processes: A student entered the classroom ten minutes late. He was not reprimanded  by the teacher. He slammed down his books but the teacher ignored the  noise. Five minutes later, the student raised his hand. Student requested 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour to go to the time-out room. The teacher was a little stunned and so was  I. Recovering quickly, the teacher asked the student whether there was  a particular reason for such a request. The student then replied, Im  meeting my girlfriend there at 2 p.m. and Ive got two minutes to get  there in time. If I dont it will be the end of us! The third happened when I was visiting a large private school. As I  was waiting to observe a teacher and about to knock and enter the room,  a student was exited. We both stood in an extremely long corridor. As he  came out, I noticed that he semaphored to mates who had been exited  from their respective classes. I was clearly in the happening place. This  was hardly isolation. These three incidents indicate that some students view the timeout room as a social outlet rather than as a non-punitive space for selfevaluation and analysis.  Talking with students displaying Category C  behaviour Students characterised by Category C behaviour can be distinguished from  Category D students in that the former, when calm, are aware of their  motives, are sensitive to the legitimate rights of others, are able to identify  with the feelings of others and have concern for others. Consequently a  Category C student would be happy to modify any behaviour that was  adversely impacting on the legitimate  rights of others, unless he or she felt the  behaviour was absolutely necessary. The main idea of talking with  students is to re-establish their commitment to rights and to acknowledge the  inappropriateness of the behaviour  that led to the exiting. To understand  the aim of the talk more easily, it is helpful to consider Eric Bernes Theory  of Transactional Analysis 1961, 1964. According to his analysis, each of  us has three elements or states. These are the Parent, Child, and Adult  states. In brief, they can be described as follows: The Parent is the part of us that has been conditioned by the authority  figures in our upbringing. It comprises a huge number of demands,  sanctions, embargos and restrictions. The Child is the emotional and feeling part of us. When in ones Child  it is not necessary to be logical or feel responsible. The Adult is our rational, responsible, moral and logical part. When in  an adult state we are reasonable and assertive, processing data objectively   The main idea of talking with students  is to re-establish their commitment  to rights and to acknowledge the  inappropriateness of the behaviour that  led to the exiting. 

Responding to students manifesting Category C behaviour      75 and dealing fairly with the information we are taking in. Our adult is our  ability to think and determine action for ourselves, based on received data.  The adult in us is the grown-up rational person who talks reasonably  and assertively, neither trying to control nor reacting. In summary, the parent state is the hub of values, the adult state is the  hub of logic and rationality, and the child state is the hub of emotions.  The aim of the talk is to keep the Category C student in his or her  adult state. This is because someone in an adult state is open to logic,  remorse and conviction, all of which are crucial elements of the talking  process. So it is not a good idea to conduct the talk when the student is  in class or even in visual contact with other students. If you do, they have  two audiences: you, an adult, and their peers, children. In such a contest  the students child state often wins.  Students find it very uncomfortable to be confronted in the adult state  because it is extremely difficult to lie when in an adult state, and it is hard  not to respond to reason. To be irresponsible requires a shift of state. This,  by the way, is why many students will address teachers very provocatively  during a discussion that is focusing on their irresponsible behaviour. It  usually occurs when the student is feeling under pressure. Rather than  suffer the discomfort associated with feeling remorse or guilt, it is a very  attractive and probably unconscious option to say something that will  push the teacher into his or her parent state. If successful, the student can  then adopt the natural partner to this, the child state. A recent example illustrates such dialogue: T:	 Are you saying that its OK for you to distract your friends when  theyre trying to concentrate? S:	 Well, youre a shit teacher! Without realising it, the student wants the teacher to say something like  Dont speak to me like that. Such a statement comes from the parent  state. It would then allow the student to be off the hook because the  natural response to a teacher in an apparent parent state is to remain in a  child state, with no feelings of remorse or responsibility. A second example I heard recently occurred when a male student,  during a one-on-one discussion with a teacher, was feeling pressured to  bring his equipment to class and to stop bothering his mates who were  trying to work. He suddenly leant forward, looked the female teacher  squarely in the eye and said. Whats the matter with you at the moment,  miss? You seem a bit uptight. Is it that time of month? For children or anyone else for that matter to remain in an adult  state they must feel heard and understood. Consequently, the talk  involves a lot of listening. One of the best-known systems that can be 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour used to exemplify the style of the talk is Teacher Effectiveness Training  TET, devised by Gordon 1975. This process uses a great deal of active  listening to assist in the clarification of problems, hopefully leading to  some resolution. Although the following is based on such a style there are,  as will be shown, significant differences.  In brief, the aim of talking with Category C students is to calm them,  give them the opportunity to talk through their side of the story, and  provide them with information to confront any irrational ideas they may  have regarding the appropriateness of their behaviour. This is done so  that they can clearly identify that there was a problem with the way they  behaved in class. When this is successful, the aim is to have them propose  alternative ways of behaving, help them evaluate the alternatives, and  implement the one they think is best for them. It is also important to have  them agree to a review period after which the solution is evaluated.  In total there are nine steps in a productive discussion:  1.	 Welcome. 2.	 Seek the students help to deal with the problem. 3.	 State what the problem is and what effect it is having on others  including you and how it makes you feel. 4.	 Listen, and paraphrase the students facts and feelings. Reframe what  is heard, to reassure the student. 5.	 Confront the irrational parts of the students argument. Try to show  that he or she is unreasonable. 6.	 Get the students agreement that there is a problem. 7.	 Have the student provide a solution that meets both his or her and  your needs; if necessary, suggest some solutions. 8.	 Clearly define the selected solution. 9.	 Set a timetable to evaluate its effectiveness. Step 1  Welcome. Often when students are spoken with, or rather, spoken to, by teachers,  the latter take on the air of a parent. The welcome, therefore, may sound  like Come in, Alexis. Sit down. To attempt to get the student into his  adult state the welcome should be adult to adult. For example, Glad you  made it, Alexis, good to see you. Step 2  Seek the students help to deal with   the problem. To allow the student to feel more on the same level as the teacher in the  conversation, he or she is asked to assist the teacher, who expresses a 

Responding to students manifesting Category C behaviour      77 need for assistance. For example, I need you to help me understand what  happened in class, or Theres something I hope you can help me with. Step 3  State what the problem is, what effect it is  having on others including you and how it makes   you feel. Most students are sent out of classes for one of three reasons. First, they  may have repeated a minor misbehaviour such as moving or talking when  they were not meant to, rocking on their chairs, or handling an irrelevant  distracting object e.g. a mobile phone, despite the teachers repeated  demands that they stop. Alternatively, they may have argued with the  teacher when the latter tried to stop them misbehaving. Finally, they may  have done something seriously inappropriate, like use racist or sexist  language, or engage in physical violence. The aim of the teacher when  talking with Category C students is to engage their adult, to allow them  ownership of both the problem and the solution. Therefore, rather than  telling them that their behaviour is unacceptable, you share your concern  about its negative impact on others by stating an I-message.  In an I-message three things are identified, which may be presented  in any order: the student behaviour that is causing a problem for classmates, the teacher 

or both the tangible or concrete effect the students behaviour has on classmates, 

the teacher or both how the teacher feels as a result of the behaviour.

I-messages let students know that their behaviour is creating a problem  without blaming them for anything or telling them what to do. They can  be contrasted with messages that place the responsibility for the teachers  problem directly on the student you are making me angry, you are  behaving stupidly, you are never finished on time, or you must stop  that immediately. In the talk with Category C students, the I-message  is modified to focus primarily on the problem the students behaviour is  causing his or her classmates. Some examples will illustrate. Suppose that you had to exit a student  for repeatedly talking at the wrong times. Having greeted and empowered  the student, you might say something like, When you talk at the same time  as I am talking to the class, your mates cant hear, and I feel concerned.  The same message can be delivered by putting the three parts in a different  order, for example, I get concerned when students attempts to hear me  are interrupted by your talking.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Some further examples of I-messages useful to an average classroom  teacher might be: I feel worried when you come late because it distracts the rest of the  students and they need to concentrate on the beginning of the lesson.  They will lose out. Im concerned that someone will be hurt if students fight. It distracts students when you come late to class, and I get frustrated. I get annoyed when you consistently call out answers too quickly  because other students dont get a fair go. When you throw things like staplers in the classroom, I get worried that  some of your friends may get hurt. It is assumed that one of the prime reasons for Category C students  problem behaviour is that they dont realise the effect their behaviour has  on others because they are too engrossed in achieving their own goals.  However, once made aware of their classmates and your problem, they  may be ready to engage in solving it by modifying their behaviour. In  response to I-messages from you, Category C students will be considerate  enough to modify their behaviour, or  at least to enter into discussion as to  why they believe their behaviour is  really appropriate. Such a desire by students to look  after their classmates assumes that  they have a genuine commitment  to the two rights possessed by all  students: the right to an opportunity  to learn and the right to feel physically and emotionally safe. Their desire  to look after you as well assumes that you have estabished the pile of  goodwill referred to earlier. Without this goodwill, and without trust  in your motives, students may not respond positively, even when they  become aware of the plight of their fellow students, and yourself. In other  words, if you havent developed a relationship with a student to the point  that the child cares about your welfare, I-messages or anything else for  that matter may not work. Given that you have succeeded in establishing a reasonable relationship  with the Category C student, an I-message should prompt the child to  negotiate a change in behaviour. However, there will be occasions when  the behaviour that you judge to be inappropriate is seen by the student as  behaviour that he or she needs to engage in. A typical example could be  when a child persistently seeks help from a friend while you are talking to  A desire by students to look after their  classmates assumes that they have a  genuine commitment to the two rights  possessed by all students: the right to  an opportunity to learn and the right to  feel physically and emotionally safe. 

Responding to students manifesting Category C behaviour      79 the class. When this is the case, an I-message from you is likely to result in  a verbal response from the student, defending or explaining the behaviour.  It is at this point that you move to Step 4, that is, active listening. Step 4  Listen, and paraphrase the students facts and  feelings, then reframe what is heard to reassure   the student. To listen actively teachers need to repeat what the student told them,  using other words to show that they have processed the information.  They should also try to work out how the student is feeling and reflect  that as well. Fortunately, students who are exited and need to be treated  as Category C students tend to say the same sort of things to teachers: It wasnt me. There were others. I was only talking about the work. I threw it because she needed it in a hurry. She started it. I cant come on time, my mum brings me. I lost my books so I cant bring them. Listening can be done at differing depths. You can simply restate the  students words in your own, look for the unspoken underlying message  or even notice the underlying feelings that you believe are built into the  message. For example, assume a student said It wasnt me. The process  of listening at increasing levels of depth is illustrated below. It wasnt me

. So there were others talking also? restating words. It wasnt me

. Do you think Im singling you out unfairly? highlighting  the underlying message. It wasnt me

. Are you upset because you think Im picking on you?  strengthening the underlying message. It wasnt me

. Are you angry because you think I dont like you?  identifying implicit feelings. Listening while validating If possible, when listening, it is easier to keep students in an adult state  if you can clearly separate your rejection of the behaviour from your  understanding that the student is generally a nice person. For example, 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour if a student who is in trouble for swearing at a classmate says she made  me, you could say, so you wouldnt normally swear at other students,  you only swore at him because you were provoked. This process is called  a reframe and presents the student in a positive light while allowing him  or her to own the behaviour. The following examples further illustrate the technique: I was only talking about the work

. So if you knew what was going  on you wouldnt have interrupted anybody? I threw it because she needed it in a hurry

. If it wasnt so urgent you  wouldnt have thrown it? You were only trying to help? I lost my books so I cant bring them

. So the only reason youre not  bringing your stuff is because its lost? This technique allows students a way of accepting that they did the  wrong thing without feeling that you see them as a bad person. By using  this technique, you can protect your pile of goodwill while confronting  the students inappropriate behaviour. The joy of the technique is that  if students accept your proposition, they are implicitly acknowledging  ownership of their inappropriate behaviour. This of course allows you to  follow up with So, you did speak interruptswearthrow. When involved in listening to students, you need to refrain from asking  for additional information, contradicting, offering advice, or negating  the students feeling. Often you will find listening without inputting  information quite difficult. Nevertheless, listening well is a great way to  keep students in their adult state. All the way through the process of the  talk, it is important to listen whenever the student says something new,  or even if he or she repeats the same information. In the course of listening, you may need to be prepared to hear the  same statement several times. This is often because at crucial times in the  conversation the student may seek reassurance that they are still acceptable,  even if they have behaved inappropriately. This can sometimes be irritating,  but students wouldnt say something if they didnt want it heard.  Teachers must be prepared to listen not only to verbal communication  from students but also to non-verbal messages. For example, a student  may appear for a talk but sit side on to the teacher, facing away with  arms folded. If the teacher says the traditional Please look at me, he or  she has adopted a parent state. This permits students to remain in the  child state and accept no responsibility for their behaviour. Rather, the  teacher must listen to the body language and say something like, I can  see you are unhappy to be here. Do you feel Im being unfair in asking  to talk with you? Such listening will usually prompt a verbal response 

Responding to students manifesting Category C behaviour      81 which then begins the talk. Once listened to, many verbal responses or  excuses offered by students for their inappropriate behaviour will need to  be confronted, because they are irrational.  Step 5  Confront the irrational parts of the students  argument. Try to show they are unreasonable. The confrontation stage of the talk usually follows the listening stage,  although, as stated above, listening occurs in response to any student  contribution to the conversation. In general, the confrontation involves  stating what is unreasonable about the students behaviour or excuses.  The joy of confronting students irrational thinking is that in many cases  its very predictable.  As indicated above, to justify their behaviour C students say things  like: There were others. I was only talking about the work. I threw it because she needed it in a hurry. She started it. I cant come on time, my mum brings me. I lost my books so I cant bring them. Consider the first of these. So what if there were others. Even if other  students are acting irresponsibly, it doesnt justify an adult doing likewise.  It is not a rational excuse. When a student is in an adult state, you can  successfully confront by asking, Are you saying that because other students  arent prepared to respect the rights of their classmates, that justifies you  interfering with your friends learning? To deflect some other issues  associated with students feeling singled out, you could say, Look, I dont  think you would like it if I spoke about you with others so I dont think its  fair to talk about others here. You agree that you were talking?  Although it is not possible to identify the confrontation for every  possible excuse, the following exemplify the idea. Note that most invite a  response by being in the form of a question. I was only talking about the work

. But are you saying that your need  to keep up justifies interfering with the learning of your friends?  I threw it because she needed it in a hurry

. So you feel its OK to  place your friends in danger to save a few seconds?
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour She started it

. Are you saying that because she did the wrong thing  that justifies you handling it so unreasonably? I cant come on time, my mum brings me

. So theres nothing you  can do to get here on time? Nothing at all? I lost my books so I cant bring them

. So because you havent  made the effort to replace the lost stuff, you feel its OK to keep  interfering with your classmates learning by borrowing their stuff? The idea is to give students additional information that cant be  assimilated if they continue to hang on to their irrational excuse. This  causes stress to the adult because of the energy required to hold to two  contradictory positions.  Confrontation via a hypothetical A second standard form of confrontation takes the form of asking the  student to think about a hypothetical situation to show how irrational his  or her excuse is. One of my favourites is what was said in response to a  tough kid who was trying to justify his aggressive behaviour. In defence,  he said to his teacher: Look! School is like that. Some kids are a bit  rough with others. Everyone expects it. Its no big deal. First, the teacher  listened: So really a bit of rough stuff among students is OK. Teachers  should butt out. The student said Yeah. The teacher confronted the response by presenting the following  hypothetical situation: OK then, if tomorrow we take into your grade a  kid whos 190 cm and 90 kg, tougher than you, and doesnt like the way  you look, are you saying we shouldnt get involved if he wants to rearrange  your face? The example is a little extreme but it makes the point. Developing challenging confrontations is not easy. Nevertheless, it  is not hard either, particularly when its done by a group of teachers.  Practice makes perfect, and after all, the excuses you will hear dont vary  that much year to year, decade to decade. Nevertheless, there will be times  when a student will give you an excuse that you arent able to easily  confront: But my Dad says hit first, dont throw the second punch. If  such a situation should occur, simply say to the student: Hmm, OK, I  need to think about what youve said. Im going to mull it over tonight  and catch up with you tomorrow. Then its time to ring a friend or two to  work out a challenging confrontation with which you feel comfortable. Confrontation via repeated questioning  Asking a student the same question a number of times can be a very  powerful confrontational device when the student is in an adult state and 

Responding to students manifesting Category C behaviour      83 attempts to lie. As stated above, it is very difficult for a person to lie  knowingly when in the adult state. A student has to invest a lot of energy  in repeatedly lying, in the face of what he or she knows to be a reasonable,  calm and adult confrontation.  A student might find it difficult to sustain the following dialogue: T:	 Hi Alexis, glad you could make it. I need you to help me. Today  in class I asked you repeatedly not to interrupt your friends. They  were trying to get the work done. When I asked you to stop you  denied everything and argued, which was even more distracting.  Thats not really fair to them. A:	 I didnt say anything in class! T:	 Nothing? A:	 Not a thing! T:	 There was no time today that you talked at the wrong time? A:	 No! T:	 No time at all? A:	 Not really. T:	 Not once? It may well be at this stage that a student will say something like I  wasnt the only one. This then gives you an opportunity to listen: So  you werent the only one who interfered with other kids learning. Any  agreement, of course, indicates the students tacit acknowledgment that  he or she was talking at the wrong time.  Step 6  Get the students agreement that there is a  problem. In general, after welcoming, seeking help, stating what you perceive to be  the problem, then listening and confronting, you should eventually get to  a situation where it will be possible to have the student recognise that his  or her behaviour is problematic. Usually this is done by saying, So you  can see that there is a problem. Dont settle for maybe.  The following illustrates a typical dialogue: T:	 Hi Alexis, good to see you. Im hoping you can help me understand  something. Today in class when I tried to stop you interrupting   the learning of your friends you argued with me. What was that all  about?
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour A:	 I was only talking about the work. You made such a fuss. T:	 So you feel I overreacted because all you wanted to do was your  own work? A:	 Yeah. T:	 But you seem to be suggesting that its OK if your need to keep up  overrides some other students right to learn. A:	 I didnt say that. But all I did was talk about the work. T:	 So you werent trying to distract anybody, you just wanted to get  on with your work. Do you think I overreacted? A:	 Yeah. T:	 The only reason I said anything was because I could see that your  friends were being distracted. A:	 What am I supposed to do then? T:	 OK. You seem to recognise that its not fair for you to distract your  mates even if all youre doing is talking about the work. A:	 Maybe. T:	 Youre not sure? Cant you see its unfair? A:	 Yeah, I suppose. T:	 You still dont sound sure. Are you sure? A:	 Yeah. At this point the dialogue moves to Step 7. Step 7  Have the student provide a solution that meets  both his or her and your needs; if necessary, suggest  some solutions. There are various ways of finding a solution that is acceptable to both   parties. You can start a discussion by saying something like, Lets try to  work out some ways we can solve this problem. Alternatively, you and the  student can independently write down all the ways in which the problem  could be resolved to both your satisfaction, and then eliminate any that  either of you finds totally unacceptable. In general terms what you are  requesting is that the student tells you what he or she plans to do if the same  situation that stimulated the problematic behaviour were to recur. It is very important for you to be honest in stating your feelings,  and if you feel that a proposed solution is unfair to other students or 

Responding to students manifesting Category C behaviour      85 to you, you must say so. In order to achieve a solution jointly with the  student, consider all the solutions that remain after the elimination step,  and together decide which of the remaining is best. While occasionally a  mutually acceptable solution might not be found, in general one exists  and finding it simply requires more negotiation. The following example,  taken from my teaching, will clarify the idea. Jim was a student who had a tendency to answer back. Whenever  I judged his behaviour to be inappropriate and told him so, he seemed  compelled to argue that I was wrong and that he was not to blame. In  discussion, I explained to Jim that our interactions at these times used  up a lot of class time and distracted a lot of kids. Once he was ready  to recognise that his behaviour was a problem, I asked him how he  could solve this problem: If I became aware in class that your talking  was disturbing your classmates and I asked you to stop, how would you  handle it in a way that your friends right to learn was not ignored? The three options Jim put forward to solve this problem were: 1.	 I should watch more closely and not blame him unfairly. 2.	 I shouldnt argue with him but rather accept his opinion. 3.	 He should let it pass even if he thought I was wrong. Further discussion quickly showed that options 1 and 2 were  unacceptable to me and option 3 was not feasible for Jim to carry out.  Even though ideally he should provide the solution to be implemented,  I could see that it was going to take too long, so I suggested that rather  than argue with me at the time, Jim could see me at lunchtime to present  his side of the story. Jim thought this was too great an imposition on his  time. He was unhappy with that and consequently a little more motivated  to find a different, workable solution. Ultimately, Jim and I agreed that  we would try a system whereby he would write down his side of the story  at the time of having his behaviour corrected, and I would reply, either in  writing that night or verbally the next day. Within a couple of lessons, Jim was in trouble for talking when he  shouldnt have been, and began to argue about my interpretation of his  behaviour I wasnt talking, I was just movin my lips. When I reminded  him of our agreement, twice, he stopped arguing, but didnt write a note.  The next lesson he was asked to stop grabbing at Ericas pencil case and  begrudgingly did so. This time he immediately proceeded to write a note  of complaint, which he handed to me as he left class. In it, Jim explained  that Erica had thrown his book off the desk and he was just retaliating.  I answered in writing that I could only respond to behaviour I saw, and  being human, I couldnt see everything. Nevertheless, I was obliged to  respond to behaviour I saw or chaos would ensue. I also said that I would  keep a close eye on Erica. After this, Jim generally stopped answering back 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour and did not write any more notes, although on a number of occasions he  complained verbally after class. Successful completion of this solution-finding step in the studentoriented approach requires you to use your intelligence and imagination  to develop possible solutions. Although you may find it very difficult  to be sufficiently creative to start with, teachers generally improve with  practice. Step 8  Clearly define the selected solution. As a result of agreeing on a solution to a problem, it is often necessary to  decide something like who is to do what and when? What do we need,  and who will get it? For example, using the solution Jim and I agreed  upon, it was necessary to make sure that Jim had pieces of paper on which  he was to write his side of the story. The story had to be to the point and  completed within five minutes. I had to reply within 24 hours. Step 9  Set a timetable to evaluate its effectiveness. The final element in the discussion is checking that the solution agreed  upon is seen to work to the satisfaction of both student and teacher.  Often some fine-tuning to remove remaining wrinkles is required after  the solution is implemented, although there will be some occasions when  one or both parties are unhappy with a solution that looked all right  to them initially. This involves saying something like, OK well try that  for a week. Lets meet very briefly on Friday after class to see that its all  working as it should. Goodwill and the talk By concentrating on understanding the Category C students view of  problems that arise in classrooms, your responses will communicate  your regard for them. By treating  students almost as equals, you will  maintain  a  high-quality  teacher student relationship and consequently  a large pile of goodwill. Your refusal  to pull rank, and thereby devalue their  feelings and perceptions, will ensure  that you have sufficient goodwill to enable students to compromise when  it comes to identifying a workable solution to a problem.  If, however, after three or four talks, you see no improvement in  the students behaviour in class, then you have probably been talking to  a Category D student. Further, when you try to draw on the Referent  By treating students almost as equals,  you will maintain a high-quality teacher student relationship and consequently a  large pile of goodwill. 

Responding to students manifesting Category C behaviour      87 power in class by saying something like Come on, Josh, you said you  were going to handle it differently, and you sense no remorse, then its  time to consider the possibility that this Category C student is really a  Category D. Another way you might tell is if the student ever, in reference  to his classmates, says, theyre not my friends, or they dont like me,  and sounds as if he really means it. Any student who says this and means  it is probably a Category D student. Chapter 7 will address their needs.
Responding to   students manifesting   Category D behaviour 7 As indicated in Chapters 4, 5 and 6, students displaying Category D  behaviour patterns dont respond to hints, rewards and recognitions,  demands, punishment and one-on-one adult-to-adult talks. These are the  students you have tried everything with, to no avail. Sometimes there is a  little improvement here and there, but there is no real sense that the student  is becoming more responsible and more aware of the rights of others. In contrast to Category C students, there is little benefit in conducting  one-on-one discussions with Category D students. The reason for this is that  it is extremely difficult to tap into their adult state, and they cant discuss  their motivation because they dont have a conscious awareness of it.  Category D students are typically grouped into four different  subcategories, as will be explained later. In reality, a Category D student  will often show behaviours characteristic of two of the four subcategories,  less frequently, three of them. The way to think about the behaviour  of students in this category is not in terms of how severe or minor the  misbehaviour, but rather how repetitive it is.  Even speaking of students as Category D is misleading because a  student may act as a Category A student in one setting and a Category  D student in another, as will be discussed later in this chapter. It is even  possible for a student to operate as a Category D for a part of a lesson   for example, whenever the reading of complex text is required  and  Category A during the role-play. Basic assumptions Unlike previous chapters, this chapter relies entirely on one theory, the  group-oriented approach developed by Dreikurs. The key assumptions we  will apply to Category D students are applied to all students by Dreikurs. In  the Developmental Management Approach outlined in this book, however,  only Category D students will be considered in Dreikurs terms.

Responding to students manifesting Category D behaviour      89 Underlying Dreikurs approach is an assumption that all children  want to belong, that is, they want status and recognition, and all of their  behaviour is based on their desire to be  accepted into a group. Furthermore,  all their inappropriate behaviour  reflects mistaken beliefs that through  this type of behaviour they will gain  the recognition they need. A second  assumption is that they will curb their  inappropriate behaviour only if they believe this will result in their gaining  acceptance by a group that is important to them. One of the most interesting, but usually unstated, implications of these  assumptions is the tremendously important role of the pile of goodwill.  When teachers dont make enough effort to develop and maintain a pile  of goodwill with a particular student, then that student may turn to  inappropriate behaviour as a way of gaining recognition.  Inappropriate behaviour The most significant contribution of the Dreikurs approach is its  explanation of why Category D students behave inappropriately.  The best way to explain the inappropriate behaviour of students  designated as Categories A, B or C is to assume that the students need to  relieve a temporary emotional state such as frustration, anxiety, boredom,  fear or excitement. Their behaviour is a response to some part of their  environment. For example, sometimes students misbehave because  they are confused or bored by the type of instruction they are receiving  McInerney  McInerney, 2002, or by the way the teacher handles their  misbehaviour Lewis, 2006. Sometimes it is because they have some very  important information, unrelated to the aims the teacher had in mind for  the lesson, which needs to be shared  now!  Their behaviour may also be caused by things that are going on around  them at the time; for example, Con explodes and hits Jackie because  she takes a ruler away from him. Their misbehaviour is very contextdependent and they have a clear understanding of what they are doing.  Students in Category A and B also know that what they do is wrong, when  it is wrong. In contrast, as explained in Chapter 6, students in Category C  may need more time and direction to explore their moral compass before  acknowledging the inappropriateness of their misbehaviour. Students in Category D are very different. They do not understand  why they act inappropriately. In fact, one of the things teachers need to  do to help such students is to make sure someone puts them in touch with  their hypothetical motive, to see if they can recognise it. Perhaps the best  All children want to belong, that is, they  want status and recognition, and all of  their behaviour is based on their desire  to belong to a group. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour way to describe Category D students reasons for acting inappropriately is  to describe their behaviour as somehow meeting unarticulated needs. That  is, they act in a socially inappropriate way to satisfy personal needs. Students whose behaviour fits this category tend to repeatedly disrupt  regardless of variations in the teachers treatment. Their behaviour is  due to their attempts to be significant, to gain recognition. They believe,  albeit wrongly, that their misbehaviour will result in them gaining the  recognition they want. They always choose to engage in whatever  behaviour they display, although they are generally not conscious of  their motive. The argument rests on a belief that students demonstrating  Category D behaviour would prefer to choose to act in an acceptable  manner to obtain recognition, but they believe it is not possible to achieve  such recognition through normal channels.  The reason for a student making the choice to act inappropriately has to  do with feelings of discouragement. By an early stage of life, some children  become very discouraged. They come to believe that they are not much  good at making a go of most things. They see people around them as much  better than they are at getting on in the world through normal channels.  True or not, some children see it this way, and once they latch on to the idea  that they arent as capable as others, they tend to see everything in distorted  ways so that their beliefs about themselves are supported. For example, a student who feels her older brother is much smarter  than she could see her teachers genuine interest in her achievements as  motivated by some sort of sympathy for her relative incompetence. Her  perception of her teachers behaviour is distorted by her bad feelings  about herself. As a result of the feeling that its not worth competing for recognition  in socially acceptable ways, discouraged children will give up trying to be  acceptable. Their lack of confidence in their abilities can be contrasted  with the self-evaluation of Category A, B and C students who, because  they are confident of their ability to find a place within a social group and  to belong through constructive activity, will tend not to be an ongoing  problem. These individuals have developed feelings of equality and selfworth. They are interested in cooperating with others, and in participating  usefully within a group. They face nearly all school demands, be they  intellectual, social, physical, or emotional, with confidence in their ability  to cope. There is no need for them to misbehave because they know they  can function constructively and cooperatively in the class. Not all discouraged students, however, are failures at what they do.  Some are aware of their competencies and believe that teachers and  parents like them, but only as long as they do well in their schoolwork.  Often these children may be the first-born in their families. They feel that 

Responding to students manifesting Category D behaviour      91 their worth depends on what they can achieve, not on who they are, and  although they generally perform at above average, or even a high level,  it is never good enough. The problem is that even though they look as if  they have a right to be satisfied with themselves, they arent. Feeling that  they can never do well enough to be worthwhile, these students can also  adopt a different goal from that of being acceptable. Sources of discouragement in the family In any family, it is likely that unacceptable behaviour occurs as part of  the normal pattern of life. Situations arise within all families that result  in children feeling rejected. The structure of the family system inevitably  means that subsystems or subgroups  develop: the parent or parents, in  theory, form a subgroup with certain  goals that may make it essential to  override the needs of other subgroups  within the family. For example, parents  have a need for privacy if they are to  maintain a sexual relationship. This  means that parents have to establish  rules within their families to guard these needs. The pursuit of these  parental rights may cause conflict and resentment, and even feelings of  rejection among the children. In large families, the adolescent children  may form subgroups of their own and be the group most affected by  parents attempts to guard their privacy. Another issue within families that can generate feelings of discouragement in children is the hierarchical position of family members relative to  each other. This structure imposes restrictions on family members free  choice of roles. Position within a family is largely determined socially  parents have certain duties to perform and biologically adolescents  require more autonomy than 6-year-olds. For example, older children  may resent a younger sibling staying up late where they regard this as  their unique right. They may feel discouraged by what they see as a lack  of recognition for their position in the family, and these feelings can be  played out in the classroom. Imagine a situation where an older child in a family is expected  to help look after the baby, clean the table, and sweep the floor. He  may feel resentful and fight with the 5-year-old, who is mainly free of  responsibilities, and consequently is seen to be more favoured. In another  family, the younger children may vigorously complain of rejection when  forced to go to bed earlier than their older brothers or sisters. It is important for teachers to be aware  that students pick up most of these  feelings of rejection at home, even if the  patterns are not apparent to outsiders.  It can also happen very early in the life  of the child.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Sibling rivalry can be caused, and prevented, by the way in which  parents balance these differing rights or responsibilities. In the case of  sibling rivalry, not only can the feelings of discouragement be transferred  to the classroom, but the patterns of the family interactions themselves can  be manifested between students. For example, if a child is very resentful of  an older siblings need to be correct all the time, he or she may react with  hostility towards a classmate with similar tendencies. Teachers are then in  a position to exacerbate or ameliorate these patterns of behaviour. One pattern of discouragement very commonly referred to appears  to surround second-born children. It has been argued e.g. Leman, 1985;  Isaacson  Radish, 2002 that first-born children are strivers and,  generally, achievers. They tend to read, write and do rithmetic quite well,  as that is how they gain recognition from their parents. The second-born  may feel he or she cannot compete and will frequently skill up in areas not  dominated by the first-borns. This is often within areas of music, sport,  or art  second-borns are often very creative. A less positive outcome for  second-borns is that they reject the norms of the family and can slip into  patterns of misbehaviour.  These birth-order patterns are not immutable. It is the pattern of  interactions within families, which result in a child feeling rejected or not,  that we must consider. When children feel inadequate, the result can be  chronically unacceptable behaviour,  which becomes part of the fabric and  challenge that make up the classroom.  It is therefore important for us to be  aware of the childs need, so we can  avoid adding to the rejection felt by  Category D students who are behaving  inappropriately. This is easy to say,  but hard to deliver. Category D students are experts at controlling the  responses of teachers and parents.  I can recall an example from when I was teaching in a relatively tough  school. One day, while on lunch duty, I noticed two boys arguing. One  was much bigger than the other. By the time I was able to approach them,  the larger boy had picked up the smaller one by the neck and had him  pressed against a wire fence. Although the boy was not choking, he was  clearly uncomfortable and unhappy. When I told the larger boy to put the  other boy down, he looked me over with disdain and said: Why dont  you butt out? Looking him in the eye, I said exactly the wrong thing:  What sort of an animal are you?  This sort of comment was not going to reduce the students sense of  rejection. I was effectively controlled by the student. He was clearly an  When children feel inadequate, the  result can be chronically unacceptable  behaviour, which becomes part of  the fabric and challenge that make up  the classroom. 

Responding to students manifesting Category D behaviour      93 expert in manipulating the reaction of those around him. Most Category  D students are.  Aims of inappropriate behaviour To help identify the Category D students, all you have to do is think of the  students you would consider to be the most difficult to teach. Then you  focus on the behaviour these children manifest. Once you start to see the  patterns forming you will discover that there are four main types. That is  because there are four main aims of childrens inappropriate behaviour.  Because the real aim of all children is to be liked and appreciated, these  four aims are called mistaken goals. Dreikurs identifies these aims as: 1.	 attention-seeking: the need to get special attention 2.	 power-seeking: the need to get other people to do what they  the students want, or to show that they wont do what others  want 3.	 revenge-seeking: the need to hurt others as much as they feel  hurt by others 4.	 withdrawal: the need to be left alone. These four goals are all likely to arise in the average classroom. In my  experience, it is only in a small proportion of cases that the behaviour is  so severe that the classroom is no longer able to fulfil its basic functions,  that of teaching and learning. When a students motive to behave  inappropriately strongly outweighs his or her choice for so-called normal  behaviour, the student may become extremely difficult to handle and can  create an acute problem requiring extra help. For instance, if a large amount of the students time is spent in  withdrawal, vandalising school property or displaying aggressive defiance,  then he or she is not carrying out other developmental functions. The  situation would then be described as an acute or pathological one, requiring  the assistance of a qualified counsellor. The inappropriate behaviour of  Category D students, however, generally assumes less dramatic forms.  Often it is attention-seeking, comprising low-level behaviour like talking,  making noises, rocking on chairs, andor moving inappropriately. The  reason it is a problem is that, although it stops when the teacher addresses  the inappropriate behaviour, it recurs and seems to keep recurring over and  over again.  Although it is common for a difficult student to be operating under one  of the four mistaken goals at any particular time, some students do move 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour from goal to goal. Dreikurs argues that students initially misbehave due  to a desire for attention, and it is only if they conclude that they are not  gaining sufficient recognition through this way of behaving that they move  on to behaviour arising from their need for power, revenge or withdrawal.  If, however, they believe they are gaining enough recognition, and hence  satisfaction, from attention-seeking, power or revenge, they will continue  behaving in accordance with the corresponding mistaken goal until they are  helped to see the situation they are in and the choices they have made. Since an understanding of a students mistaken goals is so integral to  Dreikurs group-oriented approach, I will give a more detailed description  of the behavioural characteristics of each. In general, for each of the  four mistaken goals, the way you feel when exposed to a given students  behaviour is your best guide to which goal they have selected as the basis  for their behaviour. 1. Attention-seeking If the goal of a students behaviour is attention-seeking, you usually feel  irritated or annoyed. But your feelings do not offer an infallible guide.  You may be very likely to react with irritation if you have just come from  an exhausting staff meeting and a student persists in his or her legitimate  request for a piece of equipment needed for a class experiment. Unless a  students behaviour is regularly annoying, the problem may simply be a  result of the students insensitivity. As indicated above, with attention-seeking behaviour, the behaviour  usually stops after being attended to, but only for a short time, and  then it recurs with monotonous regularity. A students attention-seeking  behaviour is essentially aimed at tying up the attention of the teacher. It can  range from disruptive or boisterous behaviour to habitual forgetfulness. Balson 1992 identifies typical examples of attention-seeking behaviour,  among which are children whom he calls the walking question mark, the  clown, the sloppy or slow worker, and the bashful or shy child. Added  to this list are the persistent talker, the noise maker, the wanderer, and  the child who never follows directions unless prompted. Not all attention-seeking takes on a destructive form. Some attentionseekers will be compelled to produce excellent work. The only problem  is that their teacher has to recognise it, regardless of whether there are 25  other students awaiting instructions at the time. Such students are likely  to act in a range of ways designed to attract positive feedback from their  teacher.  In summary, the characteristic pattern for an attention-seeker is that  the child behaves inappropriately, the teacher responds, the child stops 

Responding to students manifesting Category D behaviour      95 acting inappropriately for a short time, then does the same or some other  inappropriate behaviour once more, and the cycle repeats itself. 2. Power-seeking A student whose mistaken goal is the need to make people do as he or she  says, or the need not to do as others say, usually make teachers consistently  feel confronted, angry and retaliatory. These students view of the world is  that they are recognised as worthwhile only as long as they are in charge  and the boss. If people dont let them do as they please, its because people  dont approve of them. Students who have power as their mistaken goal are  often argumentative, deceitful, contradictory, tantrum-prone or stubborn. Unlike attention-seekers, students who are into power rarely respond to  a normal telling-off by temporarily stopping their behaviour. They usually  resist in some way and try to draw their teacher into a fight. Although  classic power-seekers are the arguers, the provocateurs and the resisters,  in its more helpful forms a need for power may be expressed as a need for  control and leadership. Consequently, such power-seeking students can  make great helpers. They are often excellent at getting things done, like  distributing books or preparing the props for a school play.  3. Revenge-seeking The third of the four mistaken goals is a belief, held by some children, that  they can only feel important when they can hurt other people as much as  they feel others have and will hurt them. They consistently make teachers  feel threatened, hurt or frightened. Such students behave in very hurtful  ways: they steal, destroy property, or are violent and vicious. They are so  discouraged that the only way they can regain some sense of status is to  get even, to hit back at their persecutors.  They consider evidence of other peoples dislike of them as some sort  of positive achievement. If and when their hurtful behaviour provokes  others to hurt them back, they feel even more justified in seeking revenge.  Their main aim is to hurt. Sometimes its to hurt others, sometimes  themselves e.g. self-mutilation and sometimes it is things property that  they attempt to damage. 4. Withdrawal The last resort of students who are very deeply discouraged is withdrawal.  Rather than respond to the perceived injustices dealt to them by others,  withdrawing students give up. Their only aim is to avoid further rejection  by appearing so stupid or by being so unavailable that they hope they 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour will be left alone. Teachers who have to deal with withdrawing students  generally feel powerless and tend to despair. The withdrawal need not be thought of as covering all fields of  endeavour. Usually it is only in areas where the students feel their  inadequacies most acutely that the misbehaviour is most frequent.  Nevertheless, some D students convey the impression that they cannot  manage to do anything correctly. By and large, most incompetent students  have the ability to achieve. They are just profoundly discouraged. Because  such students see themselves as failures, they no longer have any reason  to try. They hope that if they are left alone, their perceived incompetence  will be overlooked, and they will no longer be hurt by it. Dealing with student behaviour The mistaken goals outlined above are very useful for interpreting the  inappropriate behaviour of students, but per se do not tell you what to do.  In dealing with unacceptable behaviour, I will outline 11 steps, all of which  need to be taken, before applying each to a hypothetical Category D student  called Ryan. The first seven of these can be reasonably expected from a  classroom teacher. The remaining four, however, are more therapeutic and  may require the assistance of a qualified counsellor or psychologist.   1.	Fight your first impulse try to understand that the student is  hurting inside.   2.	Encourage the student at every opportunity.   3.	Separate the deed from the doer. Express a liking for the  student while still applying logical consequences.   4.	Show an awareness of some skill the student believes he or  she is good at. If possible, set up a situation where you can  observe the child being competent.   5.	Have the child help you in a meaningful way.   6.	Show some interest in something that interests the child.   7.	Modify the childs curriculum and assessment such a child  will usually be a more kinaesthetic and visual learner.   8.	Collect enough data to be confident of the students mistaken  goal.   9.	Make sure the student is aware of his or her mistaken goals. 10.	Confront the student with the need to choose between his or  her primary goal being liked and the mistaken goal. 11.	During class, privately inform the child of the mistaken goal  as he or she misbehaves.

Responding to students manifesting Category D behaviour      97 1. Fight your first impulse try to understand that the  student is hurting inside. No matter which of the mistaken goals a student such as Ryan is working  towards, the last thing you should do when confronted with inappropriate  behaviour is to react instinctively. There are two reasons for this. First,  it will only sustain Ryans inappropriate behaviour; it will not help to  stop it. More importantly, your instinctive reaction will usually further  discourage what is, in essence, not a bad or naughty student, but a  discouraged child. It will lead to further rejection of a student who only  behaves unacceptably because he or she feels rejected. Essentially, a teacher who reacts to an attention-seeker with irritation  and annoyance, to a power-seeker with anger or exasperation, to a  revenge-seeker with fear or hurt, or to  a withdrawing student with despair or  helplessness, is just giving the junkie  a fix. Moreover, an unthinking response  may even make matters much worse  by moving an attention-seeker into  power-seeking, or a power-seeker  into wanting revenge, and so on. At  all times, the ideal response should be  calm and considered. This call for us  to control our natural reactions rests on the belief that such unthinking  reactions feed Ryans underlying low self-concept. 2. Encourage the student at every opportunity. Since D students only behave inappropriately because they feel so  discouraged that they think they wouldnt gain acceptance by behaving  normally, it is no surprise that a major emphasis is on giving these students  lots of encouragement. Yet, make no mistake, it is not the behaviour that  should be encouraged, but the person. In giving encouragement, not only  to students who behave unacceptably, but to all students, we need to let  them know that they belong, and are useful and important members of  the class who can contribute in socially acceptable ways. According to Dreikurs, it is important when talking about  encouragement to distinguish between recognising achievement and  recognising effort. This can be illustrated by the following example. The  class is working on a geography assignment. Ryan, in contrast, is clicking  his pen. His teacher may respond by saying, in an irritated manner: Cant  you sit and get on with the work without clicking that pen. Please. Stop!  Essentially, a teacher who reacts to  an attention-seeker with irritation and  annoyance, to a power-seeker with  anger or exasperation, to a revengeseeker with fear or hurt, or to a  withdrawing student with despair or  helplessness, is just giving the junkie   a fix.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Its disturbing others. Because the teacher has focused attention on him,  Ryan feels recognised by both the teacher and the class. He sits quietly for  a short time before starting again. Over time, Ryan concludes that when  I do wrong things, I get attention. If I want to be noticed all I have to do  is act inappropriately. A teacher who is conscious of Dreikurs framework for understanding  inappropriate behaviour will feel irritated, but believe that Ryan is  attention-seeking. The last thing he or she wants to do is reinforce  Ryans attention-seeking behaviour. Consequently, the teacher keeps  talking, moves quietly alongside Ryan, takes the pen, and quietly places  it on the desk. Ryan gets little attention, does not feel recognised, and  concludes over time that I do not gain attention through misbehaviour.  Unfortunately, however, he will seek other ways of gaining recognition  until additional strategies are implemented to address the low self-concept  that drives his need for recognition. Similarly, when addressing work attempted by students such as Ryan,  you can respond appropriately or otherwise. If you react without enough  thought you might say something like, Youre working quite well Ryan,  but youve got this bit wrong. Over time, he may come to believe that he is  not quite acceptable as he is and will only become so when he is competent.  Comments like this one teach Ryan that he is no good at a given subject, for  example Maths, and ultimately, therefore, no good at all. Alternatively, Ryan may complete the assignment perfectly and then  you might say, Well done, youve done a beautiful job. Although this  comment praises the student, it may also be interpreted in exactly the  same way as the previous statement. Ryan may conclude that only as long  as he can complete work perfectly, is he acceptable. This kind of thinking  seems more prevalent among first-born children. In contrast to making a students approval conditional on satisfactory  achievement of some task, as teachers so often do, it is important to  accept children as they are, by separating their efforts and involvement  in an activity from the quality of their performance. It would have been  more helpful, that is, more encouraging, to Ryan if you said something  like thats great, its good to see you are enjoying Maths. Encouragement  of this sort gives students the courage to keep on trying and at the same  time allows them to accept their current best efforts. As long as they keep  trying, and gaining more maturity and experience, skills will develop. Figure 7.1 contains a list of encouraging statements provided by  a primary school I once worked with. The staff recommended these  phrases as those they considered most helpful, based on their extensive  experience. Dreikurs would probably be quite pleased with the results of  their grounded research. In practice, of course, the distinction between  encouraging effort and encouraging achievement is usually blurred, 

Responding to students manifesting Category D behaviour      99 Phrases that show acceptance of the student: I like the way you   It seems that you are satisfied with   Since youre not satisfied with , what do you think you can do  about it? It seems that you enjoy   How do you feel about what youve produced? Phrases that show confidence in the child: Knowing you, Im sure that you will do it all right. Thats the way, youll be able to   I know youll make a choice youll be happy with. Thats hard but Im sure you will figure it out. Phrases that focus on contributions, assets and  appreciation: Thanks, you helped me a lot. It was good of you to help with  Thanks, I really appreciate your  help, it makes my job much easier. I need your help to  so that  . The way you  is really quite impressive. Phrases that recognise efforts and achievements: It looks as if you have worked really hard on  . Youve worked hard.  It seems like you like to  . That was difficult but I can see you figured it out. I see that you are making progress with  youre already   able to  . Figure 7.1  Encouraging phrases
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour and in our society, recognition of the product is far more common than  recognition of the process. Recent research, which involved observations  of over 50 classrooms Beaman, 2006, reported that a student is seven  times more likely to be recognised for getting some schoolwork right than  criticised for getting it wrong. In contrast, when it comes to social responsibility, a student is six  times more likely to have irresponsible behaviour criticised than to have  responsible behaviour recognised. So you should not feel inadequate if  you find it difficult to achieve Dreikurs ideal. Nevertheless, encouraging  achievement as well as effort, no matter how imperfect the product, is  far better than no encouragement at all. Further, encouraging socially  responsible behaviour more often than one criticises inappropriate  behaviour is essential, even if not always practicable.  It is important to warn you about what might happen in the early  stages of encouraging students who chronically behave inappropriately.  Because their behaviour stems from low self-esteem, these students can  find it hard to believe that they have found a teacher who genuinely likes  and accepts them.  On one occasion, I had the experience of attempting to teach Matthew,  a particularly difficult student. After concluding that his chronic behaviour  was based on a need for attention, I offered him loads of encouragement,  trying to convince him that he was not as unlikeable as he assumed.  I found myself repeatedly saying to him: Matthew, I know you dont  believe it, but you really are OK, in fact, youre a nice boy. Its only your  behaviour that isnt acceptable. In the early stages of this process, he  found it necessary to test my words by behaving even worse, to see if he  could force me to dislike him. At the worst stage of testing me out, he reacted to the imposition of  logical consequences by eventually storming out of the classroom shouting,  You hate me! You hate me! I responded to this outburst by later telling him  privately what I thought was happening. He didnt think he was likeable,  couldnt accept that I didnt dislike him as he believed all the others teachers  did, and was trying to test me. I told him that the next time he tried to test  me I would respond by calmly saying: Testing  testing. I had to use this  strategy twice only before Matthew stopped his testing behaviour. In summary, therefore, encouragement of acceptable behaviour is  essential to making a student realise that he or she doesnt have to behave  inappropriately to be recognised, and that recognition and belonging can  be gained through normal acceptable behaviour. But it may be a long  time before this process takes effect. What should a teacher do about a  students unacceptable behaviour in the meantime? I will deal with the  answer to this in the next section.

Responding to students manifesting Category D behaviour      101 3. Separate the deed from the doer. Express a liking  for the student while still applying consequences for  inappropriate behaviour. Just as Category B and C students need to have their appropriate  behaviour recognised, and inappropriate behaviour subjected to a series  of increasingly severe consequences, so do Category D students. Not to  apply consequences to the behaviour of a Category D student would be  tantamount to giving the child the idea that we are thinking, Poor you, we  cant expect more, so we wont. It is important that Category D students  realise that you do have faith in their ability to live up to reasonable  expectations. Even though they may  doubt their capacities, you should  never let Category D students feel that  you see them as less than capable, or  victims to be pitied. It is particularly important that  when a Category D students behaviour  is addressed, it is done in a way that is  least likely to make the student feel rejected. Subsequently, rather than  simply say Ryan, youre talking. Its distracting the other students. Please  be quiet! you may preface such a statement with Ryan, youre a good  kid, but youre talking  If Ryan were young enough, you may even say,  Ryan, I like you, but youre talking  In private, you should also inform  Ryan that when you need to respond negatively to his behaviour it does  not mean that you dislike him. You may even tell him that you will give  some non-verbal signal as you verbally address his behaviour e.g. touch  your ear lobe so that he will know you still like him, even though you  feel compelled to deal with his behaviour because it distracts the other  kids. You may even need to tell him, Theres nothing you can do that will  make me dislike you.  When choosing consequences you should understand clearly that  any punishment that further undermines a D students self-concept is  probably going to prolong or increase the inappropriate behaviour. In  contrast, any consequence that involves Ryan making use of his usually  considerable kinaesthetic abilities to assist someone else is clearly a   good idea. It is likely to increase his sense of self-worth and thereby  reduce his need for the recognition that he gains through acting out.  Some productive consequences may be assisting in the schools general  office photocopying, folding papers, helping the maintenance man  cleaning desks, fixing damaged equipment, the gardener, or even  tutoring much younger children. Not to apply consequences to the  behaviour of a Category D student  would be tantamount to giving the child  the idea that we are thinking, Poor you,  we cant expect more, so we wont. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour 4. Show an awareness of some skill the student believes  he or she is good at. If possible, set up a situation where  you can observe the student being competent. As explained above, according to Dreikurs Category D students have a  low regard for themselves. In order to increase the likelihood that Ryan  comes to believe that you value him, you should make the effort to  observe him being competent. This may require watching the basketball  during lunchtime, or visiting a Music, Art or Phys Ed lesson. It may even  require selecting a topic or process for the normal curriculum just because  it is within Ryans sphere of competence, for example a PowerPoint  presentation on karate. 5. Have the child help you in a meaningful way. In order to convince Ryan that he is of value it is helpful to find a way that  he can be of help. On one occasion, I asked a very challenging Category  D student if he would agree to punch data from questionnaires into a  Word file, for my later analysis. I agreed to pay him 2 an hour. Our  relationship, and his classroom behaviour, improved greatly. My reduced  stress level made it well worth the small investment. 6. Show some interest in something that interests   the child. Finding out what interests Ryan may not be easy. Nevertheless, it is of  great significance because such information serves two purposes. First, it  allows you to build Ryans areas of interest into the curriculum, thereby  increasing the likelihood that he will attend to the learning activities.  Second, if for example you knew he was into technology, you could catch  up with Ryan in the playground and show him that he is of value by  saying something like, Ryan, I was thinking about buying a new TV and  cant decide whether to get a plasma or LCD screen. They tell me you  know about these things. What do you think is the best buy and why?  One of the professional development activities I provide for  teachers is to give them a minute to focus their mind on a particular  D student they are teaching. I then ask them to raise their hand if they  know what this student thinks he or she is really good at, or is genuinely  interested in. On average only about 10 per cent of secondary teachers can  do it. The percentage is higher among primary teachers. Unfortunately,  many teachers are unaware of D students expertise and interests, and  until they become aware of them they can only be of limited help to such  students.

Responding to students manifesting Category D behaviour      103 7. Modify the students curriculum and assessment  usually a more kinaestheticvisual learner. A number of years ago I was visiting a secondary school in the Eastern  Region of Victoria when the staff revolted. They refused to teach the most  badly behaved students in their classes. The behaviour of these children  was aggressive and intimidating. The staff wanted them removed from  classes. Each student to be removed was identified by the four coordinators  of the respective year level. I was curious about such students so gained  permission to obtain copies of their progress reports. What I will now  comment on is the perceived performance of the Year 8 excluded students  in a range of subjects.  Of the 207 students in Year 8, 18 were removed from their classrooms.  Although approximately 40 per cent of Year 8 were girls, all 18 excluded  students were boys. This is consistent with the often reported observation  that boys generally misbehave most in class. Table 7.1 below records their  results. For each subject, students progress was categorised as Excellent,  Satisfactory, Borderline or Unsatisfactory. Table 7.1  Progress reports for the most challenging 18 students in Year 8 Excellent Satisfactory Borderline Unsatisfactory English 0 1 4 13 Science 0 2 5 11 SOSE 0 3 7 8 Maths 0 6 7 5 Tech. 0 6 7 5 Art 0 9 3 6 Phys Ed 4 7 2 5 The first observation to be made is that there were five students  who received Unsatisfactory for all the subjects. These students were  currently unreachable and may have already divorced their schools  Glasser, 1997. That is, they may have found school and teachers so  unable to understand them and to respond to their needs that they  chose to withdraw entirely. The interesting thing about the pattern of  results for the remaining 13 students is that the more their performance  required language skills, the less successful these students have been.  Not surprisingly, when they were formally tested for language skills they  averaged Year 3 reading level. They were not literate, so could not read 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour the tests, let alone the resource material. Interestingly, they were able to  perform creditably in Art and Phys Ed. These children are not written word people; they are not linguistic and  logical learners. They are movement and picture people: in Gardners   words Gardener, 1983, they are kinaesthetic and visual learners.  Consequently, any attempt to integrate Category D students by modifying  the curriculum will require an attempt to decrease reliance on linguistic skills  and increase the significance of visual and performance skills. Assessment  would also need to be based on visual output, role-plays, and so on. Some schools have found it necessary to teach particular Category D  students outside the normal program. For example, the school providing  the progress reports above made an off-site experience available for these  Category D students, incorporating outdoor, interpersonal, and hands-on  curriculum. Another recent example that crossed my desk had a group  of Category D students spending ten weeks building motorbikes from  wood, papier-mch and cardboard. According to the teacher, we used  working arithmetic, measurement and costing for the maths element and  for the English the students wrote reports at intervals about procedures  and materials culminating in a final report wrapping up the whole project  Students on their bikes , p. 11. In addition to modifying instruction, it is also important to modify  the types of assessment used to evaluate the performance of Category D  students. It would be extremely frustrating, to say the least, if students were  able to master the learning because of its kinaesthetic and visual nature,  but not be able to communicate their mastery. So forms of assessment  will need to be considered that emphasise less the read and written word.  These may include assessments based on the production of diagrams,  graphic organisers, maps, drawings, paintings, models, sculptures, videos,  pictures, constructions, demonstrations, mimes or plays. Having completed consideration of what may be termed instructional  or pedagogical responses to the needs of Category D students, a more  controversial set of recommendations will now be presented. These  focus on therapeutic responses, which might arguably be the province of  psychologists, not teachers. Nevertheless, in the interests of Category D  students, these recommendations will be discussed, while acknowledging  their problematic nature. 8. Help to change mistaken goals. There are two reasons why you should inform students of their mistaken  understanding of the world. The first is that it can help confirm whether  your assessment of the students reason for behaving inappropriately is  correct; that is, whether the student is attention-seeking, power-seeking, 

Responding to students manifesting Category D behaviour      105 revenge-seeking or withdrawing. The second is that it enables students to  become aware of their motivation and, ultimately, to realise that a pattern  of unacceptable behaviour is not the way to gain the sort of recognition  and feelings of belonging they really want. You need to suggest to the student who is behaving inappropriately  that you think you are aware of what is causing the behaviour. You then  confront the student with the possible causes:  The student wants special attention.

The student wants to be boss.

The student wants to hurt others as much as he or she feels hurt by them.

The student wants to be left alone.

The purpose of this confrontation is to observe which proposition  stimulates a reaction from the student, and might indicate that you have  hit the nail on the head. These reactions, which are involuntary, include a  mischievous Ive been caught smile, a hand covering the mouth or face,  or even a twinkle in the eye. In attempting to identify these signs successfully, it is important that  you realise that there is a great risk of error. This is one reason why certain  psychologists have discouraged me from discussing the following material  with teachers. Just as it is argued that some childrens behaviour is caused  by poor self-esteem, the same could be said of some teachers responses.  Teachers views of the world will also be influenced by factors such as their  own sense of self-worth and experiences as a child. They may therefore  see in a students response something that is not there. In psychological terms, this is known as projection, that is, you project  your own feelings onto the student. For example, you may see a twinkle in  the students eye because you can remember how you behaved and thought  in similar circumstances. You need to be aware of these possibilities and  be on your guard.  There is another related difficulty for teachers who use Dreikurs  approach. As explained earlier, this approach argues that a teachers  reaction is his or her best guide to the possible motivation of the student;  for example, power-seeking behaviour provokes anger. However, some  teachers need to be very careful when evaluating their responses to a  students behaviour. Events in the teachers life may generally influence  their feelings and the way they are likely to react to their students. For  example, if teachers are feeling pushed around by a controlling school  administration they may be quick to interpret normal student behaviour  as challenges to their power in the classroom. Consequently they may  easily become angered. In summary, I wish to provide Dreikurs ideas as  food for thought but I do not recommend their use by all teachers. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour 9. Collect enough data to be confident of the students  mistaken goal. According to Dreikurs it is vital that Category D students become aware  of what motivates their inappropriate behaviour, and that it is a mistaken  goal, be it seeking attention, power or revenge, or withdrawal. The reason  is that they need to be forced to consider what is more important to them:  to be liked and accepted, or to seek their mistaken goal at the expense of  genuine acceptance. It is therefore important to find out how a potential  Category D student acts in a range of situations, to determine if there is a  pattern of behaviour that characterises one of the mistaken goals. I recall a passing comment from a teacher of English who, when  talking about a Category D student, said: I dont understand, he was  absolutely disgusting in class, but last night he served me at McDonalds  and he was excellent, efficient and courteous. All I could think at the  time was, Well, its obvious, an English class demands linguistic and  logical intelligence; McDonalds, in contrast, is a visual, interpersonal,  rhythmic and kinaesthetic environment. This student could cope well  and feel competent in McDonalds. Therefore, rather than destroy the  environment, he supported it. Mistaken goals Once you are confident about the likely mistaken goal driving a Category  D students behaviour, you should conduct a private discussion with  the student aimed at making him or her aware of his or her mistaken  goals, and confronting the student with the need to choose between the  primary goal being liked and the mistaken goal. Below is a transcript  of a teachers input into a possible conversation with a D student, with  various important stages identified: Gain involvement: Chloe, I think I know why you  talked while I was talkingmade noises  in classstole moneyliedetc. Do you want me to tell you what I think? Confront motivation: Could it be that you want special attention? Could it be that you want to be boss and get your own way?

Responding to students manifesting Category D behaviour      107 Could it be that you want to get even and hurt people as much as you  feel they have hurt you? Could it be you want to avoid showing others how stupid you feel you  are? Deny rational excuses: Thats not it. Its not that youre bored, confused, tired. You just want  to be noticed, to show people that they cant make you do stuff, to get  even with everyone, to be left alone. Defuse motivation: Youre right. If you act silly enough, people cant help noticing you. Absolutely, no one can make you do anything. Theres no way they can stop you from hurting them. If you want to avoid doing any work you certainly can. Encourage: You are a terrific kid. I like you very much. Confront belief about not being likeable: I know you think I dont like you, but I do. I think you feel that no one likes you, but you are wrong. I like you a lot. I understand that you feel that no one likes you and maybe you even think  youre not likeable, no matter how well you try to behave. Youre wrong! Theres nothing you can do that will make me stop liking you. Give it  your best shot. Provide choice: Do you want to be noticed or do you want to be liked to have friends?  You cant have both. Do you want to be boss or do you want to be liked? You cant have  both.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Do you want to get even or do you want to be liked? You cant have  both. Do you want to be left alone or do you want to be liked? You cant have  both. Separate child and behaviour: I think you want people to like you but you dont think they could. Youre  wrong! If you changed the way you behaved, people would find it easier to like  you. Its hard to like someone who steals, hits, etc. The only thing about you that is hard to like is the way you are choosing  to behave. If you choose to behave differently, the other kids would think differently  about you. Apply logical consequences: Because you  we will now have to  Highlight the mistaken goal during class: The next time you  or  in class, rather than punish you, I will simply  let you know that the reason for such behaviour is your need for attention  power, etc.  so you can come to understand why you do it. As indicated above, when you attempt to give unconditional acceptance  to Category D students, they will often increase their misbehaviour to test  you.  A recent example involved a girl in a Year 9 class. Her teacher  conducted a discussion similar to that outlined above. He identified the  students goal as attention-seeking and suggested to her that although her  friends found such behaviour amusing, they also found it irritating. It  was this type of behaviour that prevented them from really liking her. The  teacher also said he was aware that the student might misunderstand when  he felt compelled to react to her inappropriate behaviour, and assume that  he didnt like her. Consequently, the teacher identified a non-verbal signal he said he  would use the next time the student displayed attention-seeking behaviour 

Responding to students manifesting Category D behaviour      109 in class. Later in class when the student was behaving inappropriately,  the teacher called her name and gave the signal. The student stopped the  behaviour instantly, stood motionless for about 45 seconds then proceeded  to wave her hands from side to side above her head and started yelling,  Im attention-seeking! Im attention-seeking!  When the teacher emailed me in desperation, I explained that his  strategy was working and that he had to continue to expose the motive  behind the students behaviour. The relevant dialogue might go like this: I know why your behaviour is getting worse. Why you yelled and waved  your hands about. Youre saying to me  Like me, do you? Ill show you  Im not likeable. It wont work. I do like you. Give it your best shot. I will  deal with your behaviour because I have to protect the other kids right  to work and feel safe. But I will never dislike you.Why should I? Youre  a nice kid. To complete the chapter I want to quote Ms Megan Moore, the  principal of the Marist Transition School in Victoria, as reported in The  Age newspaper of 14 June 2004, who said:  And even the most apparently aggressive, defiant, oppositional child  has a heart thats crying  crying for boundaries, crying for affirmation,  crying for reassurance, crying for direction, crying for success  Building students self-esteem is one of the overriding objectives of the  program, and developing students trust and giving them healthy doses of  praise and affirmation are key aspects of the intervention. The students  have to learn the parameters, they have to learn that the expectations are  absolute and the consequences are non-emotive. Here Ms Moore speaks not as a theorist but as a very experienced  practitioner. In doing so, she encapsulates beautifully the situation for  Category D students as they have been represented in this chapter. Before presenting a review of published and other research designed  to evaluate the effectiveness of the sorts of techniques recommended in  previous chapters, I want to reiterate an earlier comment related to the use  of categories when considering students behaviour. These categories are  to be used only as a way of identifying the most appropriate management  strategies for a respective student. This will allow teachers to efficiently  assist students to modify their behaviour, moving from Category D to C,  to B, to A.
The Developmental   Management Approach  DMA 8 To summarise Chapters 1 to 7, without effective behaviour management  a positive and productive classroom environment is impossible to achieve.  As discussed in Chapter 1, identifying the most effective techniques for  producing behaviour change and preventing the development of classroom  discipline problems is a moderately  stressful  part  of  many  teachers  professional lives Fields, 1986; Hart  et al., 1995; Johnson, Oswald   Adey, 1993; Lewis, 2001; Oswald et  al., 1997. Some report it as a serious  concern for teachers, administrators and the public Hardman  Smith,  2003; Macciomei, 1999, and a major reason for job dissatisfaction Liu   Meyer, 2005. Part of teacher concern is uncertainty about what approaches are most  justifiable. The need for confidence regarding the impact of particular  strategies is important to teachers. The ability to manage students effectively  is a crucial component of teachers sense of professional identity McCormick   Shi, 1999, and disciplinarian ranks third after leader and knowledge  dispenser in the metaphors teachers give for their work Goddard, 2000. There is a range of classroom management strategies designed to meet  the needs of students whose behaviour can be best described as belonging  to one of four levels, designated in Chapter 2 as Categories A, B, C or D.  These have been described in detail in Chapters 4 to 7 and include Hinting,  Punishment consequences, Recognition and Reward, and Discussion. It  is only by assuming all students are operating at level A that a teacher can  identify which students arent. Those who arent are then assumed to be at  level B, until it is observed that rewards and consequences are not enough  to stimulate responsible behaviour. Once this is the case we assume the students are operating at level C,  necessitating a number of one-on-one chats. If and when there is still no  Without effective behaviour management  a positive and productive classroom  environment is impossible to achieve. 

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     111 improvement in the students level of responsibility he or she is treated as a  D-level student. I have called this approach the Developmental Management  Approach DMA. It may be useful here to give a brief summary of the techniques appropriate to each category of student behaviour in this approach. Responding to A-level students: Hinting Non-verbal 1.	 Pausing 2.	 Moving closer to student 3.	 Looking at student 4.	 Checking students work Verbal 1.	 Describe the situation: There are a lot of kids making noise. Im sure some kids cant hear  properly. Most children are at their seats and ready to begin. 2.	 Give I-messages: When students push I get worried that someone may be hurt. Im pleased to see that most students have brought their stuff. 3.	 Restate the expectations: I thought that we agreed that no one should distract others from their  work Didnt we say that everyone had a right to feel safe? 4.	 Ask questions: What are you doing? Is that fair? Responding to B-level students: Recognitions  and consequences Recognise responsible behaviour of individual students  and the class as a whole 1.	 Provide non-verbal praise such as a smile, wink or nod or a specific  signal e.g. thumbs up.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour 2.	 Provide very specific verbal praise: Yu, thanks for working so hard today. It was good of you to help your classmate with that problem. 3.	 Communicate to others note in diary, note to level coordinator, letter  home, phone call to parents. 4.	 Provide special privileges, like choice over activities, free time, access  to a computer, or being a helper. 5.	 Provide material rewards like sweets or stationery. Assertively apply a series of increasingly severe  consequences for inappropriate behaviour 1.	 Explanation: Note body language; low-key if up close, assertive if  across the room. Identify the student, describe the inappropriate  behaviour, say why it is inappropriate by referring to the rights of  other children in the class and demand responsible behaviour. Ahmud  youre talking. Its disturbing others. They have a right to  work. Please be quiet. 2.	 Reassert:  I understand, but please be quiet  Be quiet  If you wish to discuss  it, we can do that after the lesson or at lunchtime. Right now, please be  quiet. 3.	 Offer choice and apply approximately four sequential steps, then  isolate the student. For example, move the student to an isolation seat  in the room and warn of the need for a talk later, then send out and  now treat as a Category C student: Nathan, you have a choice. Either you stop talking or you will need to  move to this seat  I dont intend to force you but if you dont move  then we will need to talk about it after class. Responding to C level students: One-on-one  discussions 1.	 Welcome and seek help to deal with the problem: Good to see you. I need you to help me understand what happened in  class. 2.	 State what the problem is, what effect it is having on others including  you and how it makes you feel:

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     113 When you talk while I am talking, I worry that the other kids cant hear. Im concerned that youre coming late, because it distracts others. 3.	 Listen  and paraphrase students facts and feelings. Reframe positively: You seem to be saying that you need to talk as you are worried that  So the reason you come late is  and its not your fault. 4.	 Confront the students argument. Try to show it is unreasonable: So what you are saying is that because I didnt see Eric talking I shouldnt  try to stop you preventing your friends from learning. Because you were angry, you figure its OK to hit Cleo and hurt her? 5.	 Get the students agreement that there is a problem: So you can see theres a problem. 6.	 Have the student provide a solution that meets both his or her, and  your, needs. If necessary suggest some: So what can you do about it? How can you be sure that you can arrive on time? Next time, rather than fight, what might you do instead? 7.	 Evaluate all the solutions and find one acceptable to both. Set a  timetable to evaluate its effectiveness: OK, then well try it until  and see how it goes. If after three or four discussions there is no improvement in the level  of responsible behaviour, consider the student as manifesting D-level  behaviour. Responding to D-level students: Mistaken goals There are two kinds of responses that need to be made to students exhibiting  Category D behaviour. The first is instructional and the second therapeutic. 1. Instructional Fight your first impulse try to understand that the student is hurting.

Encourage the student at every opportunity.

Separate the deed from the doer. Express a liking for the student while still 

applying logical consequences. Use consequences likely to rebuild selfconcept.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Show an awareness of some skill the student believes he or she is good 

at. If possible, set up a situation where you can observe the child being  competent. Have the child help you in a meaningful way.

Show some interest in something that interests the child.

Modify the childs curriculum usually D children are more kinaestheticvisual

rhythmic learners. 2. Therapeutic Collect enough data to be confident of the students mistaken goal.

Make the student aware of his or her mistaken goal.

Confront the student with the need to choose between his or her primary 

goal being liked and the mistaken goal. Inform the student privately, during class, of the mistaken goal as he or she 

misbehaves. Research support for the DMA In general terms, there are at least three main philosophies on classroom  discipline, each advocating particular techniques Lewis, 1997a, 1997b;  Wolfgang, 1995. Some educationalists argue that in order to promote  responsibility in children, teachers need to develop clear expectations  for student behaviour and then judiciously apply a range of rewards  and recognitions for good behaviour and punishments for misbehaviour  Canter  Canter, 1996; Swinson  Cording, 2002; Swinson  Melling,  1995. Others argue that the aim can only be attained by less emphasis  on student obedience and teacher coercion, and more on student selfregulation. The latter is facilitated by techniques such as negotiating,  discussing and contracting e.g. Freiberg, 1996; Pearl  Knight, 1998;  Schneider, 1996; Vitto, 2003; Wade, 1997. The third orientation favours  group participation and decision-making, whereby the group takes  responsibility for ensuring the appropriateness of the behaviour of all its  members Edwards  Mullis, 2003; Glasser, 1984; Schneider, 1996. In practice, however, most programs addressing classroom behaviour  management combine techniques from all three philosophies, with varying  emphases. Even a behavioural program such as Assertive Discipline, as it  has developed in schools, has incorporated counselling techniques Canter   Canter, 1996. Similarly, a heavily negotiation-oriented program such  as Stop, Think, Do includes the option of logical consequences Beck   Horne, 1992. The DMA outlined in Chapters 3 to 7 draws on a limited range of  strategies. I have recently completed research which examines the impact 

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     115 of these strategies in classrooms. The results are reported as they apply  to all students, whereas what is ideally required is an empirical study  of their suitability to children exhibiting differing levels of inappropriate  behaviour.  Nevertheless, the research is instructive in providing empirical  support for the techniques that comprise Developmental Management.  The research examined the impact of the teachers disciplinary strategies  on students feelings towards the teacher, their belief that the teachers  disciplinary behaviour is justified, and the extent to which they feel  distracted when teachers intervene Lewis, 2006. The findings indicate  that for all students, two of the five strategies discussed in Chapters 3 to 7  are very productive, two appear somewhat productive, and one has been  characterised as counterproductive.  Recognition and Reward for responsible behaviour and  Discussion and negotiation The techniques seen by students as most useful for generating positive  student reactions are the use of Recognition and Reward for responsible  behaviour, and participation in Discussions with students where a  negotiated outcome is achieved. The success of the latter technique is not  surprising. Many educators and researchers write in support of the benefits  of including students and negotiating with them. These techniques increase  a students sense of competency and belonging, which in turn leads to a  decrease in misbehaviour Anderman, 2002. According to Mitchell Beck  and James Malley 1998, however,  teacherstudent interactions in many  conventional classrooms do not make  for a sense of belonging for students.  This is most noticeably the case for  students at risk Beck  Malley, 1998  and the more challenging students, such as those displaying Category C  and D behaviour Ellis, Hart  Small-McGinley, 1998.  Given the extent to which Recognition and Reward relate to students  positive feelings towards the teacher, their belief that the teachers  disciplinary behaviour is more justified, and less perceived distraction when  teachers intervene to respond to student misbehaviour, teachers should feel  comfortable using techniques such as personal and group Recognition as  part of a plan for Developmental Management. Such a recommendation  is consistent with the views of a number of other researchers who promote  recognition of appropriate behaviour Buisson, Murdock, Reynolds   Cronin, 1995; Cavalier, Ferretti  Hodges, 1997; Swiezy, Matson  Box,  1992. As I have argued elsewhere Lewis, 2006, one of the reasons why  Many educators and researchers write  in support of the benefits of including  students and negotiating with them. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour recognition of the appropriate behaviour of students may be productive is  that it provides a way for a teacher to show students that he or she does  not dislike them. It reinforces the fact that the teachers emphasis is on  facilitating responsible behaviour and the protection of rights.  It needs to be noted, nevertheless, that there are a number of research  studies that have highlighted negative effects associated with the use of  Recognition and Reward Deci, Koestner  Ryan, 1999a, 1999b, 2001;  Kohn, 1993, 1996. According to critics of the use of Recognition and  Reward, if students were to be recognised for responsible behaviour their  sense of competence and commitment could be undermined. Their desire  to act responsibly would decrease once the motivators ceased. Ironically  therefore, according to Alfie Kohn 1993, by recognising and rewarding  responsible behaviour, teachers may make the students more dependent  and obedient, but less responsible. This argument clearly applies most readily to Category A students for  whom provision of a tangible reward is deemed inappropriate. This is also  why it is recommended in Chapter 5 that students displaying Category B  behaviour should be encouraged to realise that although their responsible  behaviour may be recognised, it is nonetheless obligatory for all students to  respect the rights of others at all times. This is also why it is recommended  to clarify that it is effort not behaviour that is being rewarded and why  teachers should minimise the use of rewards for individual students in  Category B as soon as practicable. A comprehensive empirical examination of the claims for and against  the use of reinforcements Akin-Little, Eckert, Lovett  Little, 2004  supports the position taken here and in Chapter 5, and indicates that  there is almost no downside to the use of extrinsic reinforcements when  they are verbal and make reference to the students social or academic  competence.  In partial summary, it seems appropriate to argue, as has been done  in Chapter 4, that teachers should provide reinforcement for responsible  behaviours by students exhibiting Categories B, C and D behavioural  patterns. In addition, as recommended in Chapter 6, with Category  C students they should be prepared to discuss the negative impact the  students behaviour has on others. As a part of this process, the students  perspective would be explored and clarified and, if necessary, confronted.  In addition, students should be encouraged to plan for a better future and  to negotiate different ways of behaving in class. The reason discussion is not recommended for Category A or B  students is not that such techniques are not helpful but that they are  generally inefficient. These students are able to distinguish between right  and wrong and typically only require reminding of this fact. 

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     117 Hinting Hinting appears moderately successful because it relates to students views  that the teachers disciplinary intervention is justified. However, once any  relationship that Hinting shares with the other five discipline techniques  investigated is removed, Hinting ceases to associate significantly with  any of the students attitudes. Consequently, there is no evidence for the  independent influence of Hinting on the average students belief that their  teachers classroom discipline procedures are justified. This limited effect  of Hinting is consistent with the recommendation in Chapter 4, that  Hinting is most applicable only to the most responsible students those  whose behaviour places them in Category A.  Punishment Having established empirical support for the value of Hinting when  dealing with Category A students, Recognition and Reward for B C and  D students, and Discussion for C students, it is instructive to consider  the situation for Punishment. Although this technique is recommended  as part of the DMA, it is reported in research to be of questionable value  Lewis, 2001, 2006. The circumstances surrounding Punishment indicate  that once the relationship between the use of Punishment and the other  five disciplinary techniques is removed it has very little unique effect  on students outcomes. That is, it ceases to relate to the extent to which  teachers disciplinary interventions are seen as justified or distracting,  although it does relate to having a negative attitude towards the teacher  Lewis, 2006. Consequently, the application of punishment, which  increases in severity when resisted or  ignored, may be of limited usefulness  in promoting responsible student  behaviour Lewis, 2001, 2006.  Given the use of Punishment in the  form of consequences within the DMA,  I further interrogated data that had  been analysed in my previous empirical  studies. On the understanding that teachers use of punishment coincides  with their use of aggression Lewis, 2001, and that any positive relationship  between student responsibility and punishment may be cancelled out by the  negative impact of aggression, additional analyses were carried out. The relationship between Punishment and both Personal and  Communal responsibility was examined while statistically correcting for  any relationship between punishment and aggression. However, since it is  likely that punishment may be having a different effect on the more and  The application of punishment, which  increases in severity when resisted  or ignored, appears to be of limited  usefulness in promoting responsible  student behaviour. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour less challenging students, these analyses were performed separately for  two groups of students. The first comprised students who reported that they misbehaved at  most only a little; the second group held those who said they misbehaved  sometimes or often. In each case, the relationship was positive and  statistically significant. However, the relationship between Punishment  and Personal responsibility was almost twice as great for the students who  misbehaved less. It was two and a half times as great for the relationship  between Punishment and Communal responsibility. These findings indicated the usefulness of calmly administered  punishment in promoting responsibility among students who misbehave  only occasionally. Since this is the main purpose for punishment in the  DMA, the results justified its recommended use. Teachers reflecting on DMA strategies A second opportunity arose to determine empirically the potential of the  techniques integral to the DMA. Four secondary schools had implemented  the program for approximately three years. I invited teachers at these  schools to complete an evaluation survey that sought to obtain two kinds  of information.  The first was an indication of whether strategies recommended within  the DMA were implemented, and if so, whether they were maintained.  The second part of the survey invited comments explaining why teachers  did or did not implement andor maintain the recommended strategies.  Ninety-six teachers provided responses.  The survey asked the staff to respond to each strategy using the  following key: Tried the strategy and 

use it on a regular basis  Tried the strategy, it worked but have 

stopped using it now  Tried strategy, it 

didnt work, have stopped using it  Didnt try

 strategy.  What follows is a summary of their ratings reported as percentages  and some analysis of their comments on each strategy. Other teachers  may find it helpful to compare their own reactions with feedback from  teachers who have some experience with the DMA. Strategy: Letting all students know that classroom rules are there to protect their rights Use It Stopped Didnt Work Didnt Try 81 14 0 5

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     119 The reasons given by teachers for using this strategy range from a  rules and control orientation:  Its school policy. because they respond well to helping students develop an awareness of their own actions and their  impact on others:  Reminding the student that the rules are there to serve them helps them  to respect them. Asking misbehaving students if they have the right to disturb their friends  is very powerful. and developing a positive educational environment: because it is rational, reasonable, logical and fair The main reason given by teachers who didnt use the strategy was that  students already knew the information.  Strategy: Recognising the appropriate behaviour of more challenging students  Use It Stopped Didnt Work Didnt Try 79 14 3 4 Some teachers emphasised the benefits of this strategy to themselves: I use it as I find it helps me to stay calm. Staying calm is itself a strategy, with positive benefits for students as well  as teachers. Others spoke of the effectiveness of the strategy in terms of  managing classroom behaviour and encouraging effort: Praise is the best way to get students to respond. Its good to get them on side. Encouragement is a very important tool and helps the more challenging  students to perform better. Although this can sometimes be difficult I try it as often as I can because  it produces effort by those students and harmony in class. It was also seen as useful in building rapport and mutual respect: Lets students feel they are being treated respectfully and fairly.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Among the insightful responses were those that approached it in terms  of building the self-esteem of the more challenging students: Helps them reflect on their goal, negative habitsself tasks. Its a start  towards reprogramming negative self-talk with more positive. Of teachers who didnt use the strategy, some said it was because it wasnt  deemed necessary: not needed, as students behaviour has been modified. I dont have challenging students. or they simply forgot to do it. Others were more introspective, examining  why they had experienced difficulty with this strategy: I find it difficult to alter my way of thinking and not to take a back step  and react to secondary behaviours. Strategy: Remaining calm when dealing with misbehaviour  Use It Stopped Didnt Work Didnt Try 85 11 3 0 Many teachers who used this strategy emphasised maintaining  rapport: It helps maintain your relationships with the student, keeps them in the  adult state; you can reach them more. or as a way to avoid escalatingexacerbating situations: to not amplify the situation and make it worse It calms students down instead of firing them up. If I remain calm and use a caring and understanding voice this calms  students. It was also seen as the way to ensure a reasonable and fair outcome: because I am the adult and it is my responsibility to keep a cool head  so that I can be fair Remaining calm is really important to enable you to keep perspective  and rational thought in dealing with misbehaviour. Other comments related to this are teachers need to feel in control of  themselves, and reduce the level of stress they experience:

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     121 Students are able to respond appropriately to your demands and you  feel in control. I feel less stressed and in control and kids dont get satisfaction from  pushing my buttons. to keep stress levels down  I dont want to work in a negative  environment. It helps me so that I dont lose my head. It is also seen as effective in altering behaviour: Usually this gets better results  students respond in a more positive  manner rather than getting aggressive. and as an efficient strategy: It shows that inappropriate behaviour can be eliminated without too  much fuss. The difficulty of consistently implementing this strategy is evident in  the reasons given for not using it. Some teachers blamed the situation or  students: I can find this really difficult  especially with children being disrespectful. Being calm is often too difficult when you are being constantly  challenged. Others saw it as too hard to do when they were under stress themselves,  for example tired or ill: As to remembering to use the strategy  it depends on how tired or run  down Im feeling. Sometimes when I am tired I still resort to old habits, so I have to keep  trying. The level of stress teachers experience in dealing with challenging  students is apparent in the responses relating to controlling their own  emotions: I use it and it does work, but sometimes I get very upset and do not  always remain calm. Cant yet always stay as calm as I would like  Im no saint and my  patience is still tried occasionally. Hard to remember to do it.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour I try to do this but I still get sucked in, then I say to myself I am not going  to do it that way again. Sometimes it works. I still do get a bit worked up sometimes but turn the anger into some  kind of a joke then go back to the rules. Its difficult to remain calm when multiple challenging students are  present in each class. I try to use it. It works so much better than getting angry. I do get   angry sometimes though, and I can feel straight away when I have  blown it. I try hard to stay calm. Sometimes I do find it hard but I am still using the  strategy as much as I can. In contrast with this, teachers with a control orientation saw it as simply  ineffective: It will not work for some students who interpret this approach as a  weakness or even tolerance. Doesnt always work. Some students respond well, others dont pay  attention. Strategy: Being critical of misbehaviour, not the student Use It Stopped Didnt Work Didnt Try 93 4 0 3 A very high proportion of teachers responded positively to this strategy,  emphasising the importance of distinguishing between students and their  behaviour: People are not the problem, their behaviour is the problem; people have  the option as to how they behave. or arguing that modelling appropriate behaviour is important: It helps teach them about appropriate behaviour. Students can see how modifying behaviour can occur, rather than  personalise the issue. Others valued the strategy in terms of maintaining their relationships with  students:

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     123 Keeps relationships at a level where discussions can take place. Important in maintaining student relationships with me. This strategy appealed also to those teachers who stressed the importance  of maintaining students self-esteem: Criticising behaviour rather than the students reduces the chance for  lowered self-esteem in the students. Its only the behaviour that is poor. I dont want the student to feel bad. or thought in terms of power relationships and student rights: We have no right to use sarcasm or put-downs  thats all about power  playing. This is only fair. Others recognised its efficiency: Its always more productive. It seems to result in having calmer and more productive conversations  with students. Teachers who did not use the strategy said it was because they find it  hard to separate the student from the behaviour, they revert to their old  ways, or: It doesnt always work as the student does not recognise his or her  error. Strategy: Using a series of increasingly severe consequences for misbehaviour Use It Stopped Didnt Work Didnt Try 80 10 1 10 Teachers use this strategy because it is perceived as working, that is,  being effective in achieving behavioural change: It works well and hopefully we never reach the more severe  consequences. It works  students respond after being moved to another seat. It works well and students behaviour improves halfway through the  stages of the process.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour It also demonstrates that there are consequences for inappropriate  behaviour: It shows that, in life, inappropriate behaviours have consequences that  increase in steps. This emphasises the inevitability of bad consequences for bad behaviour. The strategy is also appreciated because of its consistency  students know  and understand what to expect: The children know I will be consistent and they wont push it. They know whats coming and argue less. It also speaks to students expectations of fairness: The students have a strong sense of fairness and justice  they dont like  you pulling consequences out of a hat. It provides a sense of fairness to students and allows students to have  opportunity to change before facing serious consequences. Other teachers emphasised the opportunity created by this strategy  for student choiceinput in the process and for taking responsibility for  their own actions: Students know what to expect and make a choice  it becomes a choice  and not a punishment. In contrast, some teachers emphasised rules and control: If you back down students interpret this to mean they can and will get  away with bad behaviour. I use this strategy  following the discipline policy. I go through the school procedure for misbehaviour. Of teachers who did not use this strategy, some said it was because  they were inconsistent in applying it: I give too many warnings. I send students straight to Admin. Physical space poses a problem in some classrooms: I am trying to use the strategy, but it is difficult to move through the steps in  very small classrooms where there is not room to move a student. Often the  only choice is to swap one child with another one. This is very disruptive.

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     125 Others said they preferred other strategies: It works well for some but others want to be exited so I dont use it on  those. I prefer to negotiate the next step rather than move to a severe  consequence. Some emphasised the importance of dealing with students as individuals,  as the consequences imposed may not have the desired effect: I find I need to come up with a variety of consequences  students are  a very diverse group and not all severe consequences have the desired  effect. Some students play the system, which is difficult. Strategy: Exiting the students who continue to act inappropriately Use It Stopped Didnt Work Didnt Try 73 10 1 17 Some teachers use this strategy because they perceive that isolation is  effective: Students dont like not getting any attention and being away from the  grade. Exiting students who continue to act inappropriately gives them a jolt  and gives you a breather to gather your thoughts and deal with the  situation in the most appropriate way when the student returns. They can also see it as allowing the student time to calm down and think  about improving their subsequent behaviour: It can remove the behaviour from the room and give the student a  chance to calm down. It breaks the behaviour pattern, removes the distraction for other  students and allows time to reflect before calm discussion later. It seems to work with most students, who re-enter the class for the  following lessons, showing some improvement. A difficult student often needs to be separated from the rest of the group   I find this is the most effective method in bringing a change in the  students behaviour.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Teachers may exit a student to avoid further disruption through the flowon effect to other students: otherwise the student continues to muck up and this flows on to other  students They may also want to demonstrate the consequences for continual  disruption: to show that there are consequences for inappropriate behaviour For some children, if a warning has no effect, there needs to be another  consequence. It warns the middle-ground kids. Supporting the rights of other students was frequently given as the reason  for exiting a student: The other students are relieved when the disruptive student is finally  exited. It allows others to work and have my attention. It gives good kids the opportunity to do good work uninterrupted. It enables me to work with the ones who want to work. Teaching and learning can go on without too much disruption. Some saw it as a strategy for using their time efficiently: I have to continue with my teaching peacefully rather than wasting too  much time with inappropriate behaviour. The responses of others indicated that for them it was a matter of following  school policy, which ensured consistency: This is school policy. It maintains consistency. It allows for consistency in the classroom management process. There was a higher percentage of teachers who had not tried this  strategy than for most of the other strategies. Some of these said it was  because they had not needed to exit a student, or prior steps in the  discipline process were effective: I havent got to this point this year. Students usually respond to the other steps and this one is now not  needed.

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     127 Others expressed their reluctance to use it, or their preference for an  alternative: I feel exiting students makes them despise you  having a discussion on  their negative behaviour is more appropriate. Im trying to use this strategy but I dont like to keep on and on exiting  the same student. If their behaviour has improved but is still disruptive  Ive tried to keep the student in. Its difficult to know what to do. I try to deal with each student on my own  when I have exited students  it is for constant or serious misbehaviour. I only rarely use this strategy  its better for students to see you sort  issues out. Another group did not use it because they saw it as ineffective; it did not  lead to a change in student behaviour: Some students were never followed up and the consequences were  never severe enough  it doesnt work. In itself, it does not have any effect on the student. Strategy: Talking with students who are isolated, or exited from class, rather than  having another staff member talk with them Use It Stopped Didnt Work Didnt Try 89 4 0 6 Maintaining or building rapport with a student was the key factor for  many teachers who used this strategy: to help to build relationships with students  to ensure students  understand that it is their behaviour I am punishing, not the student By talking to students who are exited you are able to gain a better  understanding of what is happening for the student. It is more effective if I do it; it means more to the student. Responsibility was another: I always try to handle the problem myself. It is MY student. The students are my responsibility and I have to establish a working  relationship with them.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour I like to maintain control, unless the situation is very serious. This strategy was also seen as important in reinforcing or controlling  student behaviour: It is important that a dialogue occurs so that next lesson there are no  issues. It is important to discuss issues with students personally, to maintain  control of student management. Again, some phrased their response in terms of school policy: It is part of our school time-out policy. Teachers who did not use the strategy said it was because it did not  lead to change in behaviour: I dont feel any change in result. I found it was not effective  the student continued after a while. Teachers also mentioned time constraints: difficult to find time I use it when I can but dont always have the time. or lack of confidence: dont feel confident enough to speak to them, feel like Ill say the wrong  thing and escalate the situation In some schools this follow-up talking with the student was seen as the  responsibility of coordinators: Coordinators have been doing this for me, for students who are exited  from class. As a new teacher, it is very time-consuming. Also students  are misbehaving in other classes so the Coordinator is mostly giving  punishments. In our sub-school the coordinators do it all and then let you know. Strategy: Communicating to the more difficult students an awareness of their  competencies andor interests Use It Stopped Didnt Work Didnt Try 81 11 1 6 Building connections with the student was very important:

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     129 I will also talk to him about what he did on the weekend and incorporate  it. I am always trying to find out what interests them, to form some sort of  bond. I like to know who my students are  it gives us something to talk about  in detention. This was partly to understand the student, partly to demonstrate care and  support: It builds a relationship, shows youre interested and care. Shows you respect what the child is up to  they respect you more. Builds trust between us, and respect. to build relationship to enhance communication partly a way of personalising curriculum for all kids but also to show kids  that you really know them, therefore that you care Some teachers emphasised the need to build the students self-esteem,  to show them that they have strengths: It makes them feel good and they often cant see the things that they  are good at. Looking at positives helps them to have confidence in themselves. The behaviour is often attention-seeking, suggesting that self-esteem  needs building up. When I work in a classroom with difficult children I always do this   so their relationships, self-esteem and confidence will continue to  grow. Its very important to build their self-esteem and to get them to think  that theres someone who doesnt actually think that kids a pain in the  ass. This enhances the students motivation and achievement: positive reinforcement of positive actions and competencies, student  beginning to have a sense of positive achievement Works really well as students can see that they are good at things and  just need to try other things. It is also a strategy to improve behaviour:
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour As Coordinator I utilise this often to attempt to gain improvement in  general class behaviour. I try to get them on side so its easier to appeal to them. Reasons for not using this strategy are various. They include being too  busy, or too slack, even though teachers regard it as an important strategy: I havent made a serious attempt at this  flat out dealing with the other  issues. Time is the defining factor, there is never enough. Need to do it more. I can often slack in this. I could do this much more often. Others believed it did not work: These children often just dont want to listen or will not listen. I tried at the beginning but didnt see any point when the student  exhibited consistently negative behaviour. I found it was not effective: the student continued after a while. This works infrequently  like the weather  although I use it. They laugh at you. Not all their behaviour is acting out problems; to  many of them this is a sport. This works well in most cases. However, some difficult students will not  respond positively if this sort of communication is made in front of the  whole class. I have stopped using it because discussion with some students would  be repetitive. Strategy: Building a quality relationship with the more difficult students e.g. seeking  their help Use It Stopped Didnt Work Didnt Try 71 20 3 6 Quite a number of teachers had tried this strategy but had stopped using it,  while some had not tried it. Those who were not using it said they found it  challenging and it had not been successful, it was too time-consuming, or  it required a consistent commitment that was difficult to maintain within  the competing demands of teaching:

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     131 It is challenging. Sometimes it works, sometimes they dont want to  know me. I have done this but not 100 per cent effectively  some respond, some  dont. It has little or no effect on their attitude or performance. Some students resist this and I have not been successful in achieving  quality relationships with it. I use it only occasionally. Times a factor here. Theres a limit to how much time you can put in for someone you see a  few times a week. I have used this strategy but find it difficult to spend enough time to build  relationships. I have sometimes used it and it would be good to do more of this. Its just dropped out of my consciousness. Im preoccupied with the  other demands of teaching in and out of class. Those who continued to use the strategy said it gives the student a role  and connects them: All students are given jobs, so they feel important and recognised among  their peers. Keeps them busy, makes them connect with the class, shows value. Giving them some sense of responsibility makes difficult students feel  valued and could lead to improved behaviour. Helps develop leadership and responsibility. I usually enlist the help of students who are hard to control. They  cooperate well and start seeing me as a mate. Increasing the students connectedness was seen as increasing their  willingness to work: If a child feels that you care about them, they are more willing to make  an effort for you. Sometimes the thing that forms the relationship is something you could  never have thought of, for example I collect the jigsaw dinosaurs from  chip packets  a difficult student now collects them for me and we are  mates. He now completes his work.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Improving communication was another outcome mentioned: I find that you will gain their respect and they will communicate with you  much better. Theyre more likely to listen to what you say if they trust you and think  you like them. This made them more likely to cooperate andor resist misbehaving: They are more willing to cooperate and learn. The student responds in a positive and less aggressive manner. Because students require support, very important to help build supportive strategies for the student it was seen as providing positive attention and increasing self-esteem: It works well. They seem to get the attention they need without having  to find it by acting out. If you find a task that a student is good at, it helps you develop a  relationship with them and makes them feel needed or wanted. Positive reinforcement makes them feel good about themselves. The teacher also benefits by understanding the student better: I listen to why they are behaving as they are, their reasons, try to make  some sense of it. Understanding them certainly helps when I need to try to comprehend  their behaviour. I like to get to know the whole person, not just their bad student  persona. Most importantly, the teachers who used it said it works, eventually: I always keep trying because it leaves the door open and in years to  come students remember. They ease back and tell you they appreciated  it even if they didnt show it at the time. Strategy: Trying to engage the more difficult students by adjusting curriculum  delivery e.g. including greater student interaction, movement, visuals  Use It Stopped Didnt Work Didnt Try 79 12 4 4

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     133 Teachers who found that this strategy worked for them said it gives the  student an experience of success and increases motivation: Success for students with difficulties is very important as it enhances  self-esteem. where possible, modifying expectations, tasks, helping with organisation  and management Finding areas where difficult students feel they can achieve positive  results will make them feel better about their learning. Its common sense  try to get them on track and some early success  to build on so that the situation is not complicated by their avoidance of  failure behaviour. Furthermore, some teachers said students were also less likely to be  difficult if they are engaged in the learning experience: If I make the curriculum exciting the difficult students are not so difficult. I do use this strategy without singling them out. I achieve this by  incorporating visuals, movement etc. as a whole class focus. I just find  that it really works well for those students who need that kind of stimulus  or are more challenging. If they are all engaged it makes life easier for everyone in the  classroom. Meeting individual learning needs of students was part of this: Different courses for different horses. I use lots of visual prompts, MI  stuff, auditory, music, tactilekinaesthetic. I plan lessons to appeal to all levels. It works  everyone learns differently. Those teachers who did not use the strategy said that it doesnt work: Some students just dont want to be engaged no matter how much time  and effort goes into what you set up. It hardly makes any difference  they dont want to work so, no matter  what, they dont respond. I modified the work but the students still refused to cooperate. Class sizes were seen as an issue in relation to this strategy, It can be difficult in a larger class, always try to differentiate curriculum.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour as was the need for greater organisation, time, resources: Still try to use it at times but it is often hard to find the opportunity. It is too hard to run pracs with no cash-ola. I dont have a choice of resources. I find it very difficult to plan for the needs of all the students. Time is a  big deterrent to this. Its not always easy to adjust curriculum because of photocopying  expenses and lack of time. Diversity in the classroom was seen as a complicating factor: Its too much to adjust for learning styles as well as difficult students. I try and use it but its not always possible due to the mixture of students  in classes. Regularly used for most of the class but this dumbs it down for the onethird of academic students as it is too slow for them. Teachers also spoke of the need to develop the skills for this approach: I need to be more flexible and work outside my comfort zone. Im not as flexible in this area  I feel very passionate about my subject.  If they dont engage Im disappointed but if most are with me I tend to  let the few who arent slip through the net. trying to do this  need more expertise in this The simplest responses were: I dont want to. Ive found personal connection outweighs mode of delivery of work. Strategy: Providing opportunities for difficult students to achieve success by altering  the types of assessment Use It Stopped Didnt Work Didnt Try 63 10 3 22 This strategy was the least used and the least tried. As would be expected,  many of the responses were expressed in terms of the requirements of the 

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     135 school, curriculum, or some other form of constraint. Some teachers said  they had never needed to try this strategy. Others gave more personal  responses: I did not try this because it affects the relationship between the teacher  and other students in the class. Modified tasks are offered only to  students who have difficulty, not to those who are difficult. Im still trying. This is a challenging one and I am trying to improve my  knowledge and understanding of a broad range of assessments. I would like to have time to explore this option. I would still do this occasionally, but not often enough  lack of time. I have used this but find it difficult to cater for all abilities. Some teachers said it doesnt work: Difficult students do not want to follow instructions no matter what. Even given different options, difficult students dont care and persist in  being difficult. Others had experienced difficulty in implementing it: Difficult students appreciate this but others want similar work and then  debate starts. Teachers who did regularly use this strategy saw it as part of catering  for individual needs: I have to cater for what they can achieve. I build into my teaching a range of assessment tasks to service all  students in the class. I use this because individuals learn differently, so I try and assess them  on how they learn best. or a way of building confidenceself-esteema sense of achievement: I modify work so difficult students can have some sense of  achievement. This empowers students to learn and achieve success. Students need initial success to build on further success. Difficult students usually have poor literacy skills, struggle to complete  tasks, so altering types of assessment helps them to stay focused.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour One teacher said effort requires recognition: If they try and persist they deserve rewards. What did Einstein say?  Pass them all, life will find them out! Comments Overall, the data indicates that in practice, the strategies recommended  within the DMA are seen by those using them as very helpful. The  proportion of staff finding a given strategy useful ranges from 73 to 97 per  cent, although in most cases between 5 and 20 per cent of teachers tried  the strategy and found it worked but have stopped using it. This tendency  for some staff to return to old and less productive habits is a cause for  concern and will be addressed in the next chapter. The most challenging  strategies relate to noticing when challenging students are behaving well  and giving recognition for this, and to building quality relationships with  these challenging students.  Many staff appeared to find it difficult to express their reasons for  adopting or not adopting, or not maintaining approaches to classroom  management. A number of respondents simply described what they did  without giving a reason. Inspection of the reasons why teachers chose to adopt strategies  advocated by the DMA reveals that they found the strategies of value  because they: provide clear, consistent and logical expectations

empower students

minimise future misbehaviour, enhance student self-esteem and the quality 

of teacherstudent relationships build rapport between teacher and students

aid student achievement and feelings of success

meet individual learning needs. 

The reasons teachers gave for choosing not to adopt strategies advocated  by DMA included: They forget them in the hustle and bustle of the classroom.

They find it too challenging.

They lack time and other resources.

Tiredness or illness make it difficult.

They need to develop specialised knowledge or skill particularly in relation to 

strategies involving curriculum design and individualised assessment. A number of respondents suggested that they didnt use some of the  strategies because they didnt need to. Others indicated that they did not  adopt strategies because they didnt work. 

The Developmental Management Approach DMA     137 Having identified how aggressive disciplinary strategies such as  yelling in anger, group punishment and sarcasm may be avoided by using  techniques related to the needs of students, one might assume its a simple  thing for all teacher aggression towards students to be removed from a  school. Unfortunately, its not that easy. The final chapter will consider  the process of support for teachers trying to increase their use of more  productive classroom management techniques.
Teacher support 9 Development of responsible behaviour As explained in Chapter 1, since the 1980s there has been great interest  in how schools can facilitate the development of responsible behaviour  in students, and of all the school-related factors influencing student  responsibility, classroom management is among the most potent Ingersoll,  1996; Lewis, 1997b, 2001. Observational studies of classrooms e.g.  Gottfredson et al., 1989; Kounin, 1970 and surveys of teachers, students  and parents e.g. Hyman  Snook, 2000; Lewis, 2001, 2006; Lewis et al.,  2005, 2007 have been used to identify the most effective strategies for  teachers in achieving responsible student behaviour. As was also discussed in the same chapter, when teachers verbally abuse  children, humiliate them by the use of sarcasm, frequently and repeatedly  send them out of class, or impose arbitrary and harsh punishments, their  students are more likely to be absent from school. They are also more likely  to be disengaged from schooling, lacking in interest or motivation, and  experiencing a range of feelings such as guilt, resentment or rebelliousness  Hyman  Snook, 2000; Lewis, 2001, 2006; Lewis et al., 2007. In contrast, students who are more responsible have a teacher who is  more likely to discuss misbehaviour with them, involve them in decisionmaking, hint when they misbehave, and recognise their appropriate  behaviour. The results are consistent across all levels of schooling Lewis,  2001 and across three national settings Lewis et al., 2005, 2007. Other  studies have shown that students who describe their teachers as displaying  anger, and using various forms of aggressive behaviour, become less  interested in the subjects being taught Henderson, Fisher  Fraser, 2000;  Lewis  Lovegrove, 1988. However, as indicated in the last chapter, knowing about a technical  classroom management repertoire, like that outlined in Chapters 4 to 7, is  not sufficient. Teachers may wish to use educationally justifiable models of 

Teacher support    139 management, in which they act as role models for responsible behaviour  Fenstermacher, 2001. But they also want to quickly gain the amount of  order that is essential if classroom learning is to take place Barton, Coley   Wenglinsky, 1998. What the teacher sees as best practice may also be  at odds with the way he or she was treated in childhood. As highlighted in Chapter 1, classroom discipline is a well-documented  source of teacher stress e.g. Borg, Riding  Falzon, 1991; Friedman,  1995, 2006; Lewis, 1999. Significantly, the teachers most likely to be  using counter-productive discipline techniques are those less likely to ask  for help Lewis, 1999. They often feel unsupported by their colleagues,  and the issue is seen as threatening to their status and career. Bill Rogers  research 2002 shows that even when other teachers want to assist there  remains a perceived risk in asking for or giving support.  It has been shown that improvements in classroom management can  be stimulated by the provision of focused, short-term  teacher training.  However, while behavioural change lasting for a few weeks or months  is possible to achieve, relatively few individuals maintain a more lasting  behaviour change Emmer  Aussiker, 1990; Hart et al., 1995, particularly  when it comes to dealing with the more challenging students. Currently  therefore, a central research question is how to produce sustainable  improvement in teachers classroom management behaviour.  What will be outlined in this  chapter is a whole-school approach to  supporting teachers attempting change  in classroom management behaviour.  It is premised on the assumption  that  creating  professional  work  environments where teachers feel  supported by other professionals and  school leaders in relation to their own needs for competence, autonomy,  and quality relationships, is essential to their decision to create these  conditions for students Roeser, Eccles  Sameroff, 2000, p. 466. The need for teacher support  Recent research on professional development PD conducted for the  Department of Education, Science and Training by the Australian Council  for Education Research is critical of most PD programs. The criticism  relates to the short-term nature of the PD, which is generally found to  be ineffective. The report states that ensuring opportunities for every  teacher to receive at the elbow support and coaching during the difficult  phase of implementing significant change in the classroom is a feature of  effective programs Ingvarson, 2005. Creating professional work environments  where teachers feel supported by other  professionals and school leaders  is  essential to their decision to create these  conditions for students.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Strategies of Developmental Classroom Management Below are 14 suggestions for teachers to consider when working with childrens  challenging behaviour, The aim is to avoid the use of need for aggressive  disciplinary techniques like yelling in anger, attacking sarcasm, group  punishment etc.    1.	 Letting all students know that expectations for appropriate classroom  behaviour are based on the rights of other students to work and to   feel safe.   2.	 Noticing when the more challenging students respect other students  rights and saying something nice or providing some other kind of  recognition. Recognising the effort required to act responsibly, rather than  the behaviour itself.    3.	 Minimising the use of rewards for effort by talking to students about  the need for rights and responsibilities so that the effort they require to  act responsibly is reduced. Nevertheless, trying to balance reward and  punishment for all students.   4.	 Remaining calm when dealing with misbehaviour.   5.	 Hinting when students arent acting responsibly. Moving from less  interventional techniques pausing, moving closer, checking work to verbal  hints aimed at student responsibility.   6.	 Explaining why misbehaviour is unfair to other students before telling  students how to behave properly or giving them consequences.   7.	 Using a series of increasingly severe consequences for misbehaviour when  students argue or repeat the misbehaviour.   8.	 Exiting students who continue to act inappropriately   9.	 Talking with students who are isolated, or exited from class, rather than  having another staff member talk with them. 10.	 Emphasising that students not only need to act appropriately Personal  responsibility, but also need to encourage their classmates to act  appropriately Communal responsibility. For example, rewarding and  punishing Communal responsibility more heavily than Personal, discussing  Communal responsibility when setting up expectations for appropriate  behaviour, and when Hinting. 11.	 Communicating to the more difficult students an awareness of their  competencies andor interests. 12.	 Building a quality relationship with the more difficult students e.g. seeking  their help, watching them be competent at lunchtime. 13.	 Trying to engage the more difficult students by adjusting curriculum  delivery e.g. including greater student interaction, movement, visuals. 14.	 Trying to give the more difficult students a greater chance to do well on  assessments by including more visual and kinaesthetic tests like drawing  posters, making models and drama. OTHER Please specify. Figure 9.1  Strategies of developmental classroom management The DMA Approach to Classroom Behaviour Copyright  Lewis 2008

Teacher support    141 Having identified a range of classroom management strategies in  Chapters 4 to 7 and established their usefulness in Chapter 8, in the  remainder of this chapter I will outline and justify the support component  of the DMA. I will also report some more data from the 96 teachers who  have been involved in this school-based approach. The support aspect of the DMA combines three key elements:  1.	 Identifying a range of helpful classroom management strategies. 2.	 Identifying a clear set of behaviours to indicate teachers in need of  support. 3.	 Establishing and maintaining a clear, functional support structure  for teachers, not dependent on administrative staff. This may include  collegial teams or a buddy. Teachers within a number of schools in Australia have worked  collaboratively with the author for up to nine years to implement and  maintain a school-wide system of support for colleagues attempting to  improve the effectiveness of their classroom management. In general the  kind of management strategies they are trying to avoid include a raised  angry voice, the use of sarcasm, name-calling, arbitrary and excessive  punishment, group punishments, sending students out without intermediate  steps, or sending challenging students to other teachers to be fixed.  Identifying teachers who may need support could be deemed unethical  unless they can be offered effective assistance to enable them to improve. To  highlight some classroom management techniques that may be of assistance  to teachers within a particular school, strategies extracted from the DMA  are offered to staff for comment. Figure 9.1 page 140 outlines the form of  evaluation undertaken by staff. In general, out of the many occasions this  has been done, teachers supported all but one or two of the strategies. Once a teacher in need of support is identified, discussions between  the teacher seeking support and supportive colleagues focus on which  of the 14 strategies might be of assistance. They then work out ways of  having the teacher systematically implement the strategies identified. They  also decide how to give feedback to the teacher on how well they have  been implemented and their impact on students. Setting up a support system Some schools implementing the DMA have chosen to set up support  systems for staff by focusing on a particularly challenging class. Then,  all teachers of that class meet to discuss the strategies of management  recommended as part of the DMA. Once some are identified as potentially  useful, staff working with the challenging class meet regularly to report  on their implementation and success. With agreement, they can observe  each other employing the techniques and offer co-collegial coaching.
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Please indicate below who you would prefer to speak with you if it is  thought that you might need some sort of support.  Your colleagues  would then be expected to pass any concern on to this contact person. If there were a need I would wish                        to contact me. The sort of support that could be useful would be: Please tick one or more, and, if possible, write in the name of the person  you wish to provide the support.    1.	 Having a place to put a difficult student until I can talk to him or her.  Person to provide support:                      .   2.	 Having someone I can trust to listen to me talk about how I am feeling.  Person to provide support:                      .   3.	 Have more time so I am able to talk through the issue with a student.  Person to provide support:                      .   4.	 Have someone I trust listen to me talk about the techniques I am using  with the student.  Person to provide support:                      .   5.	 Get someone to model techniques that might work with this student.  Person to provide support:                      .   6.	 Get advice on who the student can be referred to.  Person to provide support:                      .   7.	 Have someone watch me working with the student and offer advice on  what else to do.  Person to provide support:                      .   8.	 Get more information about classroom management techniques.  Person to provide support:                      .   9.	 Get information on the students behaviour in other settings.  Person to provide support:                      . 10.	 Have someone mediate between me and the student.  Person to provide support:                      . 11.	 Get more information on what works and doesnt work in other classes  with this student. Person to provide support:                      . OTHER Please specify. What sort of support would you be willing to offer your colleagues? Please write your name clearly:                                   Figure 9.2  Request for staff to nominate buddies The DMA Approach to Classroom Behaviour Copyright  Lewis 2008

Teacher support    143 An alternative approach, adopted by other schools, has required each  staff member in a school to identify a buddy. Buddies are colleagues  named by each staff member who are expected to approach that staff  member exhibiting trigger behaviour and who therefore may be in need of  support. To identify a staff member who could act as a buddy, all staff are  asked to complete a form like that shown in Figure 9.2 page 142.  Despite concerns from some teachers in the schools using the DMA  that only a few teachers would be chosen as buddies, there have only been a  few occasions where a potential buddy was forced to decline a nomination  because of multiple nominations. Obviously not all staff need a buddy, but  to avoid the possibility of having teachers feel singled out if they were to  participate in the buddy process, all staff are invited to take part.  Once each teachers buddy is identified and recorded, the next stage of  the process, identification of triggers for support, is undertaken.  There are two kinds of triggers that activate support for teachers. The first  take the form of aggressive classroom management techniques such as: aggressive disciplinary behaviour

yelling in anger at misbehaving students

using sarcasm to control misbehaviour

calling misbehaving students names like idiot

punishing students without giving a warning

not recognising the good behaviour of difficult students

sending students out of class without intervening steps

regularly sending more than two students out of class 

keeping the class in when only some kids misbehaved.

Techniques such as these are discussed by school staff, and those agreed  upon by at least 80 per cent become formal triggers. The second set of indicators focuses on what teachers might not be  doing rather than what they are doing. Some staff can avoid manifesting  aggressive disciplinary techniques by copping out of their classroom  management responsibilities. These responsibilities relate to pursuing  minimal expectations for student classroom behaviour that staff agree  are crucial to the culture of their school and that all staff in the school are  expected to police.  How teachers ensure that students live up to these expectations is a  personal decision. It might take the form of personal intervention or just  informing an appropriate staff member. However, failure to respond in  any form when students ignore these expectations is taken by colleagues  as a sign that the teacher may require support. This is only when at least  80 per cent of staff agree that such expectations are essential for students.  The assumption is made that the teacher wanted to act responsibly and  had the knowledge and skills necessary to ensure that students lived up 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour to minimal expectations. In general, the sorts of expectations for students  that teachers have highlighted relate to respectful communication, respect  for property and no intentional disruption of learning. Using these two sets of triggers for support is an essential aspect of the  DMA. Clearly there is a difference between support and accountability.  It is necessary for staff to agree that the triggers are triggers for concern  about the welfare of a colleague, not triggers for a performance review or  evaluation. This is easy to say, but it takes a long time to permeate some  school cultures. As discussed in Chapter 1, there are elements of risk in offering  teachers professional development programs. Teachers most challenged  by classroom management as many as 30 may actually be damaged  by the process of attempting change. Expectations are raised by the skills  development program and initial success, but when they find they cannot  maintain the behavioural change, they may become self-critical, depressed,  or resort to denial of the problem, making later efforts to change more  difficult Lewis, 1999.  It has already been noted that teachers who are more concerned about  their inability to discipline students in the way they would prefer are less  likely to share their concerns. They are also more likely to worry and to  blame themselves for getting it wrong.  Recent research Lewis, 2008 indicates that coping strategies such  as these bring about the likelihood of more teacher aggression in the  classroom. Consequently, it is vital that selected buddies approach their  friend when triggers are activated, rather than expect stressed staff to seek  help. It may be the only way to break the cycle of more stress  more nonproductive coping  more teacher aggression  more student misbehaviour   more teacher stress. The question now is, what does support look like?  Characteristics of support The first characteristic is that whatever support is, its between the staff  member and the support team or buddy and involves no one else unless the  stressed teacher requests additional help. Consequently, even when a staff  member is approached by a level coordinator regarding a stressed buddy, he  or she is not permitted to say who suggested the possible need for support. If the potentially stressed staff member requests it, the buddy can  report in confidence that there is some sort of misunderstanding and all  is well, but cannot disclose the name of the staff member concerned. The  usual approach by a buddy takes an open form, for example How is it  going in Year 9? Teachers need to be aware that many of the things they  may feel inclined to say in support of a buddy may not necessarily be  perceived by the buddy as helpful. 

Teacher support    145 Statements identified by staff in over 20 schools as not very helpful  include the following: Its OK, theres no reason to be upset. Im surprised, because hes never like that for me. Dont worry too much, lifes like that. You know what you should do. But I can see how he could react that way because  Oh, you poor thing. Remember, youve only got five years to go to retirement. Maybe youre really upset because as a child you  Dont worry about that kid, hes just a moron. Youve got to show these kids whos boss. Supportive statements identified by staff as more helpful include:  Just let it all out. Say exactly what happened. So if I hear you correctly the problem seems to be  How about a beer  or a cup of coffee? Do you want to talk to someone else about it? Is there anything I can do to help? In addition to verbal support, teachers in schools which introduced  the DMA identified a number of other useful elements of support, which  were then rated using a 4-point scale; Definitely helpful, Probably helpful,  Not sure and Not helpful. Table 9.1 page 146 indicates how helpful 507  teachers in 23 schools rated these elements. Inspection of these responses indicates the teachers believe that time  to talk one on one with students exhibiting Category C behaviour would  be very useful. It is relevant to repeat that in some of the schools using the  DMA, rather than sending students to senior teachers, the senior teachers  are called to come and hold the class while the teacher takes the Category  C student aside for a chat.  In addition to time, teachers clearly see the advantage in having a place  to put a Category C student until the talk can take place. Consequently, as  explained earlier, in a number of schools implementing the DMA, exited  Category C students are sent to the schools main reception area where  office staff redirect them to the back of a class that differs by two year  levels from their own. 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Table 9.1  The usefulness of various forms of support Elements of Support Definitely  Helpful Probably  Helpful Not  Sure Not  Helpful Have more time so I am able to talk  through the issue with a student. 72 23 4 2 Get information on the students  behaviour in other settings. 54 37 4 2 Have a place to put a difficult  student until I can talk to him or her. 57 32 7 5 Get more information on what works  and doesnt work in other classes  with this student. 56 37 5 2 Have someone I trust listen to me  talk about how I am feeling. 50 33 11 7 Get advice on who the student can  be referred to. 49 39 8 4 Have someone I trust listen to me  talk about the techniques I am using  with the student. 48 39 10 3 Get someone to model techniques  that might work with this student. 45 37 11 3 Get more information about  classroom management techniques. 36 48 10 6 Have someone watch me working  with the student and offer advice on  what else to do. 25 39 23 12 Have someone mediate between me  and the student. 18 35 27 19 Interestingly, these schools prefer the use of administrative staff because  they have found Category C students more likely to cooperate with the office  staff than with teachers  less legitimate power, I suspect. Other supports  identified by a majority of staff as definitely helpful include a buddy to  talk with, more information about the students behaviour in other settings,  particularly information about what management techniques work with  these students. Very questionable supports include mediation and coaching,  which no more than a quarter of teachers see as definitely helpful. When students are exited, they are given a questionnaire to be completed  while they are in the back of the sitter class. Figure 9.3 reproduces this 

Teacher support    147 You were asked to leave the classroom.  Please write the date and your year level. Circle whether you are male or female: Date:               Year Level:               Sex:  Male  Female We would appreciate it if you could give us some idea why this has happened. Circle letters to show why you think you are here. Be as honest as you can. SA  strongly agree A  agree D  disagree SD  strongly disagree   1.	 The teacher hates me:	 SA    A    D    SD   2.	 I distracted others from their work:	 SA    A    D    SD   3.	 I made other people feel unsafe:	 SA    A    D    SD   4.	 I made the teacher angry:	 SA    A    D    SD   5.	 I argued with the teacher:	 SA    A    D    SD   6.	 I hurt the feelings of other students:	 SA    A    D    SD   7.	 I ignored the teachers instructions:	 SA    A    D    SD   8.	 The teacher just picks on me:	 SA    A    D    SD   9.	 I made too much noise:	 SA    A    D    SD 10.	 I arrived late to class:	 SA    A    D    SD 11.	 I did not have equipment for class 	 SA    A    D    SD Think carefully about this teacher and this subject. Would you say:   1.	 The teacher likes me:	 SA    A    D    SD   2.	 I like the teacher:	 SA    A    D    SD   3.	 I like the subject:	 SA    A    D    SD   4.	 I am angry about being sent out:	 SA    A    D    SD   5.	 The teacher acts unfairly:	 SA    A    D    SD Please answer the questions on the other side of this sheet. Figure 9.3  Exit questionnaire The DMA Approach to Classroom Behaviour Copyright  Lewis 2008
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour 1.	 Before you were told to leave the room did you receive any other  punishments? Please circle.	 Yes  No 2.	 If you answered YES to question 1, how many other punishments   did you receive? Please circle.    
2    3    4    more than 4 The following questions are about other times you may have been asked to  leave the room. 1.	 Have you been asked to leave the classroom on other   occasions?	 Yes  No 2.	 If you answered YES, did the teacher explain why you had   to leave?	 Yes  No 3.	 Before you were told to leave the room on other occasions,   did you receive any other punishments first?	 Yes  No 4.	 If you answered YES  how many? Please circle. 	
2    3    4    more than 4 5.	 Did the teacher talk with you later?	 Yes  No 6.	 If you answered YES  please say if the teacher: Please circle. 	 Tried to help you to understand why your behaviour   was unacceptable?	 Yes  No 	 Tried to explain that you were stopping other kids   from learning?	 Yes  No 	 Tried to explain that you were making other kids feel  uncomfortable?	 Yes  No 	 Tried to help you see that you had done the   wrong thing?	 Yes  No 	 Tried to get you to work out a better way to   behave?	 Yes  No 	 Just told you off?	 Yes  No Thank you for answering this questionnaire. Figure 9.3  Exit questionnaire continued The DMA Approach to Classroom Behaviour Copyright  Lewis 2008

Teacher support    149 questionnaire, which provides school-wide feedback on students views  of why they have been exited. As a teacher more skilfully implements the  DMA, it is assumed exited students should be able to see that the reason the  teacher asked them to leave was because their behaviour interfered with the  learning of other students or their right to feel safe. It was not because the  teacher did not like them.  The questionnaire also provides feedback on whether the teacher  who exited the student conducted a follow-up adult-to-adult discussion.  This provides more data for the school. In theory, the more teachers have  discussions with students, the clearer it becomes that the teachers sole  motive for exiting a student is his or her obligation to protect the learning  and safety rights of other students. In order to examine the experience of staff in four secondary   schools which had been, in theory, implementing the support component  of the DMA for at least two years, a survey of staff was carried out.  The teachers in these schools were asked what sort of support from  colleagues and from the school structures and management is necessary  for teachers to implement the classroom management strategies of the  DMA. Necessary supports The type of support teachers said was necessary was extracted from their  written comments. Each theme is exemplified by written comments and  includes the following: 1  Buddy  someone to send the student to  a colleague to accept the student when they are exited having somewhere to send the students continual placing of difficult students into other classes Buddy  etc. Another teacher to place kids with for short times 2  School-wide consistency and commitment School and teachers need to be all in agreement. Common language goals and approach empowers staff as a whole   increases success. consistent approach across all coordinators working all together as united and same front
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour Often get comment of but in Mrs  class we can having a sharedagreed approach with specific difficult students 3  Ongoing PD practice to get up routine or language ongoing PD consistent refreshers, more role plays needs to be revisited and invigorated periodically 4  Access to information via professional learning teams structured professional discussion talking about strategies, sharing ideas about strategiestechniques need to discuss progress with others who encounter the same students discussion of strategies discussion of ideas discussingsharing ideas for rewards and creative consequences sharing of ideasplansstrategies that diddont work more sharing of ideas for difficult students 5  Communication follow-up on incidents, letting me know if someone in my grade is  involved in an incident background info on students maintaining profile of this style of approach follow-up, communication about students issues 6  Collegial support confidential sounding boards a listening ear 7  Mentoringmodelling mentoring modelling

Teacher support    151 8  Observationfeedback observation positive feedback Some teachers require another individual in class to observe, provide  feedback and offer suggestions on alternative strategies. Observation frequent. Non-judgmental. Collaboratively critical. 9  Structurestransparent processes and rules policies, procedures people to coordinate more time needs to be spent on simplifying processes in schools to  allow for these changes to be made a structured process, a consistent flow of procedures 10  Resourcestime time-out area more time, less students time and space to conduct conversations coordinators and Welfare staff with sufficient time to handle referrals;  sufficient space in the week to be able to modify assessment tasks more resources 11  Induction revisit strategies to inform new staff members 12  Opportunities for relationship-building opportunities to get to know students and form relationships outside  their classroom time allowances for relationship-building  whole-school events to provide stimulus 13  Curriculum support differentiated curriculum, curriculum committee to approve
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour 14  Parental support support from coordinatorsparents whole-school community support full support from parents 15  Leadershipmanagement back-up support from admin and level coordinators whole-school community support full support from colleagues, principal Welfare Coordinator and outside agencies and admin support also working as consistent group bringing into line those that arent consistent coherent and strong support at Coordinator and Welfare level more belief in what the teacher says as opposed to the students point  of view support from the managementprincipal team, coordinators and leadership teams in terms of ideas, enforcement, contacting parents, etc. 16  Building social connections Friday night drinks and talk Received support Having established what was perceived as necessary, teachers rated the  level of support received. To indicate the extent to support, teachers were  given four alternatives and asked to choose one. The alternatives were  No Support, Little, Some, and Full Support. Once they had responded,  teachers were asked to explain their selection. Level of collegial support received No Support Little Support Some Support Full Support 2 8 59 30 The range of justifications for selecting full support included receiving  Advice from colleagues and participating in Staff discussions:  I always get support from the school and the teachers. They always  make themselves available if I need advice.

Teacher support    153 A number of colleagues gave me a variety of strategies to use with  tougher students. Peer support person offered assistance with ideas and feedback.  Support from team members through discussion and ideas and  feedback. Usually when I am worried about something happening in my class I talk  about it with my colleagues  and ask what I should do or just debrief.  This usually helps. great support with staff helping each other, being there for each other discuss problematic situations and exchange ideas to cope with them The use of a Buddy system was also considered, as was Consistency  and Role modelling: full support from my buddy I put students in other staff members classes and vice versa but this  could be more frequent and accessible, especially for team teaching. Colleagues are supportive by accepting exited students in their  classrooms. They share materials but need to find a way to make this  sharing more efficient. all using same language and formed a united group classroom management plans, however very diverse among colleagues consistent role modelling from others Others suggested that Back-up and DiscussionMeetings were crucial:  I am always backed up by the teachers. We discussed how we were implementing the strategies at a wholeschool meeting. good support from talking and discussing strategies, but could be better verbal discussion and comment that made me feel justified and that it  was quite OK. As was Transparency in structuresprocesses, as well as Ongoing PD:  PD flowchart We are aware of the people to go to for specific things  it is a transparent  chain. opportunity to attend whole-school PD and follow-up
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour The unsupported Staff who indicated that they did not feel that support was provided  suggested that:  We have had opportunities for sharing but we are still not open enough  as a whole staff because we have sceptics or non-participants who  pretend to be practising positive relationships but actually are not. not always feasible to have a buddy given classroom and timetable  arrangements Level of administrative support received No Support Little Support Some Support Full Support 1 8 51 40 The main justifications for selecting some or full support included the  Removal of students, Availability, and Follow-up PD:  difficult student removed from class for a few lessons depending on availability and whether they were in the school at the  time difficult when hierarchy left the school for meetings Administration can be busy when you need them, but they are there  when they can be. follow-up PD on how we are using strategies just discussed at a whole-school meeting in house PD re: Role playing conversations Other staff discussed factors such as Management  advicesupport,  Structures, Consultation, and the delivery of Feedback:  Management team are always willing to offer support. I feel that the school is supportive of helping me in any difficult situations.  I dont feel that I have to tackle it on my own. leadershipmanagement help from coordinators if needed especially KLA and Year Level teachers willingness to help me to identify  the problems, suggested strategies and tasks that would be achievable.  Follow-up on incidents where required

Teacher support    155 Full support has come for me a number of times when I have encountered  troubles with difficult students and coordinators have backed me up  100 per cent. Coordinator systemintention is excellent. Exiting procedure works  smoothly most of the time. The administration is constantly trying to find  systems of handling students who are difficult. They give these students  tremendous support. We are still trying to get things right. flow chart in place for consequences PD flowchart formal structures for negotiating classroom rights and responsibilities,  time-out procedures and follow-up a clear structureset-up to develop strategies for student management School supported the introduction and use of the system meetings with  YLL and other groups to discuss implementation. Support from Admin  in implementing exit procedures. feedback survey re: student perceptions Staff who felt that insufficient support was given provided a range of  suggestions including the belief that the administration was Too busy Unavailability at times, that there was a Lack of communication, or that  the structuresprocesses were Ineffective:  Often staff, colleagues, dont know the situation or are too involved with  their own problems to provide full support. Coordinators and welfare staff do their best but lack of time makes it  very difficult for them to always follow up. Sometimes it is difficult for the management to deal with a lot of different  issues; they are overwhelmed. Hardly any feedback is given when referrals are made. Coordinator followed up incident; students exited but no feedback on  what followed. sometimes no knowledge of serious issues being followed up need for a more effective welfare system, thus knowledge made available  to teachers on student background and present problems
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour not sound management structures for dealing with repeated offenders We have not agreed upon 23 expectations as requested. Other teachers discussed a Lack of understanding of the approaches  instigated, as well as a Lack of consistency in approaches of coordinators,  while others believed there was a Lack of ownership on the teachers  behalf:  more acknowledgement of the difficulties of teaching and the need for  exittime-out supervision of difficult students Admin has no real understanding of this actual concept. They misinterpret  this style of discipline as relationship-building when it really is a lot more  clinical than that. depends who is coordinator Some coordinators are fabulous and are able to present a united front,  so positive support with classroom teachers in the face of very difficult  behaviour. Others do not inspire confidence. In some situations it has been fully supportive, but in others, while  the intention is there, it has not worked to my satisfaction because it  was a coordinatorstudent agreement etc. and not myselfstudent.  Consequently, patterns of this behaviour appear all too frequently. In summarising teachers comments on the support component of the  DMA, it can be seen that most staff acknowledge that support processes  are in place and that there is a developing but not necessarily uniformly  successful culture of support within their schools. Although the teachers  perceptions appear more positive than those normally reported Rogers,  2002, there is clearly room for  improvement. Some of the desired  improvement, however, appears to rely  on additional resources, mainly in the  form of time and staffing. The schoolwide nature of DMA is reported as a  particular advantage, as is the buddy  system and the ongoing focus on professional conversations. Nevertheless,  enough concern is expressed to indicate that there are numerous weak  spots in the support structures, both collegial and administrative. The  need for an ongoing emphasis on maintaining and strengthening the focus  is apparent. As one principal said to me when I began to work with his  school, It will take at least six years to create a genuine, effective culture  of support. Three years to go? Most staff acknowledge that support  processes are in place and that there  is a developing  culture of support  within their schools.
10 Conclusion It is clear from the analyses presented in this book that in both primary and  secondary schools, teacher aggression and, to a lesser extent, punishment  are ineffective in fostering positive student affect and behaviour. In  contrast, Hinting, Discussions, Recognition, and Involvement appear  helpful in this regard. Nevertheless, the more difficult students frequently  experience more of the former, but no more of the latter. It is not surprising  that students who are subject to, or witness, more teacher aggression, or  even escalating punishment in the face of resistance, may react negatively  towards the teacher, and be more distrustful of the teachers perceived  intentions, as discussed in Chapter 2.  However, as stated earlier, when a teacher provides recognition  and reward for appropriate behaviour particularly for that of difficult  students he or she demonstrates that it is the students behaviour that is  the focus of the disciplinary interventions and not a dislike of the child.  It is reasonable to expect that such teachers are more likely to be trusted  when they do need to deal with misbehaviour. Similarly, a teacher who talks to misbehaving students about his  or her concern over the impact their behaviour has on other students  directly confronts the challenging students hypothesis that they, not the  behaviour, are the target of the disciplinary intervention. Therefore, it is  to be expected that a more frequent use of discussions would result in a  more positive student affect. That being the case, it is problematic to note that teachers dealing  with less responsible students are not more likely and in some cases are  less likely to be using productive power such as Reward and Referent  power manifested in strategies such as Hinting, Discussing, Recognising  and Involving. It is equally problematic to see an increased use of Coercive  power in the form of Aggression and Punishment, since they are at best  of limited usefulness, and at worst counterproductive in terms of the 
The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom Behaviour students attitude to the teacher, their concentration on their work, and  their evaluation of the need for teacher intervention.  If teachers are reacting to the level of responsibility displayed by students,  it is possible that when more students misbehave, teachers may become  overwhelmed by the level of activity and consequently frustrated. Teachers  with insufficient power in the classroom may feel confronted by their own  lack of ability to ensure that all students are learning and are respectful of  rights. According to the levels of aggression reported in Chapter 2, they  may even become angry and hostile towards less responsible students.  The emotionality in teachers responses may not only be related to  the number of students misbehaving but could also be influenced by the  perceived severity of the misbehaviour. For example, according to one of  the teachers interviewed by Andy Hargreaves 2000, p. 819, commenting  on a 5-year-old boy who refused demands to go to the principal, You cant  help but get angry and agitated when those kinds of things happen.  Angry or upset teachers may, as argued by William Glasser 1997, not  be interested in being reasonable towards unreasonable and disrespectful  students. Therefore, they may find it unpalatable to recognise difficult  students when they act appropriately. Similarly, they may find it unpleasant  and unproductive to spend time letting such students tell their side of  events, trying to get them to acknowledge that their behaviour is unfair  and needs to change.  Possibly because of teachers non-productive responses to these more  difficult students, approximately a third of the students in Australian  classrooms appear more than sometimes distracted when their teacher  deals with misbehaviour. As a result of witnessing, or being the target  of, such a disciplinary response, many  also see the teachers behaviour as  unjustified and feel more negatively  towards the teacher. The proportion  of students affected is large enough to  be of concern. If teachers were more aware of the negative impact their  disciplinary behaviour has on students concentration on their schoolwork  they might rate their concern about misbehaviour and classroom discipline  as higher than moderate. There are many reasons to be concerned over teachers use of  aggressive disciplinary techniques, some of which have been covered in  earlier chapters. For example, the two most important pieces of advice  offered by Margaret Metzger 2002 to teachers trying to ensure that  students will remain motivated to behave responsibly are: first, dont  escalate, de-escalate! second, let students save face.  Clearly, both of these processes, which would generate Referent power,  are incompatible with an aggressive teacher response to misbehaviour,  First, dont escalate, de-escalate!  Second, let students save face. 

Conclusion    159 and may also be at variance with escalating punishment in the face of  resistance especially for the more difficult Category C and D students.  A second reason to ensure teachers minimise the use of aggressive  responses towards students is the need to provide an appropriate model  for children. The tendency by a large minority of teachers to display a  relative unwillingness to use strategies with the more difficult students  such as Discussion, Recognition and Reward, and Involvement is also  problematic. The concern generally relates to the educational purpose of  classroom discipline discussed in Chapter 1. First, as shown in Chapter 5,  and as argued by a number of experienced educators, these three strategies  are among those essential for producing responsible students Metzger,  2002; Roeser et al., 2000; Ryan  Patrick, 2001. As stated by Peggy  Pastor 2000, p. 657, when determining which discipline strategies are  the most desirable, we need to note that: When we separate our approach to discipline from our principles, we  influence the ethical tone of the school community. Valuing good character  and seeking the development of personal responsibility determine the  schools response to discipline problems. Discipline is not primarily a  matter of keeping things under control by making choices for students   it is a matter of helping students learn to make good choices and be  responsible for those choices.  In discussing the alternatives for discipline, Martin Maehr and Carole  Midgeley 1991, p. 412 make a similar point, highlighting the limitations  of Coercive power in comparison to Referent power when they state:  Discipline procedures can reflect sheer force or attempts to develop  critical thinking about implications of ones behaviour. In supporting a  recommendation for more inclusion of students voices, Metzger 2002,  p. 657 focuses on the relevance of discipline to the development of  democratic citizens when she states: As we seek to prepare children to  be productive citizens of a democracy, teaching them to understand and  exercise their choices and voices becomes paramount. The final comment on the relevance of the DMA to teachers and  students relates to an observation by Robert Roeser et al. 2000, p. 466,  commenting on how to facilitate the likelihood of teachers increasing their  use of Referent power while decreasing their Coercive power, including  aggressive responses, even to the most difficult of students.  Creating professional work environments where teachers feel supported  by other professionals and school leaders in relation to their own needs  for competence, autonomy, and quality relationships is essential to their  decision to create these conditions for students.
References Ainley, J., Batten, M., Collins, C.,  Withers, G. 1998. Schools and the  social development of young Australians. Melbourne: ACER. Akin-Little, K. A., Eckert, T. L., Lovett, B. J.,  Little, S. G. 2004.  Extrinsic reinforcement in the classroom: Bribery or best practices.  School Psychology Review, 33, 34462.  Anderman, Eric M. 2002. School effects on psychological outcomes  during adolescence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 944,  795809. Axelrod, S. 1996. Whats wrong with behaviour analysis? Journal of  Behavioural Education, 6, 24756. Balson, M. 1992. Understanding classroom behaviour 3rd ed.  Melbourne: ACER. Bandura, A. 1994. Self-efficacy in changing societies. Cambridge  University Press. Barton, P. E., Coley, R. J.,  Wenglinsky, H. 1998. Order in the classroom:  Violence, discipline and student achievement. Princeton, NJ: Policy  Information Center. Educational Testing Service. Beck, J.,  Horne, D. 1992. A whole school implementation of the  Stop, Think Do! Social skills training program at Minerva Special  School. In B. Willis  J. Izard Eds., Student behaviour problems:  Directions, perspectives and expectations. Melbourne: ACER. Beck, M.,  Malley, J. A. 1998. Pedagogy of belonging: Reclaiming  children and youth. Journal of Emotional and Behavioural  Problems, 73, 13337. Bennett, W. 1988. The place to harvest patriots. School-Administrator,  555, 3840. Bernard, M. 1990. Taking the stress out of teaching. Melbourne: Collins  Dove. Berne, E. 1961. Transactional analysis in psychotherapy: A systematic  individual and social psychiatry. New York: Grove Press. Berne, E. 1964. Games people play: The psychology of human  relationships. London: Andre Deutsch.
References Borg, I. 1992. Absence from school and mental health. British Journal  of Psychiatry, 161, 15466. Borg, M. G., Riding, R. J.,  Falzon, J. M. 1991. Stress in teaching: A  study of occupational stress and its determinants, job satisfaction  and career commitment among primary schoolteachers. Educational  Psychology, 111, 5975. Bowlby, J. 1975. Separation: Anxiety and anger vol. 2. Harmondsworth:  Penguin. Bowlby, J. 1981. Loss, sadness and depression vol. 3. Harmondsworth:  Penguin. Bowlby, J. 1982. Attachment 2nd ed. vol. 1. London: Harper Collins. Bruce, K.  Cacioppe, R. 1989. A survey of why teachers resigned from  government secondary schools in Western Australia. Australian  Journal of Education, 331, 6882. Buisson, G. J., Murdock, J. Y., Reynolds, K. E.,  Cronin, M. E. 1995.  Effect of tokens on response latency of students with hearing  impairments in a resource room. Education and Treatment of  Children, 18, 40821.  Canter, L.,  Canter, M. 1996. Assertive discipline: A take charge  approach for todays educators 3rd ed. USA: Lee Canter   Associates. Cavalier, A. R., Ferretti, R. P.,  Hodges, A. E. 1997. Self-management  within a classroom token economy for students with learning  disabilities. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 18, 16778.  Chan, D. W. 1998. Stress, coping strategies, and psychological distress  among secondary teachers in Hong Kong. American Educational  Research Journal, 351, 14563.  Commonwealth of Australia 2005. National framework for values education in Australian schools. Department of Education, Science and  Training, Australian Government, Canberra, accessed 3 Sept. 2007.  http:www.valueseducation.edu.auververesourcesFramework PDFversionfortheweb.pdf. Crawford, F.,  Beaman, R. 2007. Managing classroom behaviour.  Curriculum Leadership, 5 38, taken from www.curriculum.edu. auleadermanagingclassroombehaviour,14728.html. Curriculum Corporation 1997. Discovering Democracy, Melbourne:  Curriculum Corporation. Deci, E. L., Koestner, R.,  Ryan, R. M. 1999a. A meta-analytic review  of experiments examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on  intrinsic motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 62768.  Deci, E. L., Koestner, R.,  Ryan, R. M. 1999b. The undermining  effect is a reality after all-extrinsic rewards, task interest, and selfdetermination. Reply to Eisenberger, Pierce,  Cameron 1999 

References    163 and Lepper, Henderlong,  Gingras 1999. Psychological Bulletin,  125, 692700.  Deci, E. L., Koestner, R.,  Ryan, R. M. 2001. Extrinsic rewards and  intrinsic motivation in education: Reconsidered once again. Review  of Educational Research, 71, 127.  DeRobbio, R.,  Iwanicki, E. 1996. Factor accounting for burnout  among secondary school teachers. Paper presented at the annual  meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New  York. Dreikurs, R.,  Cassel, P. 1972. Discipline without tears rev. ed. New  York: Hawthorn Books. Edwards, D.,  Mullis, F. 2003. Classroom meetings: Encouraging  a climate of cooperation. Professional School Counseling, 71  American School Counselor Assn, US., 2028. Ellis, J., Hart, S.,  Small-McGinley, J. 1998. The perspectives of difficult  students on belonging and inclusion in the classroom. Reclaiming  Children and Youth: Journal of Emotional and Behavioural  Problems, 73, 14246. Emmer, E. T.,  Aussiker A. 1990. School and classroom discipline  programs: How well do they work? In Moles, Oliver C. et al.  Eds. Student discipline strategies: Research and practice. SUNY  series in educational leadership. Albany, NY: State University of  New York Press, 12965. Fenstermacher, G. D. 2001. On the concept of manner and its visibility in teaching practice. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 336,  63953. Fields, B. 1986 The nature and incidence of classroom behaviour  problems and their remediation through preventive management.  Behaviour Change, 31, 5357. Fisher, D., Henderson, D.,  Fraser, B. 1997. Laboratory environments  and student outcomes in senior school biology. American Biology  Teacher, 592, 1419. Freiberg, H. J. 1996. From tourists to citizens in the classroom.  Educational Leadership, 541, 3236.  Freiberg H. J., Stein, T. A.,  Huang, S. 1995. Effects of a classroom  management intervention on student achievement in inner-city  elementary schools. Educational Research and Evaluation, 11,  3666. French, J. R. P.,  Raven, B. H. 1959. The bases of social power. In I. D.  Cartwright Ed., Studies in Social Power. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute  for Social Research, 15067. Friedman, I. A. 1995. Student behaviour patterns contributing to teacher  burnout. Journal of Educational Research, 885, 28189.
References Friedman, I. A. 2006. Classroom management and teacher stress and  burnout. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook  of classroom management: Research, practice and contemporary  issues. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc., 92544. Fuller, F. F.,  Bown, O. H. 1975. Becoming a teacher. In K. Ryan Ed.,  Teacher education. The seventy-fourth yearbook of the National  Society for the Study of Education, part 2. Chicago University Press. Gardener, H. 1983. Frames of mind: The theory in practice. New York:  Basic Books. Giedd, J. N. 2004. Structural magnetic resonance imaging of the  adolescent brain. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,  10211, 7785. Glasser, W. 1969. School without failure. New York. Harper  Row.  Glasser, W. 1984. Control theory. New York: Harper  Row Glasser, W. 1986. Control theory in the classroom. New York: Perennial  Library. Glasser, W. 1997. A new look at school failure and school success. Phi  Delta Kappan, 788, 597602. Goddard, J. T. 2000. Teaching in turbulent times: Teachers perceptions  of the effects of external factors on their professional lives. Alberta  Journal of Educational Research, 464, 293310. Gordon, T. 1970. Parent effectiveness training: The tested new way to  raise responsible children. New York: P. H. Wyden. Gordon, T. 1974. T.E.T.: Teacher Effectiveness Training. New York: D.  McKay. Gottfredson, D. C., Karweit, N. L.,  Gottfredson, G. D. 1989.  Reducing disorderly behavior in middle schools. Baltimore, MD:  Center for Research on Elementary and Middle Schools, Johns  Hopkins University. Greaves, D. 1987. Between the tides: Discipline problems in the classroom.  In Special Education for Effective Integration. Melbourne: R. D.  Printworks. Green, S. B.,  Ross, M. E. 1996. A theory-based measure of coping  strategies used by teachers: The problems in Teaching Scale.  Teaching  Teacher Education, 1230, 31525.  Handelsman, D. J.,  Gupta, L. 1997. Prevalence and risk factors  for anabolic-androgenic steroid abuse in Australian high school  students. International Journal of Andrology, 203, 15964. Hansen, D. T. 2001. Reflections on the manner in teaching project.  Journal of Curriculum Studies, 336, 72935. Hardman, E. L.,  Smith, S. W. 2003. Analysis of classroom disciplinerelated content in elementary education journals. Behavioural  Disorders, 28, 17386. 

References    165 Hargreaves, A. 2000. Mixed emotions: Teachers perceptions of their  interactions with students. Teaching and Teacher Education, 16,  81126. Hart, P. M., Wearing, A. J.,  Conn, M. 1995. Conventional wisdom is a  poor predictor of the relationship between discipline policy, student  misbehaviour and teacher stress. British Journal of Educational  Psychology, 651, 2748. Hastings, N.  Schwieso, J. Eds. 1995. New directions in educational  psychology vol. 2. London: Falmer Press. Heider, F. 1958. The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York:  Wiley. Henderson, D., Fisher, D.,  Fraser, B. J. 2000. Interpersonal behaviour,  learning environments and student outcomes in senior biology  classes. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 37, 2643. Houston, P. D. 1998. The centrality of character education. School  Administrator, 555, 68. Hyman, I. A.,  Snook, P. A. 2000. Dangerous schools and what you  can do about them. Phi Delta Kappan, 817, 489501. Independent Education Union 1996. Education and Stress: Report on  the survey conducted by the Victoria and NSW IEU on workloads  and perceptions of occupational stress among union members  employed in Catholic schools, and Education Offices and in  Independent schools. Melbourne: IEU. Ingersoll, R. M. 1996. Teachers decision-making power and school  conflict. Sociology of Education, 682, 15976. Ingersoll, R. M. 2001. Teacher turnover and teacher shortages: An  organizational analysis. American Educational Research Journal,  383, 499534. Ingvarson, L. 2005. Getting professional development right. ACER  Annual Conference Proceedings 2005, Using data to support  student learning. Melbourne: ACER. Isaacson, C.,  Radish, K. 2002. The birth order effect. Adams Media.  Johnson, B., Oswald, M.,  Adey, K. 1993. Discipline in South  Australian primary schools, Educational Studies, 193, 289305. Jones, E. E.,  Davis, K. E. 1965. From acts to dispositions: The  attribution process in person perception. In L. Berkowitz Ed.,  Advances in Experimental Social Psychology vol. 2. Orlando, FL:  Academic Press. Jones, S. C.,  Stoodley, J. 1999. Community of caring: A character  education program designed to integrate values into a school  community. NASSP, 83609, 4651. Keiper, R.,  Busselle, K. 1996. The rural educator and stress. Rural  Educator, 172, 1821.
References Kelley, H. H. 1973. The processes of causal attribution. American  Psychologist, 28, 10728.  Kohn, A. 1993. Punished by rewards: The trouble with gold stars,  incentive plans, As, praise, and other bribes. Boston, MA:  Houghton Mifflin.  Kohn, A. 1996. Beyond discipline: From compliance to community.  Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum  Development. Kounin, J. S. 1970. Discipline and group management in classrooms.  New York: Holt, Rinehart  Winston, Inc. Lazear, D. 1999. Eight ways of knowing: Teaching for multiple  intelligences: A handbook of techniques for expanding 3rd ed.  Melbourne: Hawker Brownlow Education. Leman, K. 1985. The birth order book: Why you are the way you are.  New York: Dell Publishing Leman. Lewis, R. 1997a. Discipline in schools. In L. J. Saha Ed., International  encyclopedia of the sociology of education. Oxford: Permagon,  40411. Lewis, R. 1997b. The discipline dilemma 2nd ed. Melbourne: ACER. Lewis, R. 1999. Teachers coping with the stress of classroom discipline.  Social Psychology of Education, 3, 117. Lewis, R. 2001. Classroom discipline and student responsibility: The  students view. Teaching and Teacher Education, 173, 30719. Lewis, R. 2006. Classroom discipline in Australia. In C. M. Evertson   C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management:  Research, practice and contemporary issues. New Jersey: Lawrence  Erlbaum Associates Inc., 1193214. Lewis, R.,  Burman, E. 2006. Providing for student voice in classroom  management. International Journal of Inclusive Education, 106. Lewis, R.,  Frydenberg, E. 2002. Concomitants of failure to cope:  What we should teach adolescents about coping. British Journal of  Educational Psychology, 72, 41931. Lewis, R.,  Frydenberg, E. 2004. Adolescents least able to cope: How  do they respond to their stresses? British Journal of Guidance and  Counselling, 321, 2538. Lewis, R.,  Lovegrove. M. N. 1987a. The teacher as a disciplinarian:  How do students feel? Australian Journal of Education, 312,  17386. Lewis, R.,  Lovegrove, M. N. 1987b. What students think of teachers  classroom control techniques: Results from four studies. In N.  Hastings  J. Schwieso. Eds., New directions in educational  psychology vol. 2. London: Falmer Press, 93113.

References    167 Lewis, R.,  Lovegrove, M. 1988. Students views on how teachers are  disciplining classrooms. In R. Slee Ed., Discipline and schools: A  curriculum perspective. Melbourne: Macmillan, 26883. Lewis, R., Lovegrove, M. N.,  Burman, E. 1991. Teachers perceptions  of ideal classroom disciplinary practices. In M. N. Lovegrove  R.  Lewis Eds., Classroom discipline. Melbourne: Longman Cheshire,  86113. Lewis, R., Romi, S., Qui, X.,  Katz, Y. J. 2005. Teachers classroom  discipline and student misbehaviour in Australia, China and Israel.  Teaching and Teacher Education, 21, 72941. Lewis, R., Romi, S., Qui, X.,  Katz, Y. J. 2007. Students reactions to  teachers classroom discipline techniques in China, Australia and  Israel. Teaching and Teacher Education. Lickona, T. 1996. Teaching respect and responsibility: Reclaiming  children and youth. Journal of Emotional and Behavioural  Problems, 53, 14351. Liu, X.,  Meyer, J. P. 2005. Teachers perceptions of their jobs: A  multi-level analysis of the teacher follow-up survey for 199495.  Teachers College Record, 1075, 9851003. Luna, B.,  Sweeney, J. A. 2004. The emergence of collaborative brain  function: fMRI studies of the development of response inhibition.  Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 10211, 296309. Macciomei, N. R. 1999. Behavioral problems in urban school children.  In N. R. Macciomei  D. H. Ruben Eds., Behavior management  in the public schools: An urban approach. Westport, CT: Praeger,  318.  Maehr, M. L.,  Midgely, C. 1991. Enhancing student motivation:  A schoolwide approach. Educational Psychologist, 2634,  399427. McCormick, J.,  Shi, G. 1999. Teachers attributions of responsibility  for their occupational stress in the Peoples Republic of China  and Australia. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 693,  393407. McDonnell, S. 1998. Ethics and freedom. School Administrator, 555,  1820.  McInerney, D.,  McInerney, V. 2002. Educational psychology:  Constructing learning 3rd ed. Sydney: Prentice Hall. Mellor, S., Kennedy, K.,  Greenwood, L. 2001. Citizenship and  democracy: Students knowledge and beliefs, Australian 14 Year  olds and the Civic Education study. Melbourne: ACER. Metzger, M. 2002. Learning to discipline. Phi Delta Kappan, 841,  7784.
References Milgram, S. 1975. Obedience to authority: An experimental view. New  York: Harper  Row. Moore, M. 2004, quoted from article in press: Outsiders fit into special  programs. The Age, Melbourne, 14 June 2004. Osler, A.,  Starkey, H. 2001. Citizenship education and natural  identities in France and England: Inclusive or exclusive? Oxford  Review of Education, 272, 287305. Oswald, U., Johnson, B.,  Whittington, V. 1997. Classroom discipline  problems in South Australian Government and Independent  Schools. Paper presented at Australian Association of Educational  Research Conference. http:www.aare.edu.au97paposwam463. htm. Pastor, P. 2000. School discipline and the character of our schools. Phi  Delta Kappan, 839, 65861. Pearl, A.,  Knight, A. 1998. Democratic Schooling: Theory to Guide  Educational Practice. New Jersey: Hampton Press.  Piekarska, A. 2000. School stress, teachers abusive behaviours and  students coping strategies. Child Abuse  Neglect, 11, 144349. Pithers, R. T.,  Soden, R. 1998. Scottish and Australian teacher stress  and strain: A comparative study. British Journal of Educational  Psychology, 68, 26979. Pring, R. 2000. Education as a moral practice. Journal of Moral  Education, 302, 10112. Punch, K. F.,  Tuetteman, E. 1996. Reducing teacher stress: The effects  of support in the work environment. Research in Education, 56,  6372. Roeser, R. W., Eccles, J. S.,  Sameroff, A. J. 2000. School as a context of  early adolescents academic and social-emotional development: A  summary of the research findings. The Elementary School Teacher,  115, 44371. Rogers, W. 1992. Supporting teachers in the workplace. Milton, Qld:  Jacaranda Press. Rogers, W. 2002. I get by with a little help  Colleague support in  schools. Melbourne: ACER. Romi, S., Lewis, R.  Katz, Y. J. 2007. Student responsibility and  classroom discipline in Australia, China and Israel. Unpublished  manuscript. Rothstein, R. 2000. Towards a composite index of school performance.  The Elementary School Teacher, 1005, 40941. Rowe, K. S.,  Rowe, K.J. 2006. Careful, he may not hear you: Or,  more accurately, may not process auditory information. Teacher:  The National Education Magazine, May, 6063.

References    169 Ryan, K.,  Patrick, H. 2001. The classroom social environment and  changes in adolescents motivation and engagement in the middle  school. American Educational Research Journal, 382, 43760. Sava, F. A. 2002. Causes and effects of teacher conflict-inducing attitudes  towards pupils: A path analysis model. Teaching and Teacher  Education, 18, 100721. Schneider, E. 1996. Giving students a voice in the classroom. Educational  Leadership, 541, 2226.  Slee, R. Ed. 1988. Discipline and schools: A curriculum perspective.  Melbourne: Macmillan. Spear, L. P. 2000. The adolescent brain and age-related behavioural  manifestations. Neuroscience and Biobehavioural Reviews,  242000, 41763. Strauch, B. 2003. Why are they so weird? Whats really going on in a  teenagers brain. London: Bloomsbury. Students on their bikes to learn English, Maths. School Matters, 6, 23  June 2006, 11. Swiezy, N. B., Matson, J. L.,  Box, P. 1992. The good behaviour game:  A token reinforcement system for preschoolers. Child and Family  Behaviour Therapy, 14, 2132.  Swinson, J.,  Cording, M. 2002. Assertive discipline in a school for  pupils with emotional and behavioural difficulties. British Journal  of Special Education, 292, 7275. Swinson, J.,  Melling, R. 1995. Assertive discipline: Four wheels on this  wagon: A reply to Robinson and Maines. Educational Psychology  in Practice, 113, 38.  Tauber, R. 2007. Classroom management: Sound theory and effective  practice. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishers.  Thomas, R. M. 2000. Comparing theories of child development 5th  ed. Belmont, CA: WadsworthThomson Learning. Veenman, S., Voeten, M.,  Lem, P. 1987. Classroom time and  achievement in mixed age classes. Educational Studies, 131,  7589. Vitto, J. M. 2003. Relationship-driven classroom management strategies  that promote student motivation. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin  Press, Inc., Sage Publications.  Wade, R. K. 1997. Lifting a schools spirit. Educational Leadership,  548, 3436.  Weiner, B. 1985. An attributional theory of achievement motivation and  emotion. Psychological Review, 92, 54873. Weiner, B. 1994. Integrating social and personal theories of achievement  striving. Review of Educational Research, 64, 55773.
References White, R.,  Gunstone, R. 1992. Probing understanding. London, New  York: Falmer. Whiteman, J. L., Young, J. C.,  Fisher, L. 1985. Teacher burnout and  the perception of student behaviour. Education, 105, 299305. Wolfgang, C. H. 1995. Solving discipline problems: Strategies for  classroom teachers 3rd ed. Massachusetts: Allyn  Bacon. Zbar, V., Brown, D., Bereznicki, B.,  Hooper, C. 2003. Values education  study: Final report. Zbar Consulting; Curriculum Corporation;  University of Melbourne.
Index active listening    79 adult state    74 approving responses    53 Assertive Discipline    114 attention-seeking    94 authoritarian society    1 birth-order patterns    92 body language    60 calmness    65 Category A students  expectations    4849 hinting    4548 Category B students and irresponsible behaviour    58 and responsible behaviour    5258 Category C students  and goodwill    8687 case study    7274 talking to    7486 Category D students and inappropriate behaviour      8991 and mistaken goals    106109 basic assumptions    8889 sources of discouragement in the  family    9192 child state    74 choice    66 classroom discipline system    68 classroom management and stress    1315 and student values    1013 classroom management plan    61 classroom management strategies      140 Australian techniques    16 cross-national comparison    2 classroom meetings    41 classroom rights and  responsibilities    4244 communication    74 conditional approval    98 confidence    9 confrontation, types of    8182 consequences need to create    61, 101 stepped consequence  system    6970, 112 when students act  irresponsibly    5860 damaging behaviour    71 deficit model, the    33 Developmental Management  Approach DMA responding to A-level  students    111 responding to B-level  students    111112 responding to C-level  students    112113 responding to D-level  students    113114 support component    141 support for    114117 teachers reflecting on    118136
Index direct questions    49 discouragement impact    90 sources of    91 Dreikurs group-oriented  approach    88 effort    56 encouragement    97100 exit questionnaire    147148 expectations restating    48 to promote responsibility    114 types of    144 when to establish    61 goodwill     37 and category C students    8687 and category D students    89 and student interaction    78 estimating    38 hierarchical relationship    91 hinting and the DMA    117 general    46 responding to level A  students    111 specific    4648 verbal    45, 50 I-messages    49, 77, 111 inappropriate behaviour    3, 65, 77,  89 aims of    93 responding to    6370 incentives    58 informing the students    6163 instinctive reaction    97 irrational attitudes    26 leadership types    4 lesson techniques	 	

keeping students accountable      36 keeping students interested    35 keeping the lesson flowing    34 monitoring students    36 logical consequences    58 maintaining silence    39 management constraints    42 metacognition    8 mistaken goals    93, 106109, 113 non-verbal language need for approval    55 need to choose    63 need to recognise    80 student response    65 parent state    74 point system    54 Post-Guru Syndrome    7 power coercive    39, 51, 57, 72 legitimate    39, 45, 51, 72 referent    37, 39, 45, 73, 86 reward    39, 51 types of    18, 19 power distribution    5 productive discussion steps    7686 projection    105 punishment and the DMA    117 impact    138 need to avoid    141 recognition as a cause of misbehaviour      94 in regard to dealing with  misbehaviour	 102 with regard to B-level  students    111 reflection    9 responsible behaviour    52 reward individual     54 need to minimise    56 parental    55

Index    173 role model and remaining calm    65 and responsible behaviour    139 role of schooling    11 role of teachers    39 rules    40 separate deed from doer    101 sibling rivalry    92 social responsibility    100 stress causes of    3, 13, 139 coping strategies    2931, 144 effects of    65 role of misbehaviour    14 student behaviour categories  definition    16, 17 cause of    3334 dealing with    96106 goals of    9496 recognition of    52, 90, 115116 responding to    63 role of management  intervention    8 student responsibility, divisions in      11 student rights    40, 4244, 78 suppression    9 teacher aggression	 and categories of student  behaviour    23 and self-defeating attitudes    25 causes of    1921 frequency of    19 impact    2729, 138 ripple effect    21, 27 teacher behaviour attachment theory    2425 attribution theory    23 causes of    24 consequences of    22 efficacy theory    23 self-defeating attitudes    2526 Teacher Effectiveness Training  TET    76 teacher responsibilities    143 teacher support buddy system    141144 characteristics of    144149 development of responsible   behaviour    138139 evidence of support received      152153 evidence of unsupported      154156 need for    139141 support themes    146, 149152 supportive statements    145 triggers    143 time-out    59 transitions    54 under-assertiveness    6 values    12 visual learner modifying curriculum    103104

ISBN 978-0-86431-647-9 9 780864 316479 This book describes a system of successful classroom  behaviour management techniques developed by the  author over more than 25 years of teaching practice.  It outlines the dif culties confronting teachers trying  to manage students misbehaviour in schools and  describes four types of student who can be helped to  behave responsibly.  In The Developmental Management Approach to Classroom  Behaviour Ramon Rom Lewis explains how  students behaviour can be categorised and how  techniques can be introduced to deal with each  category, however challenging the behaviour might  be. The book goes on to provide a framework for  a long-term commitment by teachers to productive  interactions with students. ABOUT THE AUTHOR Ramon Rom Lewis is an Associate Professor in  the Faculty of Education at La Trobe University,  Melbourne. He has researched a range of issues  relating to classroom behaviour and, through his  books, has equipped teachers to remain calm and  deal with inappropriate behaviour. He is the author  of The Discipline Dilemma, and co-author of the  Adolescent Coping Scale and Coping Scale for Adults,  all published by ACER Press. Cover image:  Photographer: Chitra Tatachar  Agency: Dreamstime.com