EDUCATION REFERENCE GUIDE THE PROCESSES OF  CLASSROOM  MANAGEMENT The Editors of Salem Press SALEM PRESS A Division of EBSCO Information Services Ipswich, Massachusetts second edition

Copyright  2014, 2017, by Salem Press, A Division of EBSCO Information Services, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this work may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever or transmitted in  any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage  and retrieval system, without written permission from the copyright owner. For permissions requests, contact  proprietarypublishingebscohost.com.  ISBN: 978-1-4298-4255-6

iii Contents Introduction	 iv Classroom Management	 6 Multi Age Classrooms	 13 Peer Interaction	 20 Student Mentoring	 28 Team Teaching	 35 Reciprocal Teaching	 42 Game-Based Learning	 47 Direct Instruction	 52 Instructional Modeling	 59 Programmed Instruction	 65 Instructional Design	 74 Differentiated Instruction	 80 The Socratic Method	 88 Reflective Teaching	 95 Lesson Planning	 102 Addressing Plagiarism	 108

iv Introduction A teachers classroom management style can affect all facets of the class, including its organization, environment,  and pedagogical and curricular elements. Likewise, a students learning experience and performance level can often  rely primarily on the effectiveness of the management style. Fortunately, teachers can choose from a wide variety of  techniques to create the classroom environment works best for them and their students while promoting growth and  encouraging learning.  The Education Reference Guide series is designed to provide a solid foundation for the research of various educational  topics. This volume offers an introduction to the processes of effective classroom management. The essays begin by  examining classroom organization options before reviewing instructional methodologies and classroom management  techniques.  The collection opens with John W. Loesers overview of classroom management techniques as they apply to common  practices, such as setting clear expectations and enforcing rules and theoretical approaches, like choice theory, con gruent communication, class meetings, and respectful classrooms. Loeser goes on to describe multiage classroom, a  system of classroom organization in which students of varying ages and grade levels are grouped together within the  same class. While this environment has been shown to have positive effects on students self-esteem, social interac tion, and confidence levels, there is a lack of definitive research that demonstrates any specific academic benefits.  Another form of collaborative learning is peer interaction, which Tricia Smith describes as a valuable way for students  to help one another learn the curricular content. This method of educational organization has proven to be effective for  all age groups and across all areas of education. Other peer-assistance models also exist, including student mentoring,  which can improve academic outcomes for at-risk students. Team-teaching models can also drastically impact the suc cess of a classroom, as there are two or more teachers who instruct and supervise a group of students, allowing for the  enhancement of professional growth for teachers and learning outcomes for students. There are a number of distinct instructional methodologies that teachers can employ to structure their pedagogical  practices and the curriculums content. As Smith describes, direct instruction is a model that teachers use when deal ing with at-risk students who require the presentation of new material in small steps, and benefit from feedback and  independent student exercise. Loeser then discusses instructional modeling, a management technique in which edu cators demonstrate the desired behaviors or skill sets that they would like their students to possess. Technology can  also enhance the systematic development of instructional methods in a process known as programmed instruction.  This method helps to break up the curriculum into manageable frames, similar to instructional design. Differentiated  instruction is a methodology that attempts to present the curriculum in a variety of ways so as to reach all students  regardless of their individual learning styles. Charles Fischer explains the Socratic method, a classroom dialogue  method which can be either teacher-directed or student-centered. Smith returns with a summary of reflective teaching,  a pedagogical method which emphasizes the thoughtful consideration and evaluation of the methods that do and do not  work effectively for an individual educator. Perhaps one of the most important and widespread classroom management  tools is lesson planning. Teachers are able to use this valuable approach to provide an outline for structuring activities  and curricular content. Finally, Jennifer Bouchard reviews the subject of plagiarism and the importance of managing  and addressing this issue as it arises in the classroom. 

v Together, these essays will guide researchers through the processes and techniques of effective classroom management  and provide a thorough review of organizational and instructional methodologies. Complete bibliographic entries, a  list of suggested readings, and relevant terms and concepts finish the essay.
Classroom Management Abstract This article explores a variety of classroom management  strategies teachers use to create safe, respectful classroom  environments. Discussion focuses on the critical importance  of respecting diversity, developing relationships, and recogniz ing behaviors as a form of communication. Common classroom  management techniques are provided such as setting clear  expectations and consistently enforcing rules and expectations.  Furthermore, more robust classroom management theories are  highlighted including choice theory2, congruent communica tion4, class meetings3, and respectful classrooms. Overview Classroom management techniques refer to the strategies that  teachers employ to effectively create safe, respectful class room environments that reinforce positive behaviors and  eliminate behaviors that negatively impact learning opportuni ties. Management strategies range from specific "rules of thumb"  recommended by educators such as ensuring expectations are  clearly identified and responses are consistent to more compre hensive theories that emphasize human relationships and respect  for diversity such as choice theory Glasser, 1998. Although there are common classroom management techniques  used in most classrooms to create optimal learning opportuni ties for students, teachers often develop their own management  systems from a variety of techniques that work well for their par ticular grade level or school population. Management techniques  may work well in some classrooms but not in others. Teachers  need to be acutely aware of the needs of different student popu lations. No matter what techniques teachers employ, the behaviors they  must respond to in the classroom setting generally are the same  across grade levels and among different student demographics.  When developing classroom management systems, teachers who  recognize behavior as form of communication, respect diversity,  and value human connections and relationships, find the most  success in responding to common behavioral issues. Most Common Behavior Problems Bullock  Brown 1972 conducted a study to identify the most  common behavior problems that teachers face in the classroom  setting. Their research pinpointed ten challenges including acting  out, aggression, hyperactivity, poor social relationships, defiance,  immaturity, poor academic achievement, poor attention span,  and inadequate self concept Wilhite et al., 2007. Although this  study was conducted nearly half a century ago, the challenges  identified continue to pose problems for teachers today. Tulley  Chiu 1998 approached research on common behav ioral challenges from a different perspective by surveying a group  of sixth grade students to identify the top discipline problems  experienced in class. The students indicated that disruptions,  defiance, aggression, incomplete work and other miscellaneous  Abstract Overview Most Common Behavior Problems Recognizing Diversity Relationships  The Human Connection Applications Common Classroom Management Techniques Choice Theory Ginott's Congruent Communication Class Meeting The Respectful Classroom Conclusion Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Classroom Management 7 behaviors are among the most common challenges experi enced. Their study further illuminated six discipline strategies  that teachers most often employ to respond to the common  challenges discussed: rote punishment, removal punishment,  explanation, presentation punishment, threats and warnings, and  no action or ignoring the behavior completely Tulley  Chiu,  1998. Although these are the most common responses, they are  ineffective at managing classroom behavior and they create dis respectful and unsafe classroom environments. The challenges described above as well as the common responses  teachers employ are representative of what occurs in many class rooms across the nation from Kindergarten through Grade 12. In  fact, over the years, the challenges described have become more  complex and the responses have become more intricate given the  changing context of the world in which we live. Holliday 2005  indicates that schools and teachers are expected to recognize and  expertly control emotional, social and cognitive variables that  influence student learning. Furthermore, Holliday asserts that  teachers are increasingly expected to fill the gap caused by poor  parenting, poverty and learning disabilities p. 23. In order to successfully address these issues, teachers need to  ensure they have a strong classroom management system in place  that appropriately responds to behavioral challenges and creates  a safe, respectful classroom environment. Although behavioral  issues differ from school to school and even classroom to class room, effective management techniques ensure that challenges  are minimal and learning opportunities are maximized. Recognizing Diversity Whether teachers develop an eclectic collection of classroom  management techniques or subscribe to a specific management  theory, one common thread runs through all management sys tems acknowledgement of and respect for diversity. Manning   Bucher 2005 indicate that teachers must recognize student  diversity and aim to understand student perceptions of and reac tions to diversity. They state that students demonstrate culture,  gender, social class, and developmental differences. All of these  characteristics must be considered when implementing class room management strategies Manning  Bucher, 2005. In  addition, Mills  Keddie found that, across many parts of the  world, at the same time that the student population is becom ing increasingly diverse, bringing to classrooms divergent racial,  ethnic, cultural, and socioeconomic experiences, the teacher  population is becoming more homogeneous, primarily white and  middle class Mills  Keddie, 2012. Behaviors are a form of communication. When students misbe have, become distracted, have difficulty handing in assignments  on time, or experience any other common difficulty in the class room, they communicate to teachers that some element of the  experience is not working for them. Teachers must be acutely  aware of the diverse backgrounds and needs that students bring  to the classroom and must develop management strategies that  are responsive and respectful of these differences. Relationships  The Human Connection A second common thread that runs through all classroom man agement systems and all classroom experiences, in general, is  the critical importance of human relationships. No classroom  can operate effectively unless teachers and students develop  relationships and understand the unique qualities that each indi vidual brings to the partnership. Holliday 2005 emphasizes that  in order to effectively manage a classroom, teachers must build  the human connection first, sometimes one student at a time.  Holliday 2005 further highlights that in order for students to  connect to curriculum and become engaged in learning, teach ers must create classroom environments that communicate their  love and passion for the material and reasons it is important for  students to learn the material. Most important, teachers must do  everything possible to communicate that they will help every  student succeed. Applications As noted, no "cookie cutter" classroom management system  exists. Effective classroom management strategies come from  years of experience working with students and years of research  related to the types of responses most effective at eliminat ing undesirable behaviors in the classroom. The following  discussion highlights some of the most common classroom  management techniques that teachers employ as well as more  specific management theories such as choice theory Glasser,  1998, congruent communication Ginott, 1972, class meet ings Glasser, 1969, and respectful classrooms Wessler, 2003;  Miller  Pedro, 2006. Common Classroom Management Techniques Babkie 2006 provides a comprehensive overview of common  classroom management practices. First and foremost, Lock sug gests that it is extremely important for teachers to establish rules  and communicate clear expectations from the first day of class.  Students need to know the parameters and boundaries that exist  in a classroom and must have a clear understanding of the conse quences that will occur should they cross a boundary. Rules and  expectations are the foundation of any classroom management  system and must be concise and fair to ensure that students inter nalize standards for behavior. Babkie 2006 asserts that once rules and expectations are clearly  established and communicated, teachers need to be consistent  and fair when enforcing rules. The quickest way to undermine  any classroom management system is to enforce expectations  for one situation and not the next. When this happens, students  become confused and often misinterpret when certain behaviors  are acceptable and others are not. Another common classroom management technique involves  establishing clearly defined routines Babkie, 2006. For exam ple, teachers may develop specific routines students should  follow when handing in assignments, completing class work, 

Classroom Management 8 working in groups, completing missed assignments, recording  homework, etc. Routines establish structure within a classroom  environment and create a strong sense of predictability for stu dents. Coupled with the development of class routines, teachers  must also explicitly teach transition skills Babkie, 2006. When  teachers transition from whole group discussion to individual or  small group work and when class begins or ends, students need  to be equipped with the skills necessary to make these transitions  with ease. Organization plays a crucial role in effective classroom manage ment Babkie, 2006. Factors including how desks are arranged,  where materials are located, how easy it is to move quickly  around the classroom all determine how effectively teachers can  manage classroom expectations and student behaviors. Teachers  need to be proactive when determining the layout of the physical  classroom environment to anticipate any management issues that  may arise in order to address them before they actually occur. Both Holverstott 2005 and Babkie 2006 discuss the critical  importance of making learning engaging and real world appli cable. When students are invested in what they are learning, they  are far less likely to misbehave or disrupt other students. Erwin  2003 states that unmotivated and non-engaged students often do  poor work or no work, learn very little, and exhibit irresponsible  and disruptive behavior. When teachers find out what motivates  students and create lessons that appeal to students' interests,  they create the conditions necessary for complete engagement  in the learning process. Holverstott 2005 further asserts that by  giving students an active role in deciding what they learn about,  teachers help students exercise self-determination and thereby  help diminish classroom management issues. Developing lessons that meet the learning needs of students is  equally as important as creating ample opportunities for student  engagement Babkie, 2006. The majority of classroom manage ment problems occur when students are either too challenged  or not challenged enough. When learning becomes stressful and  overwhelming, or when students are bored and uninterested,  there is a high likelihood they may become distracted or mis behave. Differentiated instructional methodologies related to  student readiness levels, learning style and interest help teachers  optimally match student needs and thereby minimize manage ment difficulties Tomlinson, 1999. Furthermore, when students  are allowed to demonstrate understanding through multiple  modes of expression, they feel empowered and directly involved  in decisions related to their own learning Babkie, 2006. Holverstott 2005 encourages educators to model good choices  for students to help them internalize behavior expectations.  Through role modeling, teachers help students develop strategies  for dealing with conflict both in and outside of the classroom.  Moreover, when teachers explicitly teach students what to do  when they are distracted, confused or unmotivated, they provide  students with a "tool kit" of strategies to help them effectively  manage a variety of situations that can occur in a classroom  setting. Additionally, school directors should display model  behaviors which are consistent with the schools vision. They  should keep the values of the school alive and organize the  resources to actualize the targets of the school, according to  Fatih Toreman and Onder Sanli Toreman  Sanli, 2011. Cooperative learning situations are common in many class rooms. In order to effectively manage group learning situations,  teachers must anticipate group dynamics and personality con flicts when designing such activities Babkie, 2006. If teachers  do not consider these factors when developing group tasks, there  is a high likelihood that classroom management problems will  exist. Wisneski 2000 asserts that in cooperative learning situ ations teachers must expect spontaneity, noise, confusion and  uncertainty at times. However, it is critically important for teach ers to communicate clear expectations for acceptable levels of  noise and excitement. In individual cases when behavioral issues directly affect other  students' learning opportunities, teachers can design behav ior contracts to examine inappropriate behavior and provide  a system to address related issues Babkie, 2006. Behavior  contracts explicitly reference problem behaviors and provide  immediate assessment and evaluation for students to monitor  progress. Behavior contracts can also be valuable when they  build a link between school and home Hawkins et al., 2011.  Behavior contracts are usually temporary and provide praise and  encouragement for students to improve behavior. Holverstott 2005 reminds educators that all behavioral and  classroom management issues are a form of direct commu nication. Students may be overwhelmed, bored, or unhappy  with group or partner dynamics, upset about events occurring  at home or facing many other stressors. Transitions may be  difficult, routines may not work, and contracts may fail. It is  imperative for teachers to search for the underlying reasons a  student may be misbehaving or why a management policy is  ineffective in order to directly address the core issue. By apply ing the common techniques discussed, teachers ensure that  behavioral and management issues have a minimal impact on  teaching and learning. Choice Theory Erwin 2003 emphasizes that the most important rule of class room management is to develop a strong relationship with each  student. Part of maintaining a strong relationship involves cre ating a classroom environment that values intrinsic motivation  over extrinsic motivation. Choice theory, developed by Glasser  1998 and described by Erwin 2003, provides a framework for  teachers to follow when thinking about effective classroom man agement practices. The theory illuminates five principles that  guide all human behavior including survival, love and belong ing, power, freedom and fun. In order to create classroom environments where students feel  safe and thus can thrive, teachers can employ a variety of strate

Classroom Management 9 gies including developing consistent classroom procedures and  routines that provide a sense of order and security and devel oping behavior guidelines that emphasize safety and respect  Erwin, 2003. To address the need to feel loved and a sense of  belonging, teachers can conduct regular class meetings to build  relationships, solve problems and model appropriate choices.  Giving students power and a voice in class further intrinsically  motivates them to behave well and meet classroom expectations  Erwin, 2003. When teachers solicit student input regarding  classroom rules and expectations or gather feedback regarding  interest, teachers empower students to feel a sense of ownership  for the classroom and its policies and procedures. When address ing freedom in the classroom, teachers can allow students to  choose their own seating arrangement, their own partners, the  type of assignment or performance task they want to complete to  demonstrate understanding, etc. Erwin, 2003. Finally, creating  a fun and engaging classroom environment directly affects class room management simply because when students are invested  and enthusiastic about learning, management issues are minimal  Erwin, 2003. Ginott's Congruent Communication Manning  Bucher 2001 discuss congruent communication,  a model of classroom management first proposed by Haim  Ginott in the 1970's. Ginott suggests that teachers create posi tive class environments by communicating with students in ways  that are in sync with their feelings about themselves, by invit ing and encouraging cooperation, and by promoting discipline  as opposed to punishment Ginott, 1972; cited in Manning   Bucher, 2001. Ginott's theory proposes myriad ideas that teachers can employ  to effectively manage classrooms. First and foremost, teachers  should communicate clearly with students and always make stu dents feel accepted, even if they make a mistake Manning   Bucher, 2001. Furthermore, when students misbehave, teachers  should always address student behavior as opposed to charac ter Ginott, 1972; Morris, 1996. Often, it is very easy to get  caught up in the moment and negatively comment on a student's  personality without addressing the actual situation or incident  that occurred. Ginott encourages teachers to refrain from pun ishment, handle anger appropriately and always demonstrate  acceptance and acknowledgement. Moreover, he discusses the  critical importance of avoiding sarcasm, using "I" messages as  opposed to "you" messages, and respecting students' privacy  Manning  Bucher, 2001. Most important, Ginott proposes  that teachers should always praise students for their efforts and  accomplishments to instill a sense of success. Ginott's theory is  extensive and involves additional ideas that can be employed in  the middle school and secondary classroom. Manning  Bucher  2001 indicate that congruent communication has great poten tial and can be used in conjunction with already established  classroom management models. Class Meeting Class meeting is another classroom management strategy that is  primarily employed in elementary and middle school classrooms  to provide a forum for students to express thoughts, feelings,  concerns, ideas, etc. Class meeting empowers students and pro vides them with an opportunity to voice their ideas in a respectful  setting. Lickona 2001 describes the model, first proposed by  William Glasser 1969, as a time set aside each day for students  to express their views about anything related to school and to dis cuss ways to solve problems and conflicts. Topics for discussion  can be student generated sometimes anonymously or teacher  directed. Class meeting provides an opportunity for students to  become active decision makers in matters closely related to their  school experience and simultaneously creates a safe forum for  teachers to learn about what is important to students. Watkins  2005 indicates that classroom management models, such as  class meeting, create a sense of community where governance is  shared and responsibility is developed. The Respectful Classroom Miller  Pedro 2006 explore the conditions necessary to create  respectful classroom environments. They assert that when there  is a feeling of respect, behaviors that demonstrate respect will  follow. Wessler 2003 describes a respectful classroom as a  place where students feel physically and emotionally safe and  valued. In a respectful classroom, teachers are acutely aware of  student interactions and practice zero tolerance for harassment  or social exclusion Miller  Pedro, 2006. Teachers model  respectful behavior for students and require students to respond  respectfully to one another, thus creating a safe environment. Miller  Pedro 2006 claim that the development of meaning ful relationships is a major component of a respectful classroom.  Strong teacher-student and student-student relationships are  essential for respectful interactions. In such classroom environ ments, diversity is respected, students are willing to share more,  and a meaningful exchange of ideas and multiple perspectives is  encouraged. Conclusion The management techniques and theories discussed above  represent a sampling of the strategies available to teachers to  effectively manage classrooms. No one technique or theory is  superior to another. Teachers often develop their own eclectic  systems that work best for the classroom environment and school  in which they teach. Research continues to highlight the differ ent ways students learn best and the causes for the behaviors  that often interfere with optimal learning. Strong teachers are  flexible in their approach, willing and open to new management  techniques, and always in touch with the diverse backgrounds  and needs that students bring to the classroom.

Classroom Management 10 Terms  Concepts Behavior Contract: Behavior contracts explicitly reference prob lem behaviors and provide immediate assessment and evaluation  for students to monitor progress. Behavior contracts are usually  temporary and provide praise and encouragement for students to  improve behavior. Choice Theory: Choice theory, developed by Glasser 1998 and  described by Erwin 2003, provides a framework for teachers  to follow when thinking about effective classroom management  practices. The theory illuminates five principles that guide all  human behavior including survival, love and belonging, power,  freedom and fun. Class Meeting: Class meeting is a classroom management strat egy that is primarily employed in elementary and middle school  classrooms to provide a forum for students to express thoughts,  feelings, concerns, ideas, etc. Class meeting empowers students  and provides them with an opportunity to voice their ideas in a  respectful setting. Congruent Communication: A model of classroom management  first proposed by Haim Ginott in the 1970's. Ginott suggests that  teachers create positive class environments by communicating  with students in ways that are in sync with their feelings about  themselves, by inviting and encouraging cooperation, and by  promoting discipline as opposed to punishment. Cooperative Learning: An instructional technique developed to  enhance academic achievement through social and interpersonal  skill development. When creating cooperative learning groups,  teachers must anticipate group dynamics and personality con flicts. Differentiated Instructional Methodologies: Instructional meth odologies developed to optimally match student readiness levels,  learning style and interest. A strong repertoire of differentiated  instructional methodologies helps teachers meet student needs  and thereby minimize management difficulties. Modeling: A management technique by which the teacher pres ents by example the behavior desired from students. Bibliography Babkie, A. 2006. Be proactive in managing classroom behav ior. Intervention in School and Clinic, 413; pp. 184-187.  Retrieved May 22, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN19121507sit eehost-live Bullock, L. M.,  Brown, R. K. 1972 Educational provi sions for emotionally disturbed children: A status report  . Gainesville, FL: The Florida Educational Research and  Development Council. Erwin, J. 2003. Giving students what they need. Educational  Leadership , 611; pp. 19-23. Retrieved May 22, 2007  from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?direct truedbehhAN11861306siteehost-live Ginott, H. 1972. Teacher and Child.  New York: Macmillan. Glasser, W. 1969. Schools without failure.  New York:  Harper  Rowe. Glasser, W. 1998. Choice theory . New York: Harper Collins. Hawkins, E., Kingsdorf, S., Charnock, J., Szabo, M.,  Middleton, E., Phillips, J.,  Gautreaux, G. 2011. Using  behaviour contracts to decrease antisocial behaviour in  four boys with an autistic spectrum disorder at home and  at school. British Journal of Special Education, 384,  201-208. Retrieved December 11, 2013, from EBSCO  Online Database Education Source Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehh AN69972208siteehost-live  Holliday, C. 2005. The human connection. The Clearing  House , 79 1; pp. 21-23. Retrieved May 22, 2007 from  EBSCO online database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN18687728siteehost-live Holverstott, J. 2005. Promote self-determination in stu dents. Intervention in School and Clinic , 411; pp. 39-41.  Retrieved May 22, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN17997147sit eehost-live Jones, S. M., Bailey, R.,  Jacob, R. 2014. Social-emotional  learning is essential to classroom management. Phi Delta  Kappan, 962, 19-24. Retrieved November 15, 2014, from  EBSCO Online Database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedb ehhAN99541498 Lickona, T. 2001. Creating the just community with chil dren. Theory into Practice, 16 2; pp. 97-104. Retrieved  May 22, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN5201971siteehost-live

Classroom Management 11 Manning, M. L.,  Bucher, K. T. 2001. Revisiting Ginotts  congruent communication after thirty years. The Clearing  House , 74 4; pp. 215-218. Manning, M. L.,  Bucher, K. T. 2005. Classroom manage ment for middle and secondary schools. The Clearing  House,  79 1; pp. 5-6. Retrieved May 22, 2007 from  EBSCO online database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedb ehhAN18687734siteehost-live Miller, R.,  Pedro, J. 2006. Creating respectful classroom  environments. Early Childhood Education Journal , 335;  pp. 293-299. Retrieved May 22, 2007 from EBSCO online  database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN216 80085siteehost-live Mills, C.,  Keddie, A. 2012. Fixing student deficit in con texts of diversity: Another cautionary tale for pre-service  teacher education. International Journal of Pedagogies   Learning, 71, 9-19. Retrieved December 11, 2013, from  EBSCO Online Database Education Source Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedb ehhAN85204977siteehost-live  Morris, R. 1996. Contrasting disciplinary models in educa tion. Thresholds in Education , 22 4; pp. 7-13. Sayeski, K. L.,  Brown, M. R. 2014. Developing a class room management plan using a tiered approach. Teaching  Exceptional Children, 472, 119-127. Retrieved November  15, 2014, from EBSCO Online Database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN98866690 Tomlinson, C. 1999 The differentiated classroom:  Responding to the needs of all learners . Alexandria,  VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum  Development. Touml;remen, F.,  Sanli, Ouml;. 2011. The effect of  positive management approach on the success of stu dents. New Educational Review, 231, 337-353. Retrieved  December 9, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database  Education Source Complete. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbehhAN64394500site ehost-live Tulley, M.  Chiu, L. 1998. Childrens perceptions of the  effectiveness of classroom discipline techniques. Journal  of Instructional Psychology , 253; p. 189. Watkins, C. 2005. Classrooms as learning communities: A  review of research. London Review of Education , 31;  pp. 47-64. Wessler, S. L. 2003. Rebuilding classroom relationships Its  hard to learn when youre scared. Educational Leadership,  611 Wilhite, K., Sheldon, B., Frey, L.,  Wilder, L. 2007. Using the  behavioral objective sequence in the classroom. Intervention  in School and Clinic, 424; pp. 212-218. Retrieved May 22,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?direct truedbehhAN24186412siteehost-live Wisneski, D. 2000. Hatching butterflies and other mysteries:  A story of a teacher learning to let go. Early Childhood  Education Journal, 281; pp. 29-33. Retrieved May 22,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?direct truedbehhAN11305152siteehost-live Suggested Reading Danforth, S.,  Boyle, J. R. 2000. Cases in behavior man agement. Upper Saddle River, NJ: MerrillPrentice Hall. Downing, J. A. 1990. Contingency contracts: A step-by-step  format. Intervention in School and Clinic, 26; pp. 111-113. Glasser, W. 2000. Every student can succeed. Chula Vista,  CA: Black Forest Press. Jones, V. F.,  Jones, L. S. 1995. Comprehensive classroom  management: Creating positive learning environments for  all students 4th ed. Boston: Allyn  Bacon. Kohn, A. 1993. Punished by rewards. Boston: Houghton  Mifflin. Myung-sook, K.,  Sunwoo, S. 2014. A comparative study of  elementary teachers beliefs and strategies on classroom  and behavior management in the USA and Korean school  systems. International Journal of Progressive Education,  103, 18-33. Retrieved November 15, 2014, from EBSCO  Online Database Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehh AN98811778 Rhode, G., Jenson, W. R.,  Reavis, H. K. 1992. Tough  kid book: Practical classroom management strategies.  Longmont, CO: Sopris-West. Scarpaci, R. 2007. A case study approach to classroom man agement. New York: Allyn and Bacon. Sprick, R. S.,  Howard, L. M. 1995. The teachers encyclo pedia of behavior management: 100 problems and 500  plans. Longmont, CO: Sopris-West.

Classroom Management 12 Essay by John Loeser, M.Ed. John Loeser is an Assistant Head of an elementary school in San Mateo, California. He received his Master's of Education in School  Leadership from Harvard University. His research interests include differentiated instruction, improving instructional practice, and  strategic change and leadership in schools. He is a member of the National and California Association of Independent Schools, and the  Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. He currently resides in San Mateo, California, with his wife.
Multi Age Classrooms Abstract This article explores the philosophical framework and histori cal perspective of multiage education, common characteristics of  multiage classrooms, and advantages and disadvantages of nongraded programs. Multiage classrooms ignore age distinctions  and group children of varying developmental levels together,  primarily in the elementary years. Researchers point to the  social and emotional benefits of multiage classrooms asserting  that such educational environments boost self-esteem and con fidence through positive interactions between peers of varying  age levels. While literature does not clearly identify specific aca demic benefits, supporters discuss various indicators that point  toward increased academic achievement as a result of multiage  pairings. Regardless of documented benefits, some educators  hold strong that multiage classrooms require too much prepara tion and monitoring, confuse parents, and often do not match well  with school based organizational schedules. This article provides  a comprehensive overview of multiage education and highlights  the dramatic increase of non-graded classrooms throughout the  1990's and the eventual decline in such classrooms in the early  21st century. Overview Traditional graded classrooms group students according to age  criteria and apply specific grade level distinctions 1st grade, 2nd  grade, etc. throughout a child's education from Kindergarten  through Grade 12. Multiage classrooms ignore age distinctions  and group children of varying developmental levels together,  primarily in the elementary years. Gaustad 1992 defines multi age education as the practice of teaching children of different  ages and ability levels without dividing them into grade specific  classrooms based on age. Multiage classrooms are often referred  to as non-graded classrooms due to the lack of grade level dis tinction. Multiage classrooms date back all the way to the one-room  schoolhouse. Aina 2001 discusses the unique characteristics of  the one-room schoolhouse that still hold true in modern nongraded classrooms. Children remained with one teacher and the  same classmates for many years throughout their education, cre ating a safe, stable and consistent environment for learning. The  mix of different ages, ability and developmental levels provided  many opportunities for increased social interaction, positive selfesteem development and enhanced responsibility. Children in  one-room schoolhouses had no perceived ceiling with regard to  what could be taught and what they could learn Aina, 2001. All  of these characteristics are true of modern multiage classrooms. Multiage classrooms include a wide variety of backgrounds,  abilities, ages, cultures, learning styles, and interests. The age  range typically spans three or more years, thus creating an opti Abstract Overview Characteristics of a Multiage Classroom Applications Viewpoints Advantages of Multiage Classrooms Social Benefits Academic Benefits Continuity Benefits Disadvantages of Multiage Classrooms Teacher Work-Load Parent Misunderstandings Schedule Mismatches Decline of Multiage Classrooms Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Multi Age Classrooms 14 mal learning situation for students of various developmental  levels. Students in a non-graded classroom typically remain with  the same teachers and students for many years as they progress  at their own pace Hoffman, 2003. Team teaching is a common practice, and teachers employ many  instructional methodologies to effectively reach all students  in the classroom. Cooperative learning techniques are used  extensively, as the emphasis is on student-centered learning as  opposed to teacher directed instruction. With the realization that  people learn in many different ways, differentiated instructional  methodologies are used to meet the varying readiness levels,  learning styles and interests in the classroom. Often, people confuse multigrade and multiage classrooms.  Both terms apply to classroom environments with more than  one age level of students. However, the key difference is that  multigrade classrooms continue to instruct students according  to grade level distinctions, whereas multiage classrooms group  students heterogeneously according to developmental and ability  levels, interests, and learning styles without reference to age. It is  common in multiage classrooms for students of different ages to  work together on a cooperative task. Hoffman 2003 asserts that  the difference between multigrade and multiage classrooms is  often blurred in research and literature, thus making it sometimes  difficult to separate studies concerning pure, authentic multiage  environments from those referencing multigrade classrooms. Horace Mann introduced graded classrooms in the early 1900's  as a way to provide an education for the vastly increased popu lation of the United States due to the flood of immigrants into  schools Aina, 2001. Thus the one room schoolhouse waned in  popularity in most areas of the country, excluding rural areas. In  the 1950's, multiage classrooms gained momentum, again due  to an increase in population as the baby boom generation grew  to school age Viadero, 1996. In both cases, the sheer numbers  of students drove schools to reconsider class configurations in  order to provide an education for all school aged children. It was  not until the 1980's that people began to think of multiage class rooms from an educational perspective considering the benefits  of teaching and learning in a non-graded setting Viadero, 1996. During the early 1990's the movement was in full force, espe cially in primary grades, and involved a large number of  supporters. Perhaps the biggest boost to the movement came in  1990, when the Kentucky Education Reform Act mandated that  every school in the state provide a non-graded primary program.  Kentucky fully embraced the multiage philosophy and required  that all children be provided the opportunity to work from Kin dergarten through 3rd grade at their own pace Pardini, 2005.  Interestingly, the biggest blow to the movement also came from  Kentucky in 1998 when the state relaxed the non-graded primary  mandate in response to teachers and administrators who yearned  for more flexibility with regard to grouping children and devel opment of curriculum objectives Pardini, 2005. The No Child  Left Behind Act of 2001 has further driven the movement off  course as teachers and administrators are being held account able for student mastery of grade-specific standards. By the  year 2005, multiage classrooms had found it increasingly more  difficult to meet the rigid standards required by the legislation  Pardini, 2005. In 2012, the administration of President Barack  Obama distributed waivers to the act, which exempted states  from certain aspects of the educational standards Klein, 2013. Characteristics of a Multiage Classroom Robert Anderson 1993 discusses specific criteria that multi-age  classrooms must meet or come close to meeting in order to be  considered authentic multi-age experiences. First and foremost,  he indicates that such classrooms must be void of specific grade  level distinctions. Classrooms must be created with at least two  heterogeneous groups of students of different ages to create  opportunities for flexible grouping and collaborative learning  opportunities. When assessing students, teachers need to replace  traditional grading and assessment tools with methodologies that  truly reflect student performance and growth without compari son to other students. Curriculum must be interdisciplinary in  nature and teachers must have the freedom to be as flexible as  necessary with curriculum objectives to ensure that all children  succeed. Finally, Anderson asserts that schools need policies  consistent with the multi-age philosophy and must stick to them  to ensure success. Hoffman 2003 further articulates common beliefs held by mul tiage classroom teachers. He asserts that teachers need to know  their students well in order to adapt their lessons to meet a wide  range of learning abilities and styles. Moreover, teachers need  to employ flexible groups as often as possible while taking on  the role of facilitator of learning, as opposed to director. Teach ers must also take student interest into account while building  opportunities for student choice. Most important, multiage class room teachers must create the conditions necessary for students  to appreciate and celebrate the diversity of learners Hoffman,  2003. One of the key hallmarks of a multi-age classroom is the fact  that deep relationships are formed between students, teachers  and parents. Hoffman 2003 indicates that students in a multiage classroom celebrate differences and appreciate one another  for their unique personal characteristics and qualities. In graded  classrooms, students from cross grade levels usually attach a  specific grade level identity to individual students and may not  socialize or engage in learning opportunities with others simply  because of this grade level distinction. Because multi-age classrooms highly value interpersonal rela tionships and include a wide variety of learners with different  developmental levels, ability levels, interests, and cultural and  family backgrounds, they create ideal conditions for capitalizing  on collaborative learning opportunities. Additionally, because  the range of ages in a multiage classroom generally spans three  years, teachers cannot rely heavily on whole group instruction.  Much of the daily routine, therefore, is designed to take maxi

Multi Age Classrooms 15 mum advantage of cooperative and peer based learning activities.  Teachers use a variety of grouping practices ranging from indi vidual and partner work to small and large group discussions.  Such flexible grouping strategies allow teachers to effectively  meet the needs of students in a multiage classroom Chapman,  1995. Applications Hoffman 2002 highlights three of the most common group  configurations in a multiage classroom including interest groups,  shared task groups and dyads. Students form their own groups  when participating in common interest activities which usually  take the form of learning centers. Kaplan et al. 1980 defines a  learning center as an area in the classroom containing a variety  of activities or materials developed specifically to teach, rein force, or extend a skill or concept. Common interest groups  allow students to investigate and explore their own interests with  other students within the structure of an already designed center  and are often organized to encourage meaningful connections  between content areas Hoffman, 2002. Another common grouping practice involves student-led shared  task groups. Small heterogeneous groups consisting of four to  five students arranged according to ability, gender, or age work  together on a common task Hoffman, 2002. These tasks are  developed in such a way that different abilities are required and  each student plays an integral role in completion. Dyads are also  used as a way to form permanent relationships between "old  timers" and "new timers." Usually, in the beginning of the school  year, those students who have been in the class previously pair  up with students new to the class to help them learn the daily  routines, etc. These relationships usually blossom throughout the  school year Hoffman, 2002. Cushman 1990 further describes alternative methodologies  used to create cooperative learning opportunities within a multi age classroom. Often, problem based groups are developed for  students to work in teams on a common unsolved problem. Such  groups require students to apply problem solving strategies in a  collaborative nature and touch on different developmental and  ability levels. Needs-requirement groups are created to instruct  students in a specific concept, skill or value. These groups are  usually developed homogeneously for a group of students who  all need instruction in a particular skill or understanding. The  main goal of this strategy is to reach with students the mastery  level before moving on to a new skill Al-Makahleh, 2011.  Reinforcement groups are used for learners who need extra work,  support, or re-teaching and learning style groups are developed  to capitalize on the variety of learning preferences that students  bring to the classroom experience. Howard Gardner's research  1993, 1997 regarding multiple intelligences acts as a guide  for teachers with regards to developing learning style groups.  Gardner discusses eight major intelligences including verballin guistic, logicalmathematical, visualspatial, bodilykinesthetic,  musicalrhythmical, naturalistenvironmental, interpersonal and  intrapersonal. Sternberg 1988, 1997 adds another element for  teachers to consider with research related to analytical, creative,  and practical intelligences. Teachers in multiage classrooms often employ many differenti ated instructional methodologies. Differentiated instruction is a  philosophy of teaching that stems from the belief that all stu dents are different. Students differ with regard to how they learn  best, their strengths and weaknesses, their cultural and family  backgrounds, what they are interested in learning about, etc. In  addition, Mills  Keddie found that, across many parts of the  world, the student population is becoming increasingly diverse,  bringing to classrooms divergent racial, ethnic, cultural, and  socioeconomic experiences Mills  Keddie, 2012. Nowhere  are these differences more apparent than in a multiage classroom. Multiage classrooms provide ample opportunities for student  choice, a hallmark of differentiated instructional methodologies.  As Benjamin 2006 indicates, when students have choice, it pro vides them with a sense of self-determination that translates into  increased commitment. Since students are afforded this freedom  of choice, they often move at their own pace from easier to more  difficult material. As students move at different paces through  different material according to developmental and ability level,  teachers need to employ alternative assessments including check lists, portfolios, observations, and anecdotal records Gaustad,  1992. Furthermore, teachers often use weekly student-teacher  conferences to check in, set goals, review progress, and directly  instruct when necessary Miletta, 1996. Throughout the learn ing experiences in a multiage classroom, teachers act more as  facilitators of learning as opposed to directors. Viewpoints Advantages of Multiage Classrooms Social Benefits Kolstad  McFadden 1998 indicates that students in multiage  classrooms often improve and acquire social behaviors through  direct involvement with a diverse age group. In fact, research  overwhelmingly asserts that students make considerable  advancement in social and affective skills in such a classroom  Kolstad  McFadden, 1998. Older students act as positive role  models for younger students and children and by nature, care for  and help each other more in a multiage setting. This role model ing and peer tutoring translates directly into increased positive  self-esteem Aina, 2001. Due to the significant emphasis on cooperative learning expe riences and differentiated group practices, students often work  together on common tasks requiring varying skills sets. These  learning experiences encourage students to work through both  positive and negative group interactions, thus enabling them  to acquire unique perspectives on group dynamics. Hoffman  2002 highlights the fact that students in a multiage classroom 

Multi Age Classrooms 16 learn to accept differences in abilities and social behaviors  through shared work experiences. Allen 1989 further illustrates  that because no grade level distinctions exist, students are more  likely to find and belong to social groups without reference to  age or maturation. Academic Benefits In a multiage classroom, older students reinforce their own  learning by teaching younger peers Viadero, 1996. Conversely,  younger students stretch academically, at times, when working  with older peers. Multiage classrooms operate on the principles  of Vygotskian theory and research regarding the zone of proxi mal development. According to Vygotsky 1978, the zone of  proximal development refers to the distance between the actual  developmental level as determined by independent problem  solving and the level of potential development as determined  through problem solving under the guidance of an adult or when  collaborating with more capable peers. When an older student  helps a younger student work on a task that heshe might not be  able to do on hisher own, the older student works to "pull" the  younger student through hisher zone of proximal development.  Multiage classrooms create just the right conditions for applica tion of Vygotskian theory Hoffman, 2002. Multiage classrooms also seek support in Piaget's theory that  learning and conceptual development is more likely to occur in  contexts where there is mutuality of power and influence Hoff man, 2002. When students choose groups based on interest they  exercise power over their own learning. When older students  work with younger students and provide scaffolding when grap pling with difficult concepts, students exert influence over each  other's learning. Thus, power and influence play a crucial role in  the theoretical underpinnings of the multiage classroom. Grant 1993 provides additional insight into how multiage  classrooms require students to take on more responsibility for  their own learning. Without frequent whole-group teacher  directed lessons, students find themselves in charge of their  own learning opportunities. Students often set their own goals  for learning, choose their own interest groups, navigate through  social interactions, and work cooperatively on shared tasks and  assignments. Although teachers guide and facilitate learning in a  multiage classroom, student directed learning takes precedence.  Thus, students benefit tremendously from increased responsibil ity and self-confidence. Continuity Benefits Students in a multiage setting usually remain in the same  classroom with the same teachers for a number of years. This  continuity from year to year helps teachers to have a much stron ger sense of each individual student's strengths and weaknesses  as compared to teachers in traditional graded classrooms. In a  typical graded classroom, teachers begin each year with very  little knowledge of student learning profiles and family back grounds. In a multiage classroom, teachers know the students  and their families well. This familiarity helps teachers, par ents and students feel comfortable because they understand the  philosophy, routines and expectations for learning Kolstad   McFadden, 1998. Disadvantages of Multiage Classrooms Although multiage classrooms encourage students to stretch aca demically, provide opportunities for students to exert power and  influence over their own and others learning, and creates oppor tunities for continuity from year to year, there is little research  and evidence pointing to vast increases in student achievement.  Veeman 1995 concluded that multiage classrooms are no better  and no worse than single age classrooms largely because many  of the instructional methodologies employed are also used in  single grade classrooms due to a similar diversity of learning  profiles. Teacher Work-Load Teachers in a multiage classroom find that they must work  extremely hard to ensure that they are able to plan a variety of  activities that are developmentally appropriate for individual  students. Similarly, teachers find that they need to consistently  use ongoing assessments to monitor student performance and to  create as many opportunities as possible for responsive teaching  Grant, 1993. Classroom management in a multiage classroom  also poses much difficulty in that teachers need to be extremely  adept and flexible enough to have many different groups work ing on a variety of tasks and activities at one time. As Chapman  1995 indicates, multiage classrooms involve an extensive  amount of planning needed to constantly group and regroup stu dents to maximize optimal learning situations. Parent Misunderstandings Many parents misunderstand the philosophy of multiage edu cation primarily because their experience in school involved  graded or single age classes. Parents sometimes express that  they believe their children will not be challenged enough as they  become older because they will be paired with younger students  in cooperative learning situations Kolstad  McFadden, 1998.  Some parents even feel that there will come a point when their  child might reach a learning ceiling and won't be able to learn  any more in such a setting. Similarly, parents of younger children  sometimes feel that their child will be discouraged in learning  situations when paired up with students of greater developmental  and academic ability. Schedule Mismatches Oftentimes, multiage classrooms coexist in the same school  building with single age or graded classrooms. Kolstad  McFad den 1998 indicate that the schedule necessary for a multiage  classroom to operate smoothly doesn't quite fit into traditional  schedules in most schools. In order for multiage education to be  successful, teachers need large chunks of time for learning cen ters, extended projects, student-teacher conferences, etc. With  the emphasis on student directed learning opportunities, tradi tional forty or fifty minute classes do not provide enough time  for the type of work that occurs in a multiage classroom.

Multi Age Classrooms 17 Decline of Multiage Classrooms Many educators believe that multiage classrooms have fallen  victim to the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 Pardini, 2005.  With rigid standards for learning and mandatory grade level  testing, multiage classrooms suffer because teachers feel their  flexibility and creativity must be compromised to ensure success  on standardized tests. Additionally, some educators attribute the  decline in multiage classrooms to the sheer amount of work and  preparation that must be invested to keep a multiage classroom  operating smoothly. It is difficult to find teachers willing to invest  the time and energy required to manage a multiage classroom,  especially if their compensation is equivalent to their counter parts in traditional graded settings. Finally, some say the decline  is due to the difficulty experienced when attempting to explain  the multiage philosophy to parents, especially in schools where  graded and multiage classes coexist Pardini, 2005. Regardless  of a marked decline in multiage classrooms, there still exists a  cadre of educators who are committed to the philosophy and will  remain so through any future obstacles. Terms  Concepts Common Interest Groups: Groups that allow students to inves tigate and explore their own interests with other students within  the structure of an already designed center and are often orga nized to encourage meaningful connections between content  areas. Differentiated Instruction: A philosophy of teaching that stems  from the belief that all students are different. Students differ with  regards to how they learn best, their strengths and weaknesses,  their cultural and family backgrounds, what they are interested  in learning about, etc. Dyads: A way to form permanent relationships between "old  timers" and "new timers". Usually, in the beginning of the school  year, students who have been in the class previously pair up with  students new to the class to help them learn the daily routines,  etc. Learning Center: An area in the classroom containing a variety  of activities or materials developed specifically to teach, rein force, or extend a skill or concept. Learning Style Groups: Groups that are developed to capitalize  on the variety of learning preferences that students bring to the  classroom experience. Howard Gardner's research 1993, 1997  regarding multiple intelligences acts as a guide for teachers with  regards to developing learning style groups. Multiage Classrooms: The practice of teaching children of dif ferent ages and ability levels without dividing them into grade  specific classrooms based on age. Multiage classrooms are often  referred to as non-graded classrooms due to the lack of grade  level distinction. Needs-Requirement Groups: Groups that are created to instruct  students in a specific concept, skill or value. These groups are  usually developed homogeneously for a group of students who  all need instruction in a particular skill or understanding Problem Based Groups: Groups that are developed for students  to work in teams on a common unsolved problem. Such groups  require students to apply problem solving strategies in a collab orative nature and touch on different developmental and ability  levels. Reinforcement Groups: Groups that are used for learners who  need extra work, support, or re-teaching. Shared Task Groups: Small heterogeneous groups consisting of  four to five students arranged according to ability, gender, and  age that work together on a common task. These tasks are devel oped in such a way that different abilities are required and each  student plays an integral role in completion. Zone of Proximal Development ZPD: Refers to the distance  between the actual developmental levels as determined by inde pendent problem solving and the level of potential development  as determined through problem solving under the guidance of an  adult or when collaborating with more capable peers. Bibliography Aina, O. 2001. Maximizing learning in early childhood  multiage classrooms: Child, teacher and parent percep tions. Early Childhood Education Journal, 284, 219-224.  Retrieved May 21, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN11305183sit eehost-live Allen, J. P. 1989. Social impact of age mixing and age seg regation in schools: A context-sensitive investigation.  Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 408416. Al-Makahleh, A. 2011. The effect of direct instruction  strategy on math achievement of primary 4th and 5th  grade students with learning difficulties. International  Education Studies, 44, 199205. Retrieved December 12,  2013, from EBSCO Online Database Education Source  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?direct truedbehhAN69755320siteehost-live Anderson, R. H. 1993. The return of the nongraded class room. Principal, 723, 912. Benjamin, A. 2006. Valuing Differentiated Instruction.  Education Digest, 721, 5759. Retrieved May 17,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research 

Multi Age Classrooms 18 Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN22680784siteehost-live Chapman, M. 1995. Designing literacy learning experi ences in a multiage classroom. Language Arts, 726, pp.  416428. Retrieved May 21, 2007 from EBSCO online  database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN951 0114379siteehost-live Cushman, K. 1990. The whys and hows of the multiage pri mary classroom. American Educator, 142, 2832. Fink, J. W. 2013. Capital success. Instructor, 1226, 1213.  Retrieved December 9, 2014 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN87745979 Gardner, H. 1993. Multiple intelligences: The theory in prac tice. New York: Basic Books. Gardner, H. 1997. Reflections on multiple intelligences: The  theory in practice. Phi Delta Kappan, 785, 200207.  Retrieved May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN9512053705 siteehost-live Gaustad, J. 1992. Nongraded primary education. Eugene,  OR: Clearinghouse on Educational Management. Grant, J. 1993. Multiage classrooms: The ungrading of  Americas schools. Peterborough, NH: The Society for  Developmental Education. Hoffman, J. 2002. Flexible grouping strategies in the mul tiage classroom. Theory into Practice, 411, 4752.  Retrieved May 21, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN6437539site ehost-live Hoffman, J. 2003. Multiage teachers beliefs and practices.  Journal of Research in Childhood Education, 181, 517.  Retrieved May 21, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN11145477sit eehost-live Kaplan, S., Kaplan, J., Madsen, S.,  Gould, B. 1980.  Change for children: Ideas and activities for individual izing learning. Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman. Klein, A. 2013. As NCLB waivers take hold, revision of law  remains up in air. Education Week, 3221, 25. Retrieved  December 14, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database  Education Source Complete. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbehhAN85766993site ehost-live Kolstad, R.  McFadden, A. 1998. Multiage classrooms:  An age-old educational strategy revisited. Journal of  Instructional Psychology, 251. Retrieved May 21,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?direct truedbehhAN394604siteehost-live Kyle, D. W. 2011. Families goals, school involvement, and  childrens academic achievement: A follow-up study thir teen years later. School Community Journal, 212, 924.  Retrieved December 9, 2014 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN69646848 Miletta, M. 1996. A multiage classroom: Choice  possibil ity. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. Mills, C.,  Keddie, A. 2012. Fixing student deficit in con texts of diversity: Another cautionary tale for pre-service  teacher education. International Journal of Pedagogies   Learning, 71, 919. Retrieved December 11, 2013, from  EBSCO Online Database Education Source Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN85204977siteehost-live Pardini, P. 2005. The slowdown of the multiage classroom.  School Administrator, 623, 2230. Retrieved May 21,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN16172690siteehost-live Sternberg, R. 1988. The triarchic mind: A new theory of  human intelligence. New York: Viking Press. Sternberg, R. 1997. What does it mean to be smart?  Educational Leadership, 546, 2024. Retrieved May 17,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN9703145800siteehost-live Torrence, M. 2012. An idea whose time has come?.  Montessori Life, 242, 1823. Retrieved December 9,  2014 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbsihAN78296116 Veeman, S. 1995. Cognitive and noncognitive effects of mul tigrade and multiage classes: A best-evidence synthesis.  Review of Educational Research, 654, 319381.

Multi Age Classrooms 19 Viadero, D. 1996. Mixed blessings. Education Week, 1533.  Retrieved May 21, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN9605160105 siteehost-live Vygotsky, L. S. 1978. Mind and society: The development  of higher mental processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard  University Press. Suggested Reading Fosco, A., Schleser, R., Andal, J. 2004. Multiage program ming effects on cognitive developmental level and reading  achievement in early elementary school children. Reading  Psychology, 25, 117. Retrieved May 21, 2007 from  EBSCO online database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN12377194siteehost-live Grant, J. 1993. Questions and answers about multiage pro grams: The multiage resource book. Peterborough, NH:  The Society for Developmental Education. Grant, J.  Johnson, B. 1994. A common sense guide to  multiage practices. Peterborough, NH: Crystal Springs  Books. Heins, E., Tichenor, M., Coggins, C., Hutchinson, C. 2000.  Multiage classrooms: Putting theory into practice.  Contemporary Education, 713. Retrieved May 21,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?direct truedbehhAN4467694siteehost-live Holloway, J. 2001. Grouping students for increased achieve ment. Educational Leadership, 593, 84-85. Retrieved  May 21, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN7147074siteehost-live Hunter, K. 2012. Responding to the challenge of providing  continuity of care in multi-age classrooms. Exchange  19460406, 204, 5759. Retrieved December 9, 2014  from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN73781265 Lloyd, L. 1999. Multiage classes and high-ability students.  Review of Educational Research, 692, 187212. Melliger, S. 2005. Our long, winding road to multiage class rooms. School Administrator, 623, 2230. Retrieved  May 21, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN16172691siteehost-live Ong, W., Allison, J., Haladyna, T. 2000. Student achievement  of 3rd-graders in comparable single-age and multiage  classrooms. Journal of Research in Childhood Education,  142, 205215. Palmer, S. 2005. Culture shock: An inside study of multiage  programs. School Administrator, 623, 26. Tomlinson, C. A. 1995. How to differentiate instruction in  mixed-ability classrooms. Alexandria, VA: Association  for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Viadero, D. 1996. Mixed bag. Teacher Magazine, 81,  2023. Retrieved May 21, 2007 from EBSCO online data base Education Research Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN96090101 94siteehost-live Essay by John Loeser, M.Ed. John Loeser is an Assistant Head of an elementary school in San Mateo, California. He received his Master's of Education in School  Leadership from Harvard University. His research interests include differentiated instruction, improving instructional practice, and  strategic change and leadership in schools. He is a member of the National and California Association of Independent Schools, and the  Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. He currently resides in San Mateo, California with his wife.
Peer Interaction Abstract Peer learning is a form of collaborative learning that capitalizes  on active learning. When involved in peer interaction, students  help each other learn new content or skills. While peer interac tion has always existed, the concept of students learning from one  another has become more prominent in the classroom in the past  25 years. During the peer interaction process, the tutor manages  the content or skills and modifies the material so that the tutee  learns new content or skills. The tutor benefits through monitor ing the learning process, as the tutor learns to detect, diagnose  and correct misconceptions or understanding. Peer learning has  been found effective for all ages, kindergarten through college,  all learning styles and disabilities, and across all content areas  Topping, 1996. Overview The action of giving and taking information that results in  knowledge construction and cognitive development can be  accomplished through peer-to-peer interaction Lim, 2012. Peer  interaction or peer learning is a term that represents a form of  collaborative learning that capitalizes on active learning within a  classroom. During peer interaction, there is a definite shift away  from the traditional lecture format of instruction to a more per sonal experience and efficacy in learning Saville, Zinn  Elliott,  2005. While the lecture disseminates information to the student,  in peer interaction, the student is actively involved in the learn ing process. Through peer learning, students acquire knowledge  and skill through active helping and supporting among status  equals or matched companions Topping, 2005. Students help  each other to learn and learn themselves during the process.  Tutors gain increased control over subject matter, develop selfesteem and social skills, and improved attitudes about school.  Tutees receive extra attention and emotional support during the  learning process Anderson, 2007. While peer interaction has always existed, the concept of stu dents learning from one another has gained greater prominence  as a classroom methodology in the past 25 years. In prior models  of peer interaction, peers were used to assist the teacher in  teaching to students who were less knowledgeable. This linear  model of transmission of knowledge was transferred from the  teacher to the student and then re-taught by that student to  another student. Teachers chose only the most knowledgeable  students to act as pseudo-teachers. The model has shifted, as  teachers scaffold peers to teach one another important concepts  or skills Topping, 2005. Peer learning originally targeted core  skill areas such as reading and mathematics Topping, 1987;  Topping  Branford, 1998. However, as teachers began to see  the benefits in peer interaction, peer learning began to appear  in lessons across the content areas. Peer interaction or learning  has now become a theory with strong implications in classroom  practice. Abstract Overview The Interaction Process Types of Peer Interaction Advantages of Peer Interaction Applications Training Effective Tutors Types of Peer Groupings Class-Wide Peer Tutoring Models Interteaching Viewpoints Criticism of Class-Wide Peer Tutoring Models Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Peer Interaction 21 Research by Lev Vygotsky 1978 supports peer learning theory.  Palincsar and Brown 1984 promote the using of scaffolding  to reach Vygtosky's concept of the zone of proximal develop ment. Vygotsky's concept of the zone of proximal development  is involved in the peer learning process. By scaffolding students,  students can activate schemata, organize and retrieve knowledge,  and monitor, evaluate and reflect on their learning Palincsar,  1986. Learning becomes socially constructed during interaction  and activity among peers Vygotksy, 1978. The Interaction Process Topping 2005 describes this process. The tutor manages the  content or skills and modifies the material so that the tutee learns  new content or skills. The tutor benefits through monitoring  the learning process, as he or she learns to detect, diagnose and  correct misconceptions or understanding. As Topping 2005  suggests, tutors can acquire valuable skills through tutoring,  such as "listening, explaining, questioning, summarizing, specu lating, and hypothesizing" p. 637. In turn, the tutees benefit  from trusted relationships with peers who have no authority over  them. Both tutor and tutee add to and extend their capabilities by  modifying that which they know and then building new under standings. King 2002 suggests that it is important to match the peer  learning approach a teacher chooses to the requirements of the  learning task. The nature of the cognitive process is the criti cal trigger for selecting a strategy. While some tasks require  primarily recall and repetition, other learning tasks require criti cal thinking, problem solving andor decision making. Higher  level cognitive processing in peer learning may involve "making  inferences, drawing conclusions, synthesizing ideas, generating  hypotheses, comparing and contrasting, finding and articulating  problems, analyzing and evaluating alternatives, and monitor ing thinking" King, 2002, p. 34. Peers learn to exchange ideas,  information, perspectives, attitudes and opinions King, 2002;  Cohen, 1994. Conditions for positive peer interaction include shifting meth odologies from a focus on individual achievement to creation  of classroom environments that promote genuine collaboration.  Challenging problem-solving must be "beyond the comfort zone  of student knowledge in order to promote discussion," and teach ers need to carefully select groups "to ensure respectful working  relations" Blair, 2004, p. 38. They also need to provide imme diate feedback through quality discussion time. Types of Peer Interaction There are many types of peer interaction: Peer Tutoring Peer interaction shifts the nature of instruction in such models  as peer tutoring. Peer tutoring exists when two students take on  specific roles as tutor and tutee. The focus is on learning con tent and is driven by a defined process of application. The tutor  is trained by the teacher and is given structured materials or is  taught to follow a certain process for tutoring a peer. This model  can be used in any content area. Topping 2001 states that teach ers must consider certain elements for there to be successful peer  tutoring sessions. While the tutee learns specific content or skills,  the tutor benefits from the experience, as well. The tutor's social  and communication skills are enhanced during the process. The most simplistic form of peer tutoring is drill and practice,  peer assisted rehearsal, or recall and repetition of material. Often  this form is used when students are learning factual material.  Students learn to work together, as they master skills or content  King, 2002. Through drill and practice, students are scaffolded  with one another. Tutors and tutees communicate with one  another by practicing a certain skill and provide feedback for one  another during practice of the skill. They reinforce understand ing or skill level Topping, 2005. Peer Assistance Peer assistance is another simpler form of peer interaction,  as peers aid students with disabilities by helping them read  directions, gather classroom materials, or take notes for them.  Mastropieri, Scruggs, and Berkeley 2007 point out that peers  who assist those with disabilities "promote social responsibility  and stronger understanding of other's needs" p. 2. Peer Instruction Peer instruction is defined as "an instructional method aimed at  exploiting student interaction during lectures by focusing stu dents' attention on underlying concepts" VanDijk, VanderBerf,   VanKuelen, 2001, p. 4. The teacher presents key points in  lecture form and the students are given questions to answer  individually. The students then pair off or work in small groups,  discussing their answers with one another. This form of peer  interaction breaks up the traditional lecture, as students think  through the concepts presented Mazur, 1997. Peer Grouping Peer grouping also called interpretive communities is an  effective group strategy often seen in writing classes. Weaver,  Robertson and Smith 1999 state that peer grouping provides  students the opportunity to investigate how their writing might  impact readers. Teachers who are committed to peer grouping  during writing workshops must develop community skills within  their students, allowing time for students to develop trust in one  another and provide supportive and useful feedback Weaver,  Robertson  Smith, 1999. Peer Review Editing Peer review editing also involves the writing process. In this  process, students edit and respond to one another's writing. The  teacher is freed from the task of reading and editing every stu dent paper Karegianes, Pascarella,  Pflaum 1980. Students  are thrust into the role of being responsible for one another's suc cess in writing.

Peer Interaction 22 Peer Questioning Peer questioning is often used to promote high-quality questioning  among peers. There are several types of questioning approaches  such as strategic questioning. In strategic questioning, students  are provided with strategic questions that specifically develop  problem solving King, 2002. Pairs squared develops reasoning  skills in argumentation King, 1995. In guided reciprocal peer  questioning, the teacher structures peer interaction that promotes  high-level cognitive processing. Question starters are given to  peers in the form of formatted questions that promote student  thinking during discussion King, 2002. Interteaching Interteaching is defined as "a mutually probing, mutually inform ing conversation between two people" Boyce  Hineline, 2006.  In this type of active learning methodology, the teacher designs  and distributes guides that lead students through course mate rial. Questions are in the guide and trigger the learning process,  with some questions focusing on factual knowledge and others  emphasizing application and synthesis. Students pair with one  another and discuss the questions and their answers. The teacher  acts as a mentor, clarifying questions, evaluating student under standing, and supporting the students in this interactive process  Saville, Zinn,  Elliott, 2005; Boyce and Hineline, 2002. Peer Monitoring Peer monitoring occurs when peers support one another's learning  behaviors by "observing and checking" the behaviors of group  members during the process of peer group interaction Brown,  Topping, Hennington  Skinner, 1999. Students evaluate the  processes and products of their peers in a group through peer  assessment, assessing products through evaluation or grading. Class-Wide Peer Tutoring Models Class-wide peer tutoring models are instructional options used  throughout classrooms for enhancing reading skills, such as flu ency and comprehension, as well as basic skills across content  areas. In these models, students are placed in groups either ran domly or through rank-ordering based on pre-test results. The  academic content of the materials are developed by the teacher,  and they support community among peers. Class-wide peer tutor ing CWPT is used to improve basic skills in lower performing  students Salend, 2005. Peer-assisted learning strategies PALS  are used in improving reading skills. In class-wide student tutor ing teams CSTT, the teacher develops study guides or concept  cards and peers take turns reading and responding to the mate rials Harper  Maheady, 1999. Jigsaw peer models promote  common goals, as peers work on individual contributions to  group activities. Each group has members completing the same  task as another member in another group Aronson, Blaney,  Stephan, Sikes,  Snapp, 1978. Literature Circles Literature circles are small groups of students who work collab oratively "to share their reactions to and discuss various aspects  of books that all group members have decided to read" Salend,  2005, p. 425. The student ownership and peer interaction in  literature circles are critical in enhancing childrens literacy  development and helping them cultivate the skills to become  lifelong readers Marchiando, 2013. Each member of the litera ture circle has a specific role, such as: 	 The discussion leader, the peer who monitors and fosters  discussion; 	 The passage reader, the peer who reads key passages  aloud; 	 The connector, the peer who links content to students'  experiences; 	 The definer, the peer who looks up and explains key  vocabulary; 	 The summarizer, the peer who reviews key points and the  sequence of action; and, 	 The illustrator, the peer who develops corresponding  graphics Salend, 2005, p. 425. Advantages of Peer Interaction No matter which peer interaction model is activated in the  classroom, teachers maintain a supportive role during the peer  interaction process. They structure the groups and give explicit  guidance in how to collaborate effectively so that high-quality  thinking and discussion are ensured King, 2002; Cohen, 1994.  Teachers establish specific goals for the sessions, planning spe cific activities that reflect these goals Salend, 2005. In general, peer interaction has been found to be advantageous  to student learning in a number of ways. Webb and Palincsar  1996 state that the process of providing and receiving explana tions from peers can help students engage in deeper cognitive  processes. Through peer interaction, students clarify thinking,  reorganize information, correct misconceptions, and develop  new understanding. Through the concepts and skills acquired  during the process of peer interaction, students can successfully  transfer these skills to other activities Webb  Palincsar, 1996.  Students also respond more frequently in peer interaction than  in class discussion. Peer interaction also results in more time on  task Stenhoff  Linnugaris, 2007. All in all, peer interaction or learning leads "to consolidation,  fluency and automaticity of core skills." Through peer learning,  students are more able to monitor and regulate "the effective ness of their own learning strategies," thus enhancing their  metacognitive skills Topping, 2005. Peer learning has been  found effective for all ages, kindergarten through college, all  learning styles and disabilities, and across all content areas Top ping, 1996. As Stenhoff and Linnugaris 2007 point out, peer  tutoring arrangements provide students with another option for  helping all students access the general curriculum.

Peer Interaction 23 Applications Training Effective Tutors Carnine 2002 suggests several ways to train effective tutors.  Teachers should establish expectations by modeling instructional  and presentation behaviors with the tutors. Through role-playing,  tutors can shape their corrective feedback techniques and perfor mance-monitoring strategies. Through workshop settings, tutors  can practice problem-solving scenarios, as well. Teachers should  be particularly cognizant of matches between tutors and tutees.  Allsopp 1997 emphasizes the importance of pairing tutors and  tutees, choosing carefully to pair students of differing skills and  abilities. Jenkins and Jenkins 1988 suggest that personal char acteristics should also factor in the pairing of tutors and tutees.  Haisley, Tell and Andrews 1981 advocate that tutees who are  difficult to manage should be paired with tutors who are more  aggressive so they will not be intimidated by these tutees. Types of Peer Groupings Peers act as instructional agents for other students when peer  tutoring is presented as a model in the classroom. Stenhoff and  Linnugaris 2007 suggest several variations to peer groupings: 	 In heterogeneous groups, peers are taught by tutors who  are in the same grade-level but who possess a higher level  of knowledge or skill. 	 In homogeneous groups, tutors teach peers who possess  similar skills. 	 In cross-age tutoring groups, tutors teach younger stu dents. 	 In reverse-role tutoring groups, students with disabilities  tutor other students who do or do not have disabilities p.  10. Class-Wide Peer Tutoring Models Class-Wide Peer Tutoring Models provide academic interven tion across the classroom. Heron, Villareal, Ma, Christianson,  and Heron 2006 suggest that there are common characteristics  found within these evidence-based instructional models. Such  commonalities include: 	 Actively engaging all peers within the classroom simulta neously; 	 Providing highly structured and evidence-based compo nents by well-trained peers and diligent teachers; 	 Developing reading and reading-related activities for all  demographic groups; 	 Training peers in tutor and tutee roles, such as presenting  instructional items, evaluating performance, providing  positive feedback, and correcting behaviors, when neces sary; and, 	 Assessing progress through formative assessment p. 69. Interteaching Interteaching is defined as "a mutually probing, mutually inform ing conversation between two people" Boyce  Hineline, 2002.  In this type of active learning methodology, the teacher designs  and distributes guides that lead students through course material.  Questions are in the guide that leads students through the learn ing process, with some questions focusing on factual knowledge  and others emphasizing application and synthesis. Students pair  with one another and discuss the questions and their answers.  The teacher acts as a mentor, clarifying questions, evaluating  student understanding, and supporting the students in this inter active process Saville, Zinn,  Elliott, 2005; Boyce  Hineline,  2002. Saville, Zinn, and Elliott 2005 suggest that discussion  makes up about 75 of the class period. Students assess their  understanding of their learning by compiling an interteaching  record that alerts the teacher about which questions they found  difficult to answer, which ones they would like to have reviewed  in class discussion or lecture, and which ones they found useful.  The teacher can use this information for exploring ways to fur ther enhance learning opportunities. While interteaching is often used in lecture type classrooms, this  active experience is an effective supplement to lecture class rooms. There are many benefits to the use of this model in the  classroom. Interteaching promotes active learning; immediate  social reinforcement from peers and the teacher; a cooperative  learning environment; and retention of material Saville, Zinn,   Elliott, 2005. Peer Tutoring Peer tutoring exists when two students take on specific roles as  tutor and tutee. The focus is on learning content and is driven  by a defined process of application. The tutor is trained by the  teacher and is given structured materials or is taught to follow  a certain process for tutoring a peer. This model can be used in  any content area. Topping 2001 states that teachers must con sider certain elements for there to be successful peer tutoring  sessions. Teachers can assure purpose and integrity in peer tutor ing if there are: 	 Clear contexts for using peer tutoring; 	 Objectives that are clear and concise; 	 Defined curriculum areas for its use; 	 Participants who are clearly identified; 	 Clearly defined methods of peer tutoring; 	 Appropriate materials readily available; 	 Adherences to time on task; 	 Differentiation for diverse learners; 	 There is a clearly defined training process; 	 Processes that are closely monitored and evaluated;

Peer Interaction 24 	 Tutors and tutees who are assessed regularly; and, 	 Feedback sessions that are geared to improving future  tutoring sessions. While the tutee learns specific content or skills, the tutor benefits  from the experience, as well. The tutor's social and communica tion skills are enhanced during the process. For these benefits to  occur, teachers must watch for any differential in the learners, as  too great a differential can cause lack of learning by either par ties in the peer tutoring model Topping, 2001. Viewpoints Criticism of Class-Wide Peer Tutoring Models Class-wide peer tutoring models are instructional options used  throughout classrooms for enhancing reading skills, such as flu ency and comprehension, as well as basic skills across content  areas. In these models, students are placed in groups either ran domly or through rank-ordering based on pre-test results. The  academic content of the materials is developed by the teacher,  and teachers support community among peers. However, teachers  often face impediments to the learning process. Non-responders  can be a problem in the peer interaction process. Also, if teachers  are not properly trained in the model, they may provide unchal lenging materials or fail to adhere to planned procedures. Other  common problems in these models are increased noise levels,  bickering among peers, and grade inflation Greenwood, Terry,   Arreaga-Meyer, 1993. Terms  Concepts Active Learning: Active learning is a term used in teaching  methodology that refers to allowing students ample opportuni ties to clarify, question, apply, and consolidate new knowledge.  Group discussions, problem solving, case studies, role plays,  journal writing, and structured learning groups are strategies that  are often associated with active learning. Collaborative Learning: Collaborative learning is the grouping  and pairing of students for the purpose of achieving an academic  goal. In addition, the success of one student helps other students  to be successful. Heterogeneous Groups: Heterogeneous groups are groups where  students have varying abilities. Homogeneous Groups: Homogeneous groups are groups where  students have similar interests or abilities. Metacognition: Metacognition is an important concept in cog nitive theory that is defined as a learner's awareness of his or  her own learning process. Learners who are aware of their own  learning process are able to monitor their learning progress and  make changes to their process. Scaffolding: Scaffolding occurs when students are paired with  other students to support them in their learning. Schemata: Schemata are a mental bundle of knowledge in the  brain that holds everything a student knows about a topic. Learn ing occurs when learners integrate new knowledge with prior  knowledge stored in this long-term memory, or schemata. Tutee: A tutee is a student who is the recipient of the support of  a tutor. Tutor: A tutor provides expertise, experience, and encourage ment to a tutee that needs this sort of support in learning. Zone of Proximal Development: The zone of proximal develop ment is the distance between a student's actual developmental  level and the level of potential of a student. Bibliography Allsopp, D. 1997 Using classwide peer tutoring to teach  beginning algebra problem-solving skills in heterogeneous  classrooms. Remedial and Special Education, 18 6, 367379. Retrieved December 13, 2007 from EBSCO Online  Database Academic Search Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedba9hAN97121261 98siteehost-live Anderson, L. 2007. A special kind of tutor. Teaching Pre-K,  37 5, 56-57. Retrieved October 1, 2007 from EBSCO  Online Database Academic Search Premier. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbaphAN238 96812siteehost-live Aronson, E., Blaney, N., Stephan, C., Sikes, J.,  Snapp, M.  1978. The jigsaw classroom. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Blair, R. 2004, March. Peer interaction. MT: Mathematical  Teaching, 186, 36-38. Retrieved October 1, 2007 from  EBSCO Online Database Academic Search Premier.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedba phAN13020588siteehost-live Boyce, R.,  Hineline, P. 2006. Interteaching: A strategy  for enhancing the user-friendliness of behavioral arrange ments to the college classroom. The Behavior Analyst, 25  2, 215-226. Brown, C., Topping, K., Henington, C.,  Skinner, C. 1991.  Peer monitoring of learning behavior: The case of "check ing chums." Educational Psychology in Practice, 15 3,  174-182. Retrieved December 13, 2007 from EBSCO  Online Database Academic Search Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedba9hA N6449889siteehost-live

Peer Interaction 25 Carnine, D. 2002. Elements of effective reading tutoring pro grams. Washington, D.C.: US Department of Education. Cohen, E. 1994. Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for  productive small groups. Review of Educational Research,  64 1, 1-35. Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L., Mathes, P.,  Simmons, D. 1997. Peerassisted learning strategies: Making classrooms more  responsive to diversity. American Educational Research  Journal, 36 1, 62-94. Greenwood, C., Terry, C., Arreaga-Mayer, C. 1992. The  classwide peer tutoring program: Implementation factors  moderating students' achievement. Journal for Applied  Behavior Analysis, 25 1, 101-116. Haisley, E., Tell, C.,  Andrews, J. 1981. Peers as tutors in  the mainstream: Trained "teachers" of handicapped ado lescents. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 14,  224-226. Harper, G.,  Maheady, L. 1999. Classwide student tutoring  teams: Aligning course objectives, student practice and  testing. Proven Practice: Prevention and Remediation of  School Problems, 1, 55-59. Heron,T., Villareal, D., Ma, Yao, Christianson, R.,  Heron,  K.  2006. Peer tutoring systems: Applications in class room and specialized environments. Reading and Writing  Quarterly, 22 1, 27-45. Retrieved October 1, 2007 from  EBSCO Online Database Academic Search Premier.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedba phAN18711054siteehost-live Jenkins, J.,  Jenkins, L. 1988. Peer tutoring in elementary  and secondary programs. In E.L. Meyer, G. L. Vergason,   R.J. Whelan Eds., Effective Instructional Strategies  pp. 335-354. Denver: Love. Karegianes, M., Pascarella, E.,  Pflaum, S. 1980. The  effects of peer editing on the writing proficiency of lowachieving tenth grade students. Journal of Educational  Research, 73 4, 203-207. Retrieved October 1, 2007,  from EBSCO Online Database Academic Search Premier.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedba phAN4904116siteehost-live King, A., 1995. Pairs squared: Peer learning for increas ingly complex tasks. Unpublished manuscripts and materi als. San Marcos, CA: California State U. King, A. 2002. Structuring peer interaction to promote highlevel cognitive processing. Theory Into Practice, 41 1,  34-41. Retrieved October 1, 2007 from EBSCO Online  Database Academic Search Premier. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbaphAN6437541 siteehost-live Lim, E. 2012. Patterns of kindergarten children's social  interaction with peers in the computer area. International  Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,  73, 399-421. Retrieved December 19, 2013, from EBSCO  Online Database Education Source Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhA N78641308siteehost-live  Marchiando, K. 2013. Creating lifelong readers: Student  ownership and peer interaction in literature circles.  Illinois Reading Council Journal, 413, 13-21. Retrieved  December 16, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database  Education Source Complete. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbehhAN87877487siteeh ost-live Mastropieri, M., Scruggs, E.,  Berkeley, S. 2007. Peers  helping peers. Educational Leadership, 64 5, 54-58.  Retrieved October 1, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database  Academic Search Premier. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbaphAN23996914siteeh ost-live Mazur,E. 1997. Peer instruction: A user's manual. Upper  Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. O'Donnell, A.,  King, A. 1999. Cognitive perspectives on  peer learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Palincsar, A.,  Brown, A. 1984.Reciprocal teaching of  comprehension-fostering and comprehension-monitoring  activities. Cognition and Instruction, 2, 171-175. Palincsar, A. 1986.The role of dialogue in providing scaf folded instruction. Education Psychologist, 21, 73-98. Rudasill, K., Niehaus, K., Buhs, E.,  White, J. M. 2013.  Temperament in early childhood and peer interactions  in third grade: The role of teacherchild relationships in  early elementary grades. Journal of School Psychology,  516, 701-716. Retrieved December 19, 2013, from  EBSCO Online Database Education Source Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN92644375siteehost-live Salend, S. 2005. Creating inclusive classrooms: Effective  and reflective practice for all Students  5th ed. Upper  Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson. Saville, B., Zinn, T.,  Elliott, M. 2005. Interteaching versus  traditional methods of instruction: A preliminary analy sis. Teaching of Psychology, 32 3, 161-163. Retrieved  October 1, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database Academic 

Peer Interaction 26 Search Premier. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?di recttruedbaphAN17753475siteehost-live Stenhoff, D.,  Linnugaris, B. 2007. A review of the effects  of peer tutoring on students with mild disabilities in  secondary settings. Exceptional Children, 74 1, 8-30.  Retrieved October 1, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database  Academic Search Premier. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbaphAN26361614siteeh ost-live Topping, K. 1987. Peer-tutored paired reading: Outcome data  from ten projects. Educational Psychology, 7 2, 133-145. Topping, K. 1996. The effectiveness of peer tutoring in fur ther and higher education: A topology and review of the  literature. Higher Education, 32 3, 321-345. Topping, K., 1998. Peer assessment between students in col lege and university. Review of Educational Research, 68  3, 249-276. Topping, K. 2001. Peer assisted learning: A practice guide  for teachers. Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books. Topping, K. 2005. Trends in peer learning. Educational  Psychology, 25 6, 631-645. Retrieved October 1, 2007  from EBSCO Online Database Academic Search Premier.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedba phAN18786911siteehost-live Topping, K.,  Branford, J. 1998. The paired maths hand book: Parental involvement and peer tutoring in math.  London: Fulton. VanDijk, L. VanDerBerg, G.,  Van Keulen, H. 2001.  Interactive lectures in engineering education. European  Journal of Engineering Education, 26, 15-28. Vygotsky, L. 1978. Mind in society: The development of  higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: MIT  Press. Weaver, C., Robertson, A.,  Smith, B. 1999. Interpretive  communities. In A. Robertson  B. Smith Eds.,  Teaching in the 21st Century. pp. 201-211. Routledge  Palmer. Retrieved October 1, 2007 from EBSCO online  database Literary Reference Center. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedblfhAN17349619 siteehost-live Webb, N.,  Palincsar, A. 1996. Group processes in  the classroom. In D.C.Berliner  R.C. Calfee Eds.,  Handbook of Educational Psychology pp. 841-873. New  York: Simon and Schuster MacMillan. Suggested Reading Brown, A, and Palincsar, A. 1989. Guided, cooperative  learning and individual knowledge acquisition. In L.B.  Resnick Ed. Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays  in honor of Robert Glaser pp. 393-451. Hillside, N.J.:  Lawrence Erlbaum. Delquedri, J., Greenwood, C., Whorton, D., Carta, J.,  Hall,  R. 1986. Classswide peer tutoring. Exceptional Children,  52, 535-542. Duran, D.,  Monereo, C. 2005. Styles and sequences of  cooperative interaction in fixed and reciprocal peer tutor ing. Learning and Instruction, 15 3, 179-199. Retrieved  October 1, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database Academic  Search Premier. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?di recttruedbaphAN17951047siteehost-live Hashimoto, K., Utley, C., Greenwood, C.  Pitchlyn, C.  2007. The effects of modified classwide peer tutor ing procedures on the generalization of spelling skills  of urban 3rd grade elementary students. Learning  Disabilities, 5 2, 1-29. Retrieved October 1, 2007 from  EBSCO Online Database Academic Search Premier.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedba phAN26045500siteehost-live Johnson, D.,  Johnson, R. 1979. Conflict in the class room: Controversy and learning. Review of Educational  Research, 49, 51-70. Maheady, L., Mallette, B.,  Harper, G. 2006. Four classwide peer-tutoring models: Similarities, differences,  and implications. Research and Practice, 22 1, 65-89.  Retrieved October 1, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database  Academic Search Premier. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbaphAN18711056siteeh ost-live Maifair, L. 1999. Practically painless peer editing.  Instructor Intermediate, 108 7, 8-11. Retrieved October  1, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database Academic Search  Premier. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtru edbaphAN1736965siteehost-live Scruggs, R.,  Mastropieri, M. 1998. Tutoring and students  with special needs. In K. Topping  S. Ely Eds., Peerassisted learning pp. 165-182. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence  Erlbaum. Slavins, R. 1995. Cooperative learning 2nd  ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. Topping, K.,  Bryce, A. 2004. Cross-age peer tutoring  of reading and thinking: Influences on thinking skills.  Educational Psychology, 24 5, 595-621.

Peer Interaction 27 Topping, K., Peter, C., Stephen, P.,  Whale, M. 2004.  Cross-age peer tutoring of science in the primary  school: Influence on scientific language and think ing. Educational Psychology, 24 1, 57-75. Retrieved  December 13, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database  Academic Search Complete. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedba9hAN12419052siteeh ost-live Utley, C., Mortwert, C.,  Greenwood, C. 1997. Peermediated instruction and interventions. Focus on  Exceptional Children, 29 5, 1-25. Retrieved December  13, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database Academic Search  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedba9hAN9703252601siteehost-live Webb, N. 1989. Peer interaction and learning in small  groups. International Journal of Educational Research,  13,  21-39. Webb, N. 1991. Task related verbal interactions and math ematics learning in small groups. Journal for Research in  Mathematics Education, 22 5, 366-389. Essay by Tricia Smith, EdD Dr. Tricia Smith is an assistant professor of English at Fitchburg State College in Fitchburg, Massachusetts and teaches theory and peda gogy courses in English education. She has written several articles on on-line instruction, advising, and collaborative learning. Her other  areas of interest include linguistics and young adult literature.
Student Mentoring Abstract This article explores mentoring relationships for at-risk youth  with an emphasis on the guiding principles of effective mentor ing programs and the steps necessary to initiate such programs  for students K-12. Discussion focuses on the definition of a men toring relationship, individuals engaged in such relationships;  research based benefits of participation in mentoring partner ships, specific examples of successful mentoring programs, and  recommended strategies for application in the K-12 educational  and community setting. Specific programs highlighted include  Big Brothers Big Sisters, Healthy Kids Mentoring Program,  Architect, Construction Management, and Engineering ACE,  and more general peer-tutoring and peer-assistance models. Overview Definition of Mentoring Relationships A mentoring relationship includes a student mentee and his  or her mentor. Hinton 2006 describes a mentor as someone  who serves in the role of a teacher, counselor, guide, protector  or friend. There is a limited understanding of mentor educa tion teaching someone to be a mentor in schools, and being  a mentor is not recognized as a profession Ulvik  Sunde,  2013. Programs abound, however, in business and, especially,  education settings. A mentor and mentee are paired according  to interests, personalities, common characteristics, and needs.  According to Bernstein 2007, both individuals meet regularly  on a one-on-one basis in scheduled meetings that are usually  arranged by community organizations, corporations, or schools.  Bernstein 2007 highlights that mentoring relationships help  young people overcome obstacles and enhance their strengths.  This sets them on a path of life equipped with the skills nec essary to be successful. King et al. 2002 further illuminates  the findings of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent  Health that positive connections to adults or other students is  the number one factor saving children from suicide, depression,  substance abuse, early sexual involvement, and teen pregnancy. Barton-Arwood et al. 2000 highlight three guiding principles  that serve as a framework for the development of a mentoring  program. First and foremost, mentoring programs allow indi viduals to build reciprocal relationships. Both the mentor and  the mentee benefit greatly as each has something unique to  share and gain from the experience. Secondly, Rockwell 1997;  cited in Barton-Arwood et al., 2000 indicates that mentoring  relationships are important for the purpose of completing tasks  or achieving goals. Often, mentoring partnerships can take the  form of peer-tutoring or peer-assistance dyads in which both  partners work together toward a common goal or completion of  a shared task or assignment. Lastly, Barton-Arwood et al. discuss  the findings of Miller 1997 and Townsel 1997 that mentoring  relationships help reinforce and model appropriate social values  and norms such as honesty, sharing, and empathy. King et al. 2002 indicate that mentoring programs offer  safe environments, encouragement and support, empowering  activities, and specific guidelines for behavior. Thus mentor ing programs directly contribute to increased self-esteem,  Abstract Overview Definition of Mentoring Relationships Individuals Engaged in Mentoring  Relationships Benefits of Mentoring Relationships Connections Self Esteem Better School Attendance  Increased  Academic Achievement Examples of Mentoring Programs Applications Viewpoints Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Student Mentoring 29 improved attitudes toward school, more appropriate behav ior; fewer discipline issues and fewer absences from school.  King et al. 2002 further highlight the fact that mentoring  programs can assist students by focusing directly on academic  achievement and connections between school, peers, family,  and community. Factors influencing learning relate to sharing  experiences, sharing information, reflection, observation and  support. Additional categories include questioning and listen ing skills, and similarity and differences between both parties  Jones, 2013. Some mentoring programs are designed spe cifically to provide support and guidance to students who are  considered at-risk and potentially likely to participate in nega tive, unhealthy behaviors. King et al. 2002 indicate the overarching goal of a mentor ing program is to reduce risky behavior by connecting a student  in need to an individual from the school or community. The  researchers indicate that mentors serve as positive role models  while providing emotional, social and academic support. Brit ner et al. 2006 further assert that mentoring programs help  students increase autonomy and assume responsibility for life  choices. Ideal mentoring relationships capitalize on successful  relationships to guide students toward increased responsibility  for healthy, positive decisions. As students gain more autonomy  and work toward making their own decisions, they continue to  rely on the mentoring relationship for support and guidance. According to Bernstein 2007, about 3 million young students in  the United States participate in some type of a formal mentoring  program. However, the need for additional mentoring relation ships is astounding as the sheer number of youths who need a  trusted role model is ever increasing due to pressures related to  drugs, alcohol, sex, and other potentially risky behaviors. Fur thermore, the number of young children and adults who would  benefit from a mentoring relationship regardless of exposure to  risky behaviors is vast and increasing. Mentoring relationships  play a positive role in any student's life as long as they are will ing and open to the experience. Individuals Engaged in Mentoring Relationships Britner et al. 2006 indicate that mentoring programs are most  often designed for abused and neglected youth, youth who  have disabilities, pregnant and parenting adolescents, juve nile offenders, and academically at-risk students. The majority  of mentoring relationships taking place in school settings are  designed for students who are academically at risk. Such stu dents are usually paired with volunteer teachers, older students,  or adults from the community. Mentors and mentees meet on a  regular basis to work on academic activities such as homework,  reading, writing, projects, etc. Britner et al., 2006. Mentoring  for academically at-risk students takes place in a structured time,  usually at school, when mentor and mentee can work produc tively on academic tasks while building a strong relationship.  Academic tasks provide a structure for the mentoring relation ship and create opportunities for mentors and mentees to interact  and learn from each other. Students with disabilities are the second most common youth  group in school settings in need of mentoring relationships. Brit ner et al. 2006 indicate that research on the effects of mentoring  for students with disabilities is limited. However, most educators  agree that pairing a disabled student with a mentor with simi lar disabilities provides a positive role model for students who  need as many positive examples as possible. Many students with  disabilities have very few role models with similar disabilities  to learn from, look up to, and emulate. Such mentoring rela tionships provide the conditions necessary for students to gain  self-esteem and confidence. Mentors demonstrate, by example,  that physical limitations do not deter individuals from achieving  their goals. In some school settings, students placed in foster care or alter native home settings may benefit tremendously from mentoring  relationships. Rhodes 2002 indicates that students who have  been in multiple home placements, in particular, may experience  difficulty when trusting adults and therefore great care and con sideration must be given to ensure optimal matches for mentoring  relationships. Furthermore, Rhodes 2002 asserts that it is not  uncommon for frequent disruptions to occur in mentor relation ships designed for youth who have alternative home placements  simply due to the unfortunate instability in their lives. Although these are the most common groups of students in  school settings who are involved in mentoring relationships,  students from all walks of life benefit from the strong relation ships developed in mentoring programs. Mentoring programs  are not always designed for students potentially exposed to risky  behaviors. They can be developed for students entering college,  considering a particular career, needing a specific type of role  model, etc. The possibilities for mentoring relationships are  endless; if there is a need in a student population, a mentoring  program can be developed to address that need. Benefits of Mentoring Relationships Barton-Arwood et al. 2000 assert that the mentoring relation ship provides benefits for both mentors and mentees. Specifically,  mentees benefit from learning and practicing new skills with a  trusted individual, experiencing a variety of models regarding  appropriate behavior, interacting with a variety of individuals of  different backgrounds, and learning and practicing the expected  norms of the environment. Barton-Arwood et al. 2000 further  explain that mentors benefit from improved self-esteem through  modeling to another peer, increased opportunities to interact with  peers other than themselves, and mastered social competence. Dappen  Isernhagen 2005 discuss the multitude of research  studies conducted regarding the benefits of mentoring for both  mentors and mentees. Tierney  Grossman 1995 found that  mentoring relationships improve student grades, relationships  with others, and reduce drug and alcohol use. Mecca 2001  asserts that mentoring programs improve school attendance,  deter teen pregnancy, and decrease the likelihood that students  will participate in gangs. Dappen  Isernhagen 2005 further 

Student Mentoring 30 highlight studies conducted by Curtis  Hansen-Schwoebel  1999 indicating that mentoring relationships result in increas ing levels of trust and self-confidence, improving attitudes  toward school, maintaining better school attendance, increasing  academic achievement, and improving relationships with adults  and peers. In a study conducted by Morrison et al. 2000 related to ele mentary school mentoring programs, results indicated that  older student mentors had positive feelings about themselves  because they helped younger students succeed. Furthermore,  teachers involved in the mentoring program reported that older  and younger children played more with each other on the play ground as a direct result of experiences in the program and the  formation of strong relationships. Morrison et al. 2000 further  explain that the program helped to break down stereotypical  gender barriers, increased students' sense of trust and increased  the potential for learning. Quince  Layman 2006 conducted  a study specifically related to a middle school mentoring pro gram and corroborated the results indicated by Morrison et al.  2000. They found that all participants reported a boost in selfesteem, improved organization and communication skills, and  an increasing sense of motivation, maturity and responsibility. Connections Britner et al. 2006 highlight the fact that mentoring relation ships improve student connections between peers, family, school  and community. Students build strong, positive relationships  and increase levels of trust. Furthermore, mentoring encourages  youth to accept additional formal and informal services from  friends, family members, school personnel and community orga nizations. Once students experience the benefits of a mentoring  relationship, they are more likely to become involved with and  connected to other support programs. Enhanced connections are  one of the most beneficial outcomes of mentoring relationships.  When students feel connected to a positive wider community,  they are far more likely to make good life decisions. Self Esteem As noted, a preponderance of evidence exists indicating that men toring relationships improve self-esteem and self-confidence.  Both mentors and mentees experience enhanced self-esteem  because of the sense of responsibility and autonomy that both  gain as a direct result of the relationship. High levels of selfesteem and self-confidence are related to positive decisions and  healthy behavior. Better School Attendance  Increased Academic  Achievement Bernstein 2007 indicates that mentored students attend school  more regularly and exhibit more improved academic performance  when compared to students without mentors. Barton-Arwood et  al. 2000 further support the claim that mentored students dem onstrate increased academic achievement as a result of positive  social interactions. When students feel supported by peers or  adults their self-esteem and school attendance increase, directly  translating, for some students, into improved academic achieve ment and success. Examples of Mentoring Programs Big Brothers Big Sisters is likely the best-known mentor ing program in the United States. Part of the mission of the  program is to help children reach their potential through pro fessionally supported, one-to-one relationships with mentors  Big Brothers Big Sisters, 2007. Program mentors work with  children ages 6 through 18 to provide opportunities ranging  from community based and school based mentoring partner ships to programs designed specifically for African American  and Hispanic students as well as children of incarcerated adults  Big Brothers Big Sisters, 2007. Mentors and mentees par ticipate in a variety of activities ranging from playing sports  together, working on homework and playing board games  to reading a book, taking a walk, or just simply talking Big  Brothers Big Sisters, 2007. King et al. 2002 discusses the Healthy Kids Mentoring Pro gram offered to elementary students in one Midwestern suburban  public school. Mentors met with students twice a week for 90  minutes and focused on four components including relationship  building, self-esteem enhancement, goal setting, and academic  assistance King et al., 2002. Results indicated significant con tributions to academic achievement, self-esteem and connections  between peers, families, the school and the community. Some programs offer group mentoring. Bernstein 2007  discusses one such program, the Architect, Construction Man agement, and Engineering ACE Mentor Program. ACE  operates in urban areas all over the United States and fosters  relationships as students collaborate on a project in an architect's  office. Mentors help the students write proposals, plan, design,  and construct a final project. At the end of the year, groups build  and present their final project. Barton-Arwood et al. 2000 further highlight alternative Peerbased interventions similar to mentoring programs that have a  specific academic focus such as peer-tutoring and peer-assisted  learning. Both involve student partnerships designed to raise  levels of academic achievement and to boost self-confidence.  Additionally, they provide information regarding programs with  more of a social focus such as peer mediation and peer modeling,  both designed to enhance positive social relationships. Applications Researchers, King et al. 2002, Dappen  Isernhagen 2005  and Reese 2006 all provide practical suggestions for starting  a mentoring program, maintaining the program, and evaluating  success. There is no doubt that initiating a mentoring program  can be a difficult task. However, with the right types of support,  programs can start and benefits can be provided for those stu dents in need.

Student Mentoring 31 King et al. 2002 and Dappen  Isernhagen 2005 stress the  critical importance of obtaining administrative support from the  board of education, superintendent, and building administrators  before setting out to develop and implement a mentoring pro gram. Administrative support is crucial as administrators hold  the key to funding, schedules, and personnel who can assist with  implementation. Also, building administrators i.e. principals,  assistant principals serve as invaluable resources when it comes  to recommending students in need of mentoring and conveying  the critical importance of such relationships to parents who may  need guidance and coaching to understand the benefits of men toring. Dappen  Isernhagen 2005 discuss the need to identify the  general program parameters including goals, student popula tion, qualifications to participate, and resources needed. King et  al. 2002 emphasize the goal to create a multidimensional pro gram that includes opportunities for relationship building, self  esteem enhancement, goal setting and academic support. Strong  mentoring programs need a clearly articulated plan outlining the  specific population served, individuals responsible for manage ment, structure and type of mentoring partnerships, overarching  goals and performance outcomes. Whenever presenting the idea  of such a program to administrators, it is imperative that devel opers have a clearly outlined and articulated plan that can lead  directly into implementation if approved. Once a plan is devised and approved, initiators need to locate  individuals willing to serve as mentors as well as develop criteria  for student participation in the program. King et al. 2002 sug gest searching for mentors within the community and the school.  Dappen  Isernhagen 2005 further suggest recruiting men tors from businesses, retired workers and service organizations.  Reese 2006 even recommends finding mentors in senior citi zens and college students. Wherever program developers choose  to search for mentors, they must ensure that the individuals  chosen believe in the mission of the mentoring program, support  the goals, and are devoted to ensuring success for all mentees.  Similarly, mentees must be chosen who will directly benefit from  the services provided and who demonstrate a genuine need for  mentorship and guidance. Chosen mentors must also be provided with ongoing training and  support to ensure they employ best practices and feel they have  individuals they can turn to when they need advice or guidance  regarding particular situations. All three research teams King  et al., 2002, Dappen  Isernhagen, 2005, Reese, 2006 agree  that continuous training and support for mentors is necessary to  ensure the success of any mentoring program. Mentors must be  provided with a "toolkit" of strategies to use to "reach" students  in need, help them increase autonomy, and influence the types  of decisions students make. Although on the surface mentoring  relationships may seem easy to establish, maintaining success ful relationships require work and dedication on behalf of both  partners. Careful consideration must be given to mentor and mentee pair ings to ensure that partnerships are created reflective of interest,  common traits or characteristics, and personalities. Dappen   Isernhagen 2005 suggest developing criteria for matching  mentors and mentees that relate specifically to program goals.  They encourage a clearly defined rationale for how students are  matched with mentors and why certain partnerships are created  as opposed to others. Matching mentoring partners is perhaps the  most important component of developing a mentoring program  because the relationship is the core of what makes each partner ship unique and successful. Finally, program developers must ensure that evaluation criteria  are in place to meaningfully assess the success of the program and  determine if changes are necessary to promote further success  and growth. Researchers King et al., 2002, Dappen  Isern hagen, 2005, Reese, 2006 all agree that evaluation indicators  are necessary for sustaining a high quality program. Feedback  and input from mentors and mentees must be sought, and sug gestions for improvement should be implemented to enhance  opportunities afforded by the program. Viewpoints One issue highlighted in some of the literature concerns the fact  that most mentoring programs start in middle and high school  with little opportunities for intervention early on during the  elementary years. Although there are some great examples of  elementary school-based mentor programs as noted above, very  few evaluative studies have been conducted regarding imple mentation of such programs at the elementary level King et al.,  2002. For the most part, studies related to program effective ness during the elementary years point to anecdotal evidence  or findings from studies conducted at one school. Few studies  provide a comprehensive overview of the benefits of mentoring  programs across wide populations of elementary school aged  children. King et al. 2002 highlight findings of O'Donnell et  al. 1995 that early interventions may prove more effective in  preventing current and future health problems. Despite findings  such as these indicating that early interventions are critical, a  majority of mentoring programs still exist at the middle and high  school levels. Terms  Concepts At-risk Youth: Elementary and secondary students who are  potentially likely to participate in negative, unhealthy behaviors  which put them at risk for academic failure. Architect, Construction Management, and Engineering ACE  Mentor Program: ACE operates in urban areas all over the  United States and fosters relationships as students collaborate on 

Student Mentoring 32 a project in an architect's office. Mentors help the students write  proposals, plan, design, and construct a final project. Big Brothers Big Sisters: Big Brothers Big Sisters is likely the  most well known mentoring program across the United States.  Part of the mission of the program is to help children reach their  potential through professionally supported, one-to-one relation ships with mentors Big Brothers Big Sisters, 2007. Program  mentors work with children ages 6 through 18. Healthy Kids Mentoring Program: A program offered to ele mentary students in one Midwestern suburban public school.  Mentors meet with students twice a week for 90 minutes and  focus on four components including relationship building, selfesteem enhancement, goal setting, and academic assistance King  et al., 2002. Mentee: An individual in need of a strong relationship, support  and guidance to help him or her make positive decisions about  life and exhibit healthy behavior. Mentor: A mentor is someone who serves in the role of a teacher,  counselor, guide, protector or friend to a mentee. A mentor and  mentee are paired according to interests, personalities, common  characteristics, and needs. Peer-Tutoring: Often, mentoring partnerships can take the form  of peer-tutoring or peer-assistance dyads in which both partners  work together toward a common goal or completion of a shared  task or assignment. Reciprocal Relationships: The mentoring partnership is an  example of a reciprocal relationship. Both Mentor and Mentee  benefit from the experience through improved self-esteem, selfconfidence, academic achievement, etc. School-Based Mentoring: In some programs, community leaders  connect with students through school-based mentoring SBM  programs, e.g., adults who mentor at-risk students. Frels et al.,  2013 Bibliography Barton-Arwood, S., Jolivette, K.,  Massey, N. 2000.  Mentoring with elementary-age students. Intervention  in School and Clinic , 361; pp. 36-39. Retrieved June 2,  2007 from EBSCO online database, Education Research  Complete, http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN3497976siteehost-live Bernstein, L. 2007. Is there a mentor in your future? Career  World, 354; pp. 9-11. Big Brothers Big Sisters 2007. Our Programs. Retrieved  June 5, 2007, from http:www.bbbs.org. Britner, P., Balcazar, F., Blechman, E., Blinn-Pike, L.,   Larose, S. 2006. Mentoring special youth populations.  Journal of Community Psychology, 346; pp. 747Retrieved June 2, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Academic Search Premier. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbaphAN22671811siteeh ost-live Curtis, T.,  Hansen-Schwoebel, K. 1999. Big Brothers Big  Sisters school-based mentoring: Evaluation summary of  five pilot programs. Philadelphia: Big Brothers Big Sisters  of America. Dappen, L.,  Isernhagen, J. 2005. Developing a student  mentoring program: Building Connections for at-risk stu dents. Preventing school failure, 493; p. 21-25. Retrieved  June 2, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN17154023siteehost-live Frels, R. K., Onwuegbuzie, A. J., Bustamante, R. M., Garza,  Y., Nelson, J. A., Nichter, M.,  Soto Leggett, E. 2013.  Purposes and approaches of selected mentors in schoolbased mentoring: a collective case study. Psychology in  the Schools, 506, 618-633. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbehhAN88107336siteeh ost-live  Hinton, K. 2006. The true meaning of mentorship. Diverse:  Issues in Higher Education, pp. 60. Retrieved June 2,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN23188044siteehost-live Jones, J. 2013. Factors influencing mentees' and mentors'  learning throughout formal mentoring relationships.  Human Resource Development International, 164, 390408. Retrieved December 16, 2013, from EBSCO Online  Database Education Source Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN90134894 siteehost-live King, K., Vidourek, R., Davis, B.,  McClellan, W. 2002.  Increasing self-esteem and school connectedness through  a multidimensional mentoring program. The Journal  of School Health, 722; pp. 294-299. Retrieved June 2,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN7451125siteehost-live Mecca, A. M. 2001. The mentoring revolution: Growing  America one child at a time. Part I.  Tiburon, CA:  California Mentor Foundation. Miller, D. 1997. Mentoring structure: Building a protective  community. Preventing School Failure, 413; pp. 105Student Mentoring 33 109. Retrieved June 2, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN9708105173 siteehost-live Morrison, I., Everton, T.,  Rudduck, J. 2000. Pupils help ing other pupils with their learning: Cross-age tutoring in  a primary and secondary school. Mentoring  Tutoring,  83; pp. 187-200. Retrieved June 2, 2007 from EBSCO  online database Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhA N4052829siteehost-live O'Donnel, J., Hawkins, J., Catalano, R., Abbot, R., Day,  L. 1995. Preventing school failure, drug use, and  delinquency among low-income children in long-term  intervention in elementary schools. American Journal of  Orthopsychiatry, 651; pp. 87-99. Retrieved June 2, 2007  from EBSCO online database Academic Search Premier.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedba phAN9502161313siteehost-live Quince, A.,  Layman, M. 2006. Pupil2Pupil peer mentor ing. Education Review, 192; pp. 85-89. Retrieved June 2,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN23074714siteehost-live Reese, S. 2006. Elements of an effective mentoring program.  Techniques: Connecting Education  Careers, 816; pp.  20-21. Retrieved June 2, 2007 from EBSCO online data base Education Research Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN22379169 siteehost-live Rhodes, J. E. 2002. Stand by me. The risks and rewards  of mentoring today's youth. Cambridge, MA: Harvard  University Press. Rockwell, S. 1997. Mentoring through accessible, authentic  opportunities. Preventing School Failure, 413; pp. 111114. Retrieved June 2, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN9708105175 siteehost-live Tierney, J. P.,  Grossman, J. B. 1995. Making a difference:  An impact study of Big Brothers Big Sisters. Philadelphia:  PublicPrivate Ventures. Townsel, K. T. 1997. Mentoring African American youth.  Preventing School Failure, 413; pp. 125-127. Retrieved  June 2, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education  Research Complete http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx ?directtruedbehhAN9708105181siteehost-live Ulvik, M.,  Sunde, E. 2013. The impact of mentor edu cation: Does mentor education matter? Professional  Development in Education, 395, 754-770. Retrieved  December 16, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database  Education Source Complete. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbehhAN90503492siteeh ost-live  Suggested Reading Blinn-Pike, L., Kuschel, D., McDaniel, A., Mingus, S.,   Poole-Muttie, M. 1998. The process of mentoring preg nant adolescents: An exploratory study. Family Relations,  47; pp. 119-127. Retrieved June 2, 2007 from EBSCO  online database Education Research Complete http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhA N582852siteehost-live Charlton, T. 1998. Enhancing school effectiveness through  using peer support strategies with pupils and teachers.  Support for Learning  132; pp. 50-53. Dappen, L.,  Isernhagen, J. 2002. TeamMates: A model to  support mentoring in rural schools. Journal of Research  in Rural Education, 173; pp. 154-161. Dubois, D. L., Holloway, B. E., Valentine, J.C.,  Cooper, H.  2002. Effectiveness of mentoring programs for youth:  A meta-analytic review. American Journal of Community  Psychology, 302; pp. 157-197. Retrieved June 2, 2007  from EBSCO online database Academic Search Premier  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedba phAN6713612siteehost-live Dopp, J., Block, T. 2004. High school peer mentoring that  works! Teaching Exceptional Children, 371; pp. 56-62.  Retrieved June 2, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN14315345sit eehost-live Guetzloe, A. 1997. The power of positive relationships:  Mentoring programs in the school and community.  Preventing School Failure, 413; pp. 100-104. Retrieved  June 2, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN9708105171siteehost-live Hernandez, B., Hayes, E., Balcazar, F.,  Keys, C. 2001.  Responding to the needs of the underserved: A peer men tor approach. Psychosocial Process, 14; pp. 142-149. Reglin, G. 1998. Mentoring students at-risk: An underuti lized alternative education strategy for K-12 teachers.  Springfield, IL: Thomas.

Student Mentoring 34 Rhodes, J. E., Grossman, J. B.,  Resch, N. L. 2000. Agents  of change: Pathways through which mentoring rela tionships influence adolescents' academic adjustment.  Child Development, 71; pp. 1662-1671. Retrieved June 2,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN3981090siteehost-live Essay by John W. Loeser, Ed.M. John Loeser is an Assistant Head of an elementary school in San Mateo, California. He received his Master's of Education in School  Leadership from Harvard University. His research interests include differentiated instruction, improving instructional practice, and  strategic change and leadership in schools. He is a member of the National and California Association of Independent Schools, and the  Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. He currently resides in San Mateo, California with his wife.
Team Teaching Abstract This article explores various team-teaching models, benefits for  both teaching and learning, and the conditions necessary for suc cessful teacher partnerships. Team-teaching is the practice of  including two or more teachers of equal status in a classroom to  provide instruction to one group of students. Models discussed  include special educationregular education teacher partnerships,  middle school teacher teams, and interdisciplinary teams in the  high school setting. All models positively influence both profes sional growth for teachers and learning outcomes for students.  Conditions necessary for successful partnerships are explored  including common planning time, communication, definition of  roles, accommodating schedules, symbiotic relationships, and  teacher willingness. Overview Dieker  Murawski 2003 define team-teaching as two or more  teachers of equal status in the classroom providing instruction  to one group of students at the same time. A variety of teamteaching models exist, each with a different purpose. However,  the overarching benefits of each model are the same. Teamteaching provides opportunities for teachers to break free from  isolation, collaborate on meaningful curriculum development  projects, share teaching philosophies, better assess student learn ing outcomes, and grow professionally. Furthermore, successful  team-teaching provides a model for students with regard to  cooperation, teamwork, positive interaction, and the results of  collaborative efforts. One team-teaching model involves partnerships between special  education teachers and regular education teachers. This model  has gained popularity in the past decade mostly due to an empha sis on inclusive education strategies as mandated by laws such  as the 1997 Individuals with Disabilities Education Act IDEA.  This practice places a burden on the general educator who is  often inadequately trained to meet the needs of such a diverse  classroom. Co-teaching has been one of the support strategies  used to address the challenges and capitalize on the opportunities  for learners with special needs in the general education class room Nierengarten, 2013. In fact, the majority of co-teaching  scenarios involve specialist teachers partnered with regular edu cation teachers. By the year 2000, approximately 80 of the nation's middle  schools reported using teacher teams as a mode of instruction  Hackmann, Petzko, Valentine, Clark, Nori  Lucas, 2002.  Middle schools use the method extensively primarily because  of the social and emotional needs of adolescent students. Teams  Abstract Overview Co-Teaching: Special Education  Regular  Education Teachers Teacher Teams in Middle Schools Interdisciplinary Team Teaching Benefits of Team Teaching Applications Common Planning Time Communication Definition of Roles Scheduling Willingness to Team Teach Symbiotic Relationships Initial Strategies for Implementing  Team-Teaching Models Alternative Perspectives Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Team Teaching 36 generally consist of two teachers, each teaching separate dis ciplines i.e. math and science together and language arts and  social studies together. Teaching-teams are responsible for one  team of students and meet regularly to discuss teaching philoso phies, management systems, assessment, etc. Interdisciplinary teams, primarily at the high school level, are  yet another form of team-teaching that encourages connections  across disciplines and creates opportunities for increased appli cations to real-world settings Murata, 2002. Interdisciplinary  teams involve two or more teachers from different disciplines  partnering to develop a course that combines different areas  of expertise and bridges the gap between otherwise seemingly  unrelated fields of study. Co-Teaching: Special Education  Regular Education  Teachers Warwick 1971 was the first to propose co-teaching as a way to  reach all students with learning disabilities. During the 1980's the  movement gained momentum and became more commonplace  compared to the traditional pull-out programs where students  with learning disabilities were removed from the regular edu cation class to receive one-on-one instruction. At the time, the  central motivating factor behind co-teaching scenarios was the  fact that partnerships within the classroom dramatically reduced  the student-teacher ratio, thus benefiting students who needed  extra support and individualized instruction Friend, 2007. The  co-teaching model differs from teacher partnerships where two  regular education teachers combine, for example, two classes  of twenty students for instructional purposes. Rather than two  teachers for forty students, the co-teaching model creates stu dent-teacher ratios of two teachers for twenty students. Friend 2007 asserts that one strong benefit of the co-teaching  model is that both teachers bring unique qualities and character istics to the classroom. Regular education teachers often focus on  the content and curriculum while special education teachers focus  on the actual learning process and assisting students with dem onstration of skills and understandings. This type of partnership,  if developed with careful consideration and nurtured throughout,  can have an impact on student performance and achievement  outcomes. Friend 2007 does make explicit, however, that coteachers need extensive professional development to understand  the philosophy behind co-teaching, expectations for performance,  ways to develop a positive working relationship and strategies to  maximize contributions to teaching and learning. Cook  Friend 2000 describe five models of co-teaching that  are used primarily in situations where special education teachers  are partnered with regular education teachers in the homeroom  setting. The first model includes one teacher and one assistant.  In this model, one teacher is primarily responsible for delivering  instruction. The station-teaching model integrates both teachers  into the delivery of instruction. However, both teachers work  with different stations of students on activities and assignments.  Parallel teaching scenarios are created when both teachers plan  together, but deliver instruction separately to different groups  and alternative teaching scenarios involve one teacher working  with small groups to pre-teach, re-teach, or supplement regular  instruction. Cook and Friend 1995 suggest that the most effec tive co-teaching model involves team-teaching where two or  more teachers share responsibility for instruction for the entire  class at the same time. Teacher Teams in Middle Schools According to Hackmann et al. 2002, teacher teams are a  common middle school organizational structure. As noted,  approximately 80 of middle schools in the nation report using  teaching teams. Middle school teams usually include two teach ers responsible for separate areas of the curriculum, but highly  integrated in terms of teaching philosophy, assessment, manage ment policies, etc. These teams often provide students with a  greater sense of security and stability. As Picucci et al. 2002  indicate, teacher teams in middle school provide the structure  necessary to maintain closer social and emotional connections  between teachers and students. Although middle school teacher  teams may not frequently include opportunities for two teachers  to work collaboratively in the same classroom at the same time,  other models of team-teaching such as co-teaching, as described  above, can be integrated with teacher teams to influence student  achievement outcomes. Interdisciplinary Team Teaching Interdisciplinary team-teaching occurs mostly in high schools as  teachers with different areas of expertise collaborate to develop  courses that integrate curriculum and fields of study. According  to Murata 2002, in 1997 the National Association of Secondary  School Principals called for greater personalization, integrated  and engaging curriculum, and opportunities for connections to  the real world. Murata 2002 asserts that effective team-teach ing is a practice with broad appeal and potential for improving  teaching. She believes these calls by secondary school principals  can be answered to a great degree by creating more opportunities  for interdisciplinary team-teaching. Davis 1995 indicates that in order for interdisciplinary teamteaching to be successful, teachers need to collaborate on  planning, content integration, teaching and evaluation. Wenger  and Hornyak 1999 further highlight that teachers need to  develop lesson objectives together, discuss "turn taking" within  the teaching partnership, and create time to discuss the overall  quality of an effective lesson. Murata 2002 sheds light on a possible reason interdisciplinary  team-teaching is not as common as it could be in many high  schools. Although team-teaching is often seen as innovative and  empowering for teachers, the philosophy itself is contrary to  many schools already established cultures. Often team-teaching  is considered a direct challenge to the status quo and change is  not easy for many individuals Murata, 2002.

Team Teaching 37 Benefits of Team Teaching Many documented benefits exist with regard to team-teaching.  First and foremost, team-teaching provides an opportunity for  teachers to model positive interactions, collaboration and life long learning for students Sandholtz, 2000. When teachers  interact with each other in the classroom, students see firsthand  what it is like to collaborate well with another individual and  how teamwork can lead to better results. Furthermore, Fullan  1991 asserts that successful team teaching leads to mutual sup port for growth. In turn, this leads to increased effectiveness and  innovation in teaching. When teachers have an opportunity to  work out of isolation, generate ideas with another teacher and  spark engaging curriculum development, they are motivated to  become better teachers and to improve instructional practice. The  right partnership can lead to the conditions necessary to rejuve nate veteran teachers and provide a forum for the exchange of  fresh perspectives of novice teachers. Moreover, Sandholtz 2000 indicates that team-teaching often  serves as the means to motivate teachers' professional devel opment. Murata 2002 claims that team-teaching provides a  dynamic way for teachers to learn from each other and grow.  Through team-teaching scenarios, teachers have many opportu nities to share instructional methodologies, ideas for curriculum  development, and best practices that reach all learners. Brenan  Witte 2003 state that more accurate and concise  diagnostic observations can be made when two teachers work  collaboratively in one classroom. As opposed to one teacher col lecting assessment data and documenting anecdotal observations  and evidence of learning, two teachers with different perspec tives collect more meaningful assessment data to help inform  instruction. Applications Whether regular education teachers are paired with other reg ular education teachers or with special education teachers,  research consistently demonstrates that a variety of factors must  be considered in order to create ideal conditions for successful  partnerships Bouck, 2007, Friend, 2007, Kohler-Evans, 2006,  Murata, 2002, Shibley, 2006. Without careful consideration of  these factors, teaching-teams may fail and even worse, present  negative images to students regarding cooperation, teamwork  and collegiality. The conditions necessary include common planning time, clear  expectations and roles, symbiotic relationships, consistent  communication, accommodating schedules and a genuine will ingness to work collaboratively with a partner. Common Planning Time In a majority of studies exploring the team-teaching experience,  researchers have uncovered that common planning time is the  number one determining factor for success Arguelles, Hughes,   Schumm, 2000, Bouck, 2007, Friend, 2007. Teachers need  time to discuss curriculum objectives, student work, discipline,  assessment results, student concerns and a myriad of other topics  related to the everyday classroom experience. Murata 2002  further asserts that many teachers go so far as to voice strong  opinions for common planning time as opposed to actual coteaching time in the classroom. One of the main issues teachers  face when attempting to implement a team-teaching model is the  lack of time in a traditional school schedule for such meetings  to occur. The effectiveness of the team model hinges on school  administrators' abilities to create the time necessary for commu nication. Communication Brenan  Witte 2003 assert that consistent communication is  another extremely important condition for successful team-teach ing. Teachers need to communicate honestly about everything  ranging from teaching philosophies and classroom management  policies to assessment methodologies and physical classroom  organization systems. In separate, unrelated studies, Arguelles,  Hughes,  Schumm 2000 uncovered the critical importance  of flexibility and compatibility with regard to teaching philoso phies and styles, Shibley 2006 noted the compelling need for  unified assessment philosophies, and Bouck 2007 articulated  the need for both teachers to be clear on behavior management  policies and how physical space is divided in the classroom to  maximize instructional opportunities. Both partners must dis cuss virtually every aspect of teaching and learning and fully  disclose individual beliefs and practices to ensure a successful  team. Kohler-Evans 2006 further asserts that communication  must be consistent and frequent. Definition of Roles Bouck 2007 concluded that in order for team-teaching situa tions to be successful, teachers need to be clear with regard to  their role in the classroom. Partners should outline expectations  for curriculum development and instruction and be willing to  redefine roles as necessary. Murata 2002 asserts the incredible  importance of sharing core beliefs about teachers' roles and atti tudes as the foundation for strong working relationships. When  considering the partnership between regular education and  special education teachers, Bouck 2007 claims that teachers  should not resort to the comfortable roles of regular education  teachers leading large groups discussions while special educa tion teachers work with individual students or small groups in  need of extra support. Rather, in a true team-teaching model, both  teachers should assume responsibility for all types of instruc tional delivery within clearly defined roles mutually agreed upon  throughout the experience. Scheduling From a systems perspective, schedules are often the one obstacle  impeding the implementation of team-teaching models. Suc cessful partnerships hinge on available times in the schedule for  teachers to meet to collaborate, engage in discussion and grapple  with questions related to teaching and learning. With a myriad of 

Team Teaching 38 competing interests, scheduling large blocks of time for teachers  to engage in these critical conversations is often nearly impos sible for some school administrators. Murata 2002 discusses  the impact scheduling can have, specifically in high schools, on  a teacher's willingness to participate in a team-teaching model,  indicating that restrictions of most high school schedules often  discourage teachers who might otherwise be interested in col laborative work. If a school is serious about the implementation  of a team-teaching model, administrators need to manipulate the  scheduling puzzle to ensure that times are available and students  who would most benefit from a team-teaching experience have  the opportunity to participate Friend, 2007. Willingness to Team Teach Shibley 2006 indicates that potential collaborators should be  chosen according to their willingness to invest the time necessary  for success. No teacher should ever be forced into a team-teach ing situation. Murata 2002 discusses the critical importance  of allowing teachers, at the high school level, to choose their  partners and their curriculum. Encouraging a willingness among  high school teachers to participate in a team-teaching experience  can be quite difficult as they need to be willing to diverge from  the common high school norms of subject and teacher autonomy  Murata, 2002. No matter what educational level, teachers who  engage in team-teaching need to be willing, open to change, and  motivated by the possibilities for improved instructional practice  and student achievement. Symbiotic Relationships The team-teaching relationship often joins two individuals with  different perspectives on teaching and varied strengths and  weaknesses. The partnership creates ample opportunities for  teachers to grow professionally but only if they are willing to  embrace the symbiotic nature of the relationship. Bouck 2007  asserts that teachers need to take advantage of the benefits of the  partnership, but also need to be aware of the constraints. Teamteaching offers an opportunity for new roles in a classroom and  more freedom in terms of instructional methodologies and cur riculum development. At the same time, however, team-teaching  can limit autonomy, constrain pre-existing roles and even possi bly devalue one partner's contributions at certain times Bouck,  2007. Murata 2002 found that the most positive partnerships  demonstrate respect for each other's differences and support  diverse philosophies and approaches to education. When one  partner views the other's strengths as enhancements to hisher  weaknesses, the opportunity for professional growth dramati cally increases. Initial Strategies for Implementing Team-Teaching  Models Kohler-Evans 2006 recommends that schools planning on  implementing team-teaching models start small and ask for  volunteers that want to team-teach. Teachers should never be  forced into teaching partnerships if they are not comfortable  with or don't understand the philosophy behind team-teaching.  Administrators should look for teachers who are motivated to try  new approaches and who are willing to spend the time, energy,  and effort necessary to achieve success. Walther-Thomas et  al. 1996 further recommend that teachers and administrators  work to create balanced heterogeneous classes to ensure a mix  of students with different abilities, learning styles and interests.  Kohler-Evans 2006 emphasizes that school administrators need  to set the foundation for success by ensuring that time is set aside  for teachers to communicate clearly and often by sharing per spectives on everything related to teaching and learning. Most  importantly, special care must be given to ensure that teaching  partners are of equal status and can never rely on seniority to  devalue a partner's contributions. Team-teaching involves many  intricacies and nuances of human behavior and interaction.  Careful consideration must be given to many different factors  to create successful partnerships that flourish and provide role  models for young students. Alternative Perspectives One of the worst-case scenarios that can occur when imple menting a team-teaching model is when two teachers are paired  arbitrarily without consideration of the factors discussed above  and provided little or no support for successful growth of the  partnership. Team-teaching can be a daunting process for many  educators as it directly challenges the norm of teaching as an  isolating profession. In order for team-teaching to be success ful, teachers need to trust each other and be honest throughout  the partnership. If teachers are arbitrarily placed together, more  often than not the relationship fails and sometimes can even  create negative learning environments for students. Some educators claim that certain team-teaching relationships,  such as the special and regular education teacher combination,  are developed not for sound educational reasons, but rather to  address the law, specifically the Individuals with Disabilities  Education Act IDEA and the No Child Left Behind Act of  2001 NCLB Kohler-Evans, 2006. Under constant pressure  to ensure that the needs of all students are met through inclu sive strategies, school administrators may create team-teaching  situations with the expectation that two teachers and a smaller  student-teacher ratio will address student needs. According to  some teachers, administrators sometimes fail to recognize the  many factors that must be considered when developing partner ships in order for team-teaching situations to have a positive  impact on student achievement. In Kamens,Susko  Elliotts  study of administrator knowledge and practices related to the  supervision and evaluation of co-teachers in inclusive classroom  settings, themes that emerged were related to professional prepa ration and training; expectations and perspectives of co-teaching  and inclusive practice; and supporting, supervising, and evalu ating co-teachers. The data indicated that there is considerable  inconsistency in administrator knowledge and practices and  that professional development for administrators is warranted  Kamens, Susko  Elliott, 2013. Kohler-Evans 2006 emphasizes possible issues that arise  when special and regular education teachers are paired in coTeam Teaching 39 teaching situations without careful consideration of the match  between teaching philosophies, personalities, etc. Regular  education teachers sometimes do not understand the need for  an additional teacher in the classroom and therefore are not  invested in creating the conditions necessary for a successful  partnership. Regular education teachers might feel they are  capable of meeting the needs of their students without assis tance and may even be insulted by the notion that an additional  teacher is necessary. Kohler-Evans 2006 claims an undesired  outcome of such partnerships is a relationship that breaks down  in front of students due to a lack of understanding, nurturing,  and mutual investment. Although on the surface, team teaching seems as simple as plac ing two equally qualified teachers in a classroom with one group  of students, the model is quite complex and involves many dif ferent factors that must be considered before actively pursuing  implementation. Brenan  Witte 2003 indicate that simply  placing two teachers into a team-teaching situation runs the risk  of combining incompatible teaching styles, personalities, and  priorities. They illuminate the particularly acute problem that  occurs when a novice teacher is paired with a veteran teacher in  a team teaching situation without careful consideration. Similar  to Kohler-Evans 2006, Brenan  Witte 2003 assert that such  team situations can create unhealthy and unproductive teaching  and learning environments. Terms  Concepts Alternative Teaching: Alternative teaching scenarios involve  one teacher working with small groups to pre-teach, re-teach, or  supplement regular instruction. Co-Teaching: A team teaching method used primarily in situa tions where special education teachers are partnered with regular  education teachers in the homeroom setting, reducing the stu dent-teacher ratio. Individuals with Disabilities: Education Act IDEA A federal  law that provides for special education and related services for  children aged 3-21. It was reauthorized in 1997 and 2004 and  ensures free and appropriate access to public education for chil dren with disabilities. Interdisciplinary Teams: Interdisciplinary teams involve two or  more teachers from different disciplines partnering to develop a  course that combines different areas of expertise and bridges the  gap between otherwise seemingly unrelated fields of study. No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 NCLB: A broad bi-partisan  education reform that addresses the issue of performance in  American elementary and secondary schools. The act focuses  on accountability for schools and districts, choice for parents  regarding low performing schools, and requirements for use  of federal education dollars. In 2012, the administration of  President Barack Obama distributed waivers to the act, which  exempted states from certain aspects of the educational stan dards Klein, 2013. Parallel Teaching: Parallel teaching scenarios are created when  both teachers plan together, but deliver instruction separately to  different groups. Station-Teaching: The station-teaching model integrates both  teachers into the delivery of instruction. However, both teachers  work with different stations of students on activities and assign ments. Team-Teaching: Team-teaching involves two or more teachers  of equal status in the classroom providing instruction to one  group of students at the same time. A variety of team-teaching  models exist, each with a different purpose. Bibliography Arguelles, M. E., Hughes, M. T.,  Schumm, J. S. 2000.  Co-teaching: A different approach to inclusion. Principal,  79 4; pp. 50-51. Brenan, C.,  Witte, R. 2003. Team teaching in the sec ondary instrumental music classroom. Music Educators  Journal, 89 3; pp. 31-35. Retrieved May 24, 2007 from  EBSCO online database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN8957373siteehost-live Bouck, E. 2007. Co-teachingNot just a textbook term:  Implication for practice. Preventing School Failure, 51  2; pp. 46-51. Retrieved May 24, 2007 from EBSCO  online database Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhA N24238659siteehost-live Cook, L.  Friend, M. 1995. Co-teaching: Guidelines  for creating effective practices. Focus on Exceptional  Children, 283; pp. 1-16. Retrieved May 24, 2007 from  EBSCO online database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN9602192589siteehost-live Cook, L.  Friend, M. 2000. Interactions: Collaboration  skills for school professionals 3rd ed. New York:  Addison Wesley Longman. Davis, J. R. 1995. Interdisciplinary courses and team teach ing. Phoenix, AZ: American Council on Education and  Oryx Press. Dieker, L. A.,  Murawski, W. M. 2003. Co-teaching at the  secondary level: Unique issues, current trends, and sug

Team Teaching 40 gestions for success. The High School Journal, 864; pp.  1-13. Retrieved May 24, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN9659613 siteehost-live Friend, M. 2007. The co-teaching partnership. Educational  Leadership, 645; pp. 4852. Retrieved May 24, 2007  from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN23996913siteehost-live Fullan, M. G. with S. Stiegelbauer 1991. The new mean ing of educational change 2nd ed. New York: Teachers  College Press. Hackmann, D. G., Petzko, V.N., Valentine, J. W., Clark, D.C.,  Nori, J.R.,  Lucas, S. E. 2002. Beyond interdisciplin ary teaming: Findings and implications of the NASSP  National Middle Level Study. NASSP Bulletin, 86 632;  pp. 33-47. Retrieved May 24, 2007 from EBSCO online  database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN998 5089siteehost-live Individuals with Disabilities Education Act of 1997. Pub. L.  105-17. 4 Jun. 1997. 20 U.S.C. 1400 et seq. Kamens, M., Susko, J. P.,  Elliott, J. S. 2013. Evaluation  and supervision of co-teaching: A study of administra tor practices in New Jersey. NASSP Bulletin, 972, 166190. Retrieved December 16, 2013, from EBSCO Online  Database Education Source Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN87560462 siteehost-live Klein, A. 2013. As NCLB waivers take hold, revision of law  remains up in air. Education Week, 3221, 25. Retrieved  December 14, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database  Education Source Complete. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbehhAN85766993siteeh ost-live Kohler-Evans, P. 2006. Co-teaching: How to make this mar riage work in front of the kids. Education, 127 2; pp.  260-264. Retrieved May 24, 2007 from EBSCO online  database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN237 61150siteehost-live Murata 2002. What does team teaching mean? A case study  of interdisciplinary teaming. Journal of Educational  Research, 96 2; pp. 67-77. Retrieved May 24, 2007 from  EBSCO online database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN8557868siteehost-live Nierengarten, G. 2013. Supporting co-teaching teams in  high schools: Twenty research-based practices. American  Secondary Education, 421, 73-83. Retrieved December  16, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database Education Source  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN92045050siteehost-live No Child Left Behind Act of 2001. Pub. L. 107-110. 8 Jan.  2002. Stat. 115. 1426. Picucci, A. C., Brownson, A., Kahlert, R.  Sobel, A. 2002.  Driven to succeed: Highperforming, high-poverty, turn around middle schools. Volume 1: Cross-case analysis  of high-performing, high-poverty, turnaround middle  schools. Austin, TX: University of Texas at Austin. Sandholtz, J. H. 2000. Interdisciplinary team teaching as  a form of professional development. Teacher Education  Quarterly, 27 3; pp. 39-54. Shibley, I. A. 2006. Interdisciplinary team teaching:  Negotiating pedagogical differences. College Teaching,  54 3; pp. 271-274. Retrieved May 24, 2007 from EBSCO  online database Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhA N21851590siteehost-live Walter-Thomas, C., Bryant, M.,  Land, S. 1996. Planning  for effective co-teaching: The key to successful inclusion.  Remedial and Special Education, 17; pp. 255263. Warwick 1971. Team Teaching. London: University of  London. Wenger, M. S.,  Hornyak, M. J. 1999. Team teaching for  higher level learning: A framework of professional col laboration. Journal of Management Education, 23 3;  pp. 311-327. Retrieved May 24, 2007 from EBSCO online  database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN201 0319siteehost-live Suggested Reading Barth, R. 2006. Improving relationships within the school  house. Educational Leadership, 63 6; pp. 8-13. Boudah, D., Schumacher, J.,  Deshler, D. 1997.  Collaborative instruction: Is it an effective option for  inclusion in secondary classrooms? Learning Disabilities  Quarterly, 20; pp. 293-316.

Team Teaching 41 Crow, G. M.,  Pounder, D. G. 2000. Interdisciplinary  teacher teams: Context, design, and process. Educational  Administration Quarterly, 36; pp. 216-254. Retrieved  May 24, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN3035970siteehost-live Hackman, J. R. 1990. Groups that work and those that  don't: Creating conditions for effective teamwork. San  Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Pounder, D. G. 1999. Teacher teams: Exploring job char acteristics and work-related outcomes of work group  enhancement. Educational Administration Quarterly, 35;  pp. 317-348. Retrieved May 24, 2007 from EBSCO online  database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN213 1421siteehost-live Weiss, M. D.,  Lloyd, J. 2003. Conditions for co-teaching:  Lessons from a case study. Teacher Education and  Special Education, 26; pp. 27-41. Essay by John Loeser, M.Ed. John Loeser is an Assistant Head of an elementary school in San Mateo, California. He received his Master's of Education in School  Leadership from Harvard University. His research interests include differentiated instruction, improving instructional practice, and  strategic change and leadership in schools. He is a member of the National and California Association of Independent Schools, and the  Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. He currently resides in San Mateo, California with his wife.
Reciprocal Teaching Abstract Reciprocal teaching is an instructional model applied to writ ten text in which students, working together in small groups, are  empowered to take control of their own education processes by  interrogating not only the text under investigation but also the  larger process of learning itself. By breaking down the work of  comprehension into stages, students can theoretically secure a  better understanding of how learning actually happens. Initially  advocated in the 1980s as a way to improve reading skills and  learning confidence among students in the primary grades, the  process has since been extended to the secondary school level  and even to college. Overview The premise behind reciprocal teaching was and still is revo lutionary. For generations, teachers in any discipline assigned  blocks of reading material with the assumption that students  could accomplish that reading task on their own initiative at  home, that reading skills were largely equal within the classroom  given that each student was in the same grade level. Reading,  after all, was reading. Before the advent of television and the  subsequent sharp deterioration of reading skills as successive  generations of schoolchildren spent increasingly less time work ing on building reading competencies, teachers in the primary  grades could no longer assume the long-established principal  stages of readinglocating a texts main points; understanding  the implications of those main points; analyzing the implica tions of those points; and then applying those principal points to  other, broader situationswere intuitive, simply part of how any  student approached any piece of writing under study from basic  texts of the creative imagination stories, novels, poems, plays  to textbooks in any discipline, and word problems in mathemat ics. These stages did not need to be introduced or interrogated for  their efficiencythey were simply what anyone did when they  interacted with a written text. Whatever the curriculum from the  sciences to history, reading was essential. Except for those stu dents diagnosed with reading comprehension difficulties andor  learning disabilities, teachers simply assumed reading itself was  a universal skill. By the early 1980s, however, accumulating data began to suggest  a far different picturestudent reading skills were significantly  impaired. Students simply could not understand written texts  with any accuracy or consistency. Termed cognitive failure,  this dead-end moment revealed to the student and the teacher  that education at that point was simply not possible; not grasp ing the meaning of a written text could not be ignored, could not  be minimized, could not be addressed with tutors, could not be  repaired by parental assistance. Being able to read, that is mas tering the recognition of symbols as letters and groups of letters  as words, no longer implied being able to understand what those  words and sentences were actually saying. Although students  understood the constructs of squiggles and lines that made up  the alphabet and recognized the general operational architecture  of a sentence, they struggled to distill from those language con structs their meaning, much less their purpose. Educators faced  a systemic dilemmathe problem, although it tended to spike  in underfunded and overcrowded school districts, generally cut  across all traditional markers. School children, without qualifying adjectives, were finding the  ability to engage a text responsibly more and more a special ized skill. Teachers at all levels of instruction from the primary  grades to high school faced the daunting challenge of using class  time to tell students what texts were saying as the only way to  move that information; of course, in the long term, that dynamic  in turn would only create students who were essentially passive  recipients of blocks of information whose reading skills would  Abstract Overview Applications Viewpoints Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Reciprocal Teaching 43 Figure 1: Reciprocal Teaching Predicting Clarifying Summarizing Questioning RECIPROCAL TEACHING never necessarily improve. In turn, teachers grew increasingly  frustrated by the progress of classroom instruction; morale in the  profession dropped; supporting staff necessary to help students  with low reading skills drained budgets; and in the process stan dardized test scores, long viewed as the most accurate way to  assess a schools success and a students comprehension, began  what would turn into a nearly twenty-year downward spiral. Perhaps the problem centered on conventional perceptions of the  classroom as an instructor-centered construct where students had  long been necessarily viewed as subordinate to the process of  mastering material. In the early decades of the twentieth century,  Lev Semyonovich Vygotsky, a Russian psychologist, first pos ited that instruction itself is best managed as a dynamic between  teacher and student and, more important, among students  themselves. Learning is best conceived as a dialogue, a social  interaction that encourages discussion, contribution, feedback,  and mutual support. It was at the time a revolutionary premise.  Knowledge and meaning are the result of creative socializations  arranged through negotiation and discourse among teachers and  students, or students and students Choo, Eng  Ahman, 2011.  Within the progressively more authoritarian political environ ment of Russia, a theory that advocated dialogue, encouraged  students to strengthen their understanding with the help of other  students, and encouraged participation as key to educational  evolution was widely discredited, and Vygotsky died from tuber culosis at the age of thirty-seven, largely unknown in the West.  His theories were essentially rediscovered during the heyday  of the counterculture in America in the late 1960s and 1970s.  Here was an education template that appealed to that generation  of free thinkers, a system that welcomed students to participate  in their own education and that viewed cognition, that is learn ing, as a result of a cooperative interaction and redesigned the  instructor into a facilitator, a support system rather than the  autocratic center of the classroom. That theory, which became  known as constructionism, that is building the understanding of  material together and centering that process as the key to effec tive classroom management, was by definition controversial as  it positioned students at the center of their own education pro cess and necessarily challenged, even upended, generations of  assumptions about the primacy of the teacher in a classroom.  Applications As with so many groundbreaking theories, the premise under pinning reciprocal teaching is on its face simple: Take the  steps readers traditionally performed when engaging a written  text understanding; analysis; clarification; and prediction and  assign one student in a small group to perform one of those tasks  in the classroom itself as part of a collaborative effort to master  an assigned reading. For students to take control of their own  education, to become in essence authors of their own education,  required teachers themselves to radically alter the perception  of their role in a classroom. Constructing educational practice  around these processesrequires educators to think differently  about education, authority, and learning Baxter, 2012. Recip rocal teaching externalizes the internal stages of reading. The  students come to see how the act of reading actually works, what  exactly it means to interact with a written text. This sort of edu cational approach, called metacognition, asserts that students  should be made aware of what they are actually doing when they  learn, to be aware of the process of thought and comprehension  as a real-time function that the brain performs.  Within this template, the teacher, after carefully explaining the  four-part concept and even demonstrating the cooperative nature  of this sort of instruction, acts initially as a kind of facilitator,  ensuring that each small group of students follows the proto col and stays on task. After the classroom adapts this process,  educators point out, the teacher becomes less and less of a hover ing presence and the students build their confidence, see exactly  how the process of interacting with a text works, and within a  relatively short period of time research has suggested as little  ten weeks of application come to own their own education  process and in turn approach texts on their own with for more  competency and efficiency. Learners learn to give and receive  feedback with a peer, which results in an expansion of learner  socialization skill; and. learners learn to perform and analyze  movements by observing the performance of the doer, compar ing the performance against criteria, and drawing conclusions  about the accuracy of the performance Chatoupis, 2015.  Consider how the theory might be applied in an actual classroom  exercise. Take, for example, a fifth grade social studieshistory  class composed of twenty-five students whose competencies  and skill sets are fairly distributed from As to Ds. The class  is to review a three page reading assignment that covers Benja min Franklins scientific achievements, most notably his work 

Reciprocal Teaching 44 with the lightning rod. Within traditional classroom dynamics,  the instructor expects to review the reading assignment, perhaps  even give a pop quiz, to weed out the weaker readers because  across-the-board reading competencies cannot be assumed.  Then, perhaps supplemented with some application of technol ogy a video or a YouTube short, the instructor goes over the  written material and hopes to maintain the students attention  and attention spans in students under the age of 12 have dwin dled to on average just under eight minutes sufficiently to make  sure they get the main points. The actual reading of the passage  itself becomes largely irrelevant. If that classroom dynamic assumes a centering instructor and  passive students, reciprocal teaching upends that construct. Edu cation works better when it is dialogic, that is when material is  tested, analyzed, questioned in a call and response template that  can be done live in class. Students and teacher essentially alter nate dominant position, share the control of the classroom itself.  Early in the grading period, the teacher has reviewed the concept  of reciprocal teaching as a way to commit the class to its proto colthus the class is ready to execute the process. The instructor  first breaks the classroom randomly into operating groups, four  in each would be the optimum number. Instead of lecturing about  the material, the instructor assigns a role to each member of the  group: one will serve as the summarizer, responsible for high lighting the passages main points what did Franklin actually  do, when did he do it and under what conditions, how successful  was he; a second will serve as the groups interrogator, return ing to the text, raising questions about passages that are murky  or ideas that puzzle because questioning promotes students  comprehension, because students must understand what they  have read to ask their peers knowledgeable questions Stricklin,  2011 what exactly was the point of the key tied to a kite; what  did Franklin think might happen? could he have been killed?  why would a prominent politician be experimenting with sci ence in the first place?; a third will serve as analyzer, providing  some level of response to those questions to clarify the texts  more difficult passages; and the fourth will serve as the predic tor, taking the group into the next level of analysis by posing  questions about future actions and the implications of that text  to a wider and broader context what was the importance of this  discovery, what are some of the applications, and what might  Franklin have done next to continue his investigation. Summarize, question, analyze, and predict: Without the usual  stress of participating in a wider classroom dynamic or simply  trying to pay attention to a teacher, this small group exercise  encourages mutual support and discussion. The group will  actually play out the internal processes of reading and will, col laboratively, construct a viable reading of the text. Unlike the  intimidating expectations of working with an entire class, stu dents respond to small group activity, they feel comfortable.  With the direction of the instructor, the class will work toward  a better understanding of reading itself until it can execute the  process virtually independent of instructor direction, a process  known as scaffolding. The students will have moved toward  reading comprehensiveness. As students gain proficiency with  a strategy and move toward becoming independent comprehen sion strategy users, they assume more of the responsibility for  applying the strategy while the teacher gradually releases his or  her responsibility over the strategys application Pilonieta   Medina, 2009. The mystery of reading will be clarified. Mastering the text  will be efficient and cooperativeand the students, along the  way, will develop respect for each other, will evolve their own  socializing skills, and may even have fun. Subsequently, group  roles will be redistributed and, eventually, the groups them selves can be reshuffled. Since the advent of the Internet and  the resource storage capability of YouTube, a significant archive  of actual classroom activities using reciprocal teaching has been  made available to teachers to model their own classroom work.  Allowing the students to grow and contribute to the work of the  classroom has made reciprocal teaching an attractive model for  underfunded schools with limited support staffthe teacher  can in essence deputize the students themselves to help in the  dynamic of instruction. Virtually any kind of reading assignment can be worked using  reciprocal teaching: essays, short stories and novels, poetry,  textbooks, newspaper and magazine pieces; accumulating data  indicates that this sort of engaged reading act even transfers to  those materials the students elect to read outside the class for their  own recreation. Indeed, reciprocal teaching has been applied in  general math classes to address the difficulty students faced in  approaching word problems. The language of mathematics can  often be a formidable barrier to understanding mathematical  concepts, comprehension and problem-solving Meyer, 2014. In fact, reciprocal teaching has even been applied to physical  education by suggesting students who pair-off in gym class  perform better Chatoupis, 2015. It is at once an endorsement  of this approach and a harsh critique of the steadily declining  reading skills that this approach to helping students build their  reading skills confidence has been adapted by college instruc tors who have also come to appreciate the depth of the challenge  posed by a generation of students who have all but abandoned  the commitment to reading as a life skill. College students must  be taught the skills to locate and analyze complicated informa tion, to solve problems they encounter while reading, and to  connect ideas and concepts Gruenbaum, 2012. Because suc cess in college and in a career for that matter is tied strongly to  reading skills, reciprocal teaching at that level seeks to moderate  the growing attrition of incoming freshmanmore than half of  students who begin college work will not finish. Viewpoints Despite the accumulation of data that establishes the viability  of reciprocal teaching, there are drawbacks. For the system to  work effectively, the instructor must have considerable patience 

Reciprocal Teaching 45 as the students work toward understanding the responsibility  of group work. Students are not uniformly skilledin small  group work, those individuals with lower competency levels can  feel embarrassed, left out, vulnerable to criticism. The system  requires a long-term commitment to improvement on the part of  the students themselves to resist turning the small group instruc tional units into improvised playtime. More disturbing, students  assigned reading tasks can go online and retrieve much of the  information on the assignment secondhand without committing  to the responsibilities of in-class learning. Advocates of constructivist teaching cite these concerns as  trivial compared with the benefits: students discovering their  own competencies in reading, understanding the actual pro cess of interacting with a written text, and learning the value of  cooperation. More promising, data has indicated that reciprocal  teaching can assist those with disabilities by extending to them  social inclusion into the larger classroom dynamic; recipro cal teaching can design strategies for students with intellectual  and learning disabilities to join the mainstream classroom  experience Reichenberg, 2014. Educators have embraced the  promise of reciprocal teaching in an era of declining reading  skills. It is now an accepted theoretical element of university  education programs that train future teachers, and its theoretical  premise has engendered a generation of education textbooks,  cutting-edge reading programs, and a plethora of online instruc tion tools. Terms  Concepts Cognitive Failure: The fail point in a students ongoing educa tion in which the student no longer assimilates new material  and can no longer process the expected evolution toward under standing. Constructivism: In education, a theory that holds that learning  is necessarily social, that understanding itself is best achieved  through the collaborative efforts of teachers and students who  collectively build, or construct, a viable understanding of mate rial, that meaning itself can only be arrived at through the  interaction of like-minded, if not like-talented people. Dialogic Education: The theory that learning, whether analysis  or problem solving, is best enhanced through the genuine ques tion and answer process conducted between teacher and students  and among students in which control of the classroom dynamic  is permitted, even expected, to change. Metacognition: In psychology, a method of thinking in which  one is made aware of the process of analysis and discovery; in  education, the deliberate introduction of the awareness of the  process of learning into the classroom operation. Scaffolding: In education, a system in which the instructor ini tially plays out or demonstrates an intended educational exercise  and then, using that model, the students execute the same exer cise with the teacher acting as facilitator. Toolbox: In education, a term that refers to the specific com petencies and skills of individual students that empowers the  student to control their own education evolution. Bibliography Baxter Magolda, M. 2012. Building learning partnerships.  Change 44 1, 3238. Retrieved December 1, 2015 from  EBSCO Online Database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN70230722siteehost-live  Chatoupis, C. 2015. Pairing learners by companionship:  Effects on motor skill performance and comfort levels in  reciprocal style of teaching. Physical Education 72, 307 323. Retrieved December 1, 2015 from EBSCO Online  Database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedba9hAN 111081529siteehost-live  Choo, T., Eng, T.,  Ahman, N. 2011. Effects of reciprocal  teaching strategies on reading comprehension. Reading  Matrix 11 2: 140-149. Retrieved December 1, 2015 from  EBSCO Online Database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedb ehhAN61895441siteehost-live  Gruenbaum, E. 2012. Common literacy struggles with col lege students: Using the reciprocal teaching technique.  Journal of College Reading  Learning, 422, 109116.  Retrieved December 1, 2015 from EBSCO Online  Database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN 109971228siteehost-live  Meyer, K. 2014. Making meaning in mathematics problemsolving using the reciprocal teaching approach. Literary  Learning: The Middle Years, 222, 714. Retrieved  December 1, 2015 from EBSCO Online Database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN96974860 siteehost-live Pilonieta, P.,  Medina, A. 2009. Reciprocal teaching for  the primary grades: We can do it too! Reading Teacher,  632, 120129. Retrieved December 1, 2015 from EBSCO  Online Database Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehh AN44618155siteehost-live Reichenberg, M. 2014. The importance of structured text  talks for students reading comprehension. Journal of 

Reciprocal Teaching 46 Special Education and Rehabilitation, 1534, 7794.  Retrieved December 1, 2015 from EBSCO Online  Database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN 98627038siteehost-live  Stricklin, K. 2011. Hands-on reciprocal teaching: A compre hension technique. Reading Teacher Techniques, 648,  620625. Retrieved December 1, 2015 from EBSCO  Online Database Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehh AN60759867siteehost-live  Suggested Reading Fisher, D.,  Frey, N. 2013. Better learning through struc tured teaching: A framework for the gradual release of  responsibility. 2nd ed. Alexandria, VA: ASCD. Fisher, D., Frey, N.,  Lapp, D. 2014. Teaching students to  read like detectives: Comprehending, analyzing and dis cussing text. Bloomington, IN: Solution Tree Press.  Oczkus, L. 2010. Reciprocal teaching: Powerful Strategies  and lessons for improving reading comprehension. 2nd  ed. Newark, DE: International Reading Association.  Essay by Joseph Dewey
Game-Based Learning Abstract While cognitive theories and intuition point to game-based learn ing as holding a great deal of promise, games are not fitting into  the educational landscape with the ease anticipated by champi ons of game-based learning. A number of technical, cultural, and  ethical factors demand attention as the role of game-based learn ing in formal education evolves. Overview Games of all stripes have long been of interest by educators as  a way to engage and motivate students to learn new concepts  and apply their knowledge in a meaningful context. Learning  theories from the sociocultural cognition family of learning theo ries points to the potential games have to motivate, engage, and  provide authentic learning experiences. Despite this promise,  however, games particularly video games have struggled to  penetrate the formal education marketplace. Furthermore, some  scholars have suggested that the application of game mechanics  towards non-game environments is a manipulative and exploi tive practice. Nonetheless, games are an increasingly important  medium where school-aged children spend much of their time.  As such, it is important for educators and educational research ers to understand games in the context of this greater media  landscape, and what it means for the future of learning. Game-based learning is sometimes mistakenly referred to as  game theory, however, the term game theory refers to the use  of mathematical models to study decision making, and is not  related to game-based learning. The relationship between games  and learning and the use of games as a vehicle for learning has  long been of interest to educators. Interest in game-based learn ing among scholars, funding agencies, educational technology  start-ups, large educational publishing companies, and the White  House DeLoura 2013 has increased since the beginning of the  twenty-first century. Leading theorists in the field are explor ing the intersection of games and learning, and what games can  teach us about learning. Applications Learning is a life-long endeavor for humans and can occur via  a designed experience such as at a workshop, in a classroom,  via a museum exhibit, or by watching a documentary or via  un-designed experiences such as free play or personal reflec tion. Game-based learning is typically discussed in the context  of designed learning experiences both in terms of what learning  designers can glean from game design and in terms of how to  utilize games as part of a designed learning experience. Sociocultural Learning Theories There are numerous theories about learning, and in understand ing game-based learning the family of theories that are of greatest  use are the sociocultural learning theories. These theories of  learning emphasize the roles that communities and tools play in  how humans learn. Scholars from education, psychology, anthro pology, and sociology have contributed and built upon this body  of knowledge, which has its origin in the work done by Vygotsky  in the early part of the twentieth century. Vygotskys emphasis  Abstract Overview Applications Sociocultural Learning Theories Games and Learning Experiences Educational Video Games Games and Behavior Modification Transmedia in the Learning Landscape Viewpoints Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Game-Based Learning 48 on the role adults and peers play in learning, along with how  cultural context affects learning and the importance of play in  cognitive development have been fruitful in generating learning  theories that suggest game-based learning to be worthy of deeper  investigation. One of Vygotskys most enduring ideas was that of  the zone of proximal development ZDP. Cognitive tasks that a  learner cannot perform on his own but can perform with outside  assistance are said to lie within the ZDP. Understanding where  a learners ZDP is for particular learning objectives is critical  for scaffolding learners through mastery in that learning objec tive. As research into learning moved toward more constructivist  models, the role of mentors, peers, society, and culture could  not be ignored. To be sure, the basic idea behind ZDP emerges  frequently in sociocultural learning research, sometimes under  other names such as cognitive apprenticeships or legitimate  peripheral participation. To accept that learning and cognition are social phenomenon is  also to accept that cognition is distributed. That is to say that  an individuals knowledge is distributed among an individuals  social network and the tools in the environment. People often  use tools that make them work more efficiently or boost their  knowledge base. Distributed cognition and sociocultural learn ing theories are critical for understanding the arguments behind  game-based learning. Games and Learning Experiences Fullerton 2008 compares two very different experiences that  are recognized as games as opposed to toys, puzzles, or dra matic play: The card game Go Fish and the video game Quake.  Through this comparison, Fullerton draws out what she identi fies as the essential components of a game: 	 Players: A game is designed for players. Unlike other  forms of entertainment, games demand active participation. 	 Objectives: Games lay out specific goals for players.  Whether it is collecting the most cards or shooting the  most enemies or getting a basket in a net, games provide  players with goals. 	 Rules: All games explain what players can or cannot do  in pursuit of the goals. 	 Resources: Games provide players with resources to  draw upon to achieve the goals. For example, a puck, a  scrabble tile, or a chance card. 	 Conflict: In a game, the player has to work against  something or someone to obtain the goals. Other players  might pose conflict. Hazards in a video game are another  example of conflict. 	 Boundaries: These can be physical boundaries such as  the lines on the floor of a basketball court, or they can  be conceptual boundaries via the social agreement of a  game. For instance, players agree that only in the Go Fish  game are they discussing and bargaining over the cards  involved. 	 Outcomes: Games involve uncertain and unequal out comes. Players will lose or win, but that is not certain  from the outset of the game. That uncertainty is important  as it drives the players through the game. In examining these components outlined by Fullerton, the over laps between games and well-designed learning experiences  become apparent. Learning experiences are designed with learn ers in mind. There is an objective that learners are working  toward in the interest of specific outcomes. Well-designed learn ing experiences will likely provide learners with resources, such  as videos, pencils, workbooks, Erlenmeyer flasks, or audiotapes  to support the learner. The degree to which learning and games overlap on those ele ments is arguable and there are certainly less apparent overlaps  such as boundaries and conflict. One can find a detailed explo ration of these arguments in Gees What Video Games Have to  Teach Us About Learning and Literacy 2007. Gee unpacks  thirty-six learning principles that are manifest in both good  games and effective learning experiences. By examining social  learning and linguistic theories around situated cognition, dis tributed cognition, cultural models, multimodal principles,  identity, self-knowledge, and others, Gee is able to weave all of  Fullertons elements into a schema for effective learning design. Educational Video Games Gees work speaks to what makes any designed learning experi ence an effective one, it is not an explicit advocacy of the use  of games in general or video games in particular as learning  tools. Rather, Gees argument centers on the fact that modern  video games are challenging and cognitively demanding. Play ers are often frustrated at many junctures in trying to reach the  video games objectives. Yet, through the forces of a competitive  market place, game designers need to figure out how to make  their games just challenging enough to be compelling while  providing rewards, help, hints, and reinforcement to keep play ers from quitting or giving up in frustration. These competing  pressures yield the most popular video games on the shelves as  the product would otherwise not thrive, people would not pur chase those products. Gee poses a similar challenge to educators,  schools, and curriculum designers: Design learning experiences  that are challenging yet pleasurable. Gees contribution revived an interest in educational video games,  but interest in games for learning began in the 1970s, with the  earliest personal computers. In a white paper from the Joan Ganz  Cooney Center, Richards, Stebbins, and Moellering 2013 note  that older titles such as Math Blaster, Oregon Trail, Where in the  World Is Carmen Sandiego, and Sim City enjoyed tremendous  success in both the K-12 institutional market as well as the com mercial markets. A new generation of educational games has had  a harder time achieving similar. Companies such as BrainPop  and Discovery Education have begun to aggregate and deliver  games to fill curricular niches across all the grade and subject  areas. The challenge these companies have faced in finding prof

Game-Based Learning 49 itable models for educational games underscores a fundamental  disconnect. The stigma of using games as tools for learning  has all but fallen away, but schools are not yet buying learning  games in a commercially viable way. With all the enthusiasm  around game-based learning and the mutual vision educators  seem to share for their potential, why has market success been  such a challenge? Richards et al identify several potential issues,  including uneven technological capabilities among schools,  supplementary curricular budgets that are in flux, and the wide,  confusing range of game products of varying quality. Games and Behavior Modification As formal learning scholars grappled with the ideas presented  by Gee and others researching and developing games for use in  the classroom, many in the private and commercial sector began  to consider how game mechanics can be used for motivation  and behavior modification. This application of game mechan ics to areas where behavior modification are desirable such as  in marketing, training, and education, have come to be known  as gamification. Gamification leverages individuals desire for  such things as self-expression, mastery, competition, status, and  achievement in pursuit of a desired objective. Game designer McGonigal 2012 championed the role games can  play in addressing global and society problems such as poverty and  climate change. Games and gamified experiences hold potential  for solving cognitively complex problems. For example, the game  Foldit is an online game about protein folding. The game received  special attention and acclaim when it was noted that human play ers were able to outperform the computationally demanding,  algorithmically generated solutions to questions in protein folding. Gamification has been utilized across a variety of efforts, includ ing employee recruitment and retention, physical fitness, social  network participation, ideation, and customer loyalty. Con cerns emerged, however, that gamification techniques began to  encourage unintended behaviors, as people would try to, for lack  of a better term, game the system. That is, maximize desired  quantitative outputs for the outputs themselves, or, to revisit  Fullertons framework, to obtain the desired outcomes without  pursuing the intended objective. Critics such as Bogost 2011  have been adamant and vocal in their warnings that gamification  is exploitive and manipulative, particularly when employed as a  marketing strategy in for-profit commercial endeavors. Bogost  described efforts as a type of exploitationware. Transmedia in the Learning Landscape While the use of game mechanics to sculpt human behavior  continues to garner critics and champions, other scholars are  pointing out the ubiquitous role video games play in the Ameri can childhood media landscape. To be sure, where some critics  of gamification criticized the movements emphasis on mechan ics over narrative, other scholars turned their attention to the  value of narrative in games. Video games are a critical part of  the transmedia experience common to children in many parts of  the Western world Jenkins, 2010. Transmedia defines the play,  storytelling, and learning of most American children ages 611.  As is implied by the name, transmedia describes phenomena that  cross media platforms: books, televisions, movies, live action,  and games. Because of their interactive nature, video games play  a key role in the transmedia landscape. As such, Jenkins has dis tilled what it is about transmedia that is of particular import to  educators and in doing so has challenged educators to consider  the role games and particularly video games can play in the  transmedia learning landscape: 	 Spreadability vs. drillability: Spreadability refers to the  ability to scan a media landscape for bits of interesting  information or data. This is the way traditional survey or  introductory courses have typically approached informa tion. Drillability refers to the ability and opportunity to  dig deeper into content and asks educators to think care fully about motivation, what motivates students to try and  learn more about a subject? 	 Continuity vs. multiplicity: Continuity refers to the coher ent story told by a media landscape. In education, this  commonly manifests itself as a cannon. Multiplicity, on  the other hand, asks learners to think about perspectives  other than that of the established cannon. As an example,  educational technology scholar Squire used the computer  game Civilization to invite players to think about alternate  histories: What if North America had colonized Europe,  for example? How might the world be different today? 	 Immersion vs. extraction: Immersion refers to the ability  of media theme parks, simulations, online worlds, video  games to immerse students in a different world. Extrac tion refers to the students ability to take those lessons and  experiences back with them to their own everyday world. 	 World building: Since transmedia experiences are often  outside of the core narrative, they can provide richer  environments in which these peripheral narratives play  out. In a school setting, for instance, this might mean that  students read historical fiction to accompany a history  lesson thus moving away from stories of presidents or  generals to understanding or imagining the everyday life  of citizens of those eras. 	 Seriality: With the seriality principle, Jenkins 2010  asserts that educators can learn from good, serial story tellers. In a serial, chapters are satisfying as units in their  own right but entice the reader to continue onto the next  chapter with a cliffhanger. Classrooms should offer an  equivalent of cliffhangers to motivate learners. 	 Subjectivity: Transmedia experiences allow audiences to  explore a central narrative through new eyes. A good ex ample of this is the book Wicked, which tells a story from  the perspective of the antagonist from Wizard of Oz. As  such, they offer new perspectives. Using the example of a  history class, this means students get to examine a battle  from the perspective of the Greeks and the Persians, for  example.

Game-Based Learning 50 	 Performance: Transmedia experiences lead audiences into  wanting to participate and develop their own performance  of the material. Jenkins uses much of his scholarship on  fandom and fan experiences for this principle. Jenkins  points to communities such as Star Trek fans but more  recent examples include multiple Harry Potter or Buffy  fans wherein the media becomes so meaningful to fans  that the narrative of the media lives on with fans long  after the media property has been retired. Performance is  a point of interest as it points to issues of motivation and  involvement that are of interest to the formal education  community. To extend on the historical example used  above, this could include asking students to dress up in  period costumes and reenact important or even quotidian  moments in history. Viewpoints Where Fullerton discusses the role of the game designer to  establish rules, boundaries, and goals, Jenkins paints a media  ecosystem in which learners become the rule makers and the rule  breakers, where learners test boundaries and push past them. As  such, Jenkins points the way to a post-games way of looking at  games-based learning, one in which games are one piece of a  media puzzle that must be mastered by children of the so-called  information economy. Games, particularly video games, will continue to be part of  the rich media ecosystem inhabited by the distributed, situated  minds of school-aged children. While anyone who has played  an immersive game can intuit the power games have to shape  knowledge, ideas, and values, the role of games in formal educa tion settings remains to be seen. Terms  Concepts Cognition: The processing of information. Cognition can refer to  broadly to processes involving things like judgment, reasoning,  problem solving, new knowledge acquisition, comprehension,  decision-making, memory, and attention. Distributed cognition: A sociocultural learning theory that argues  that knowledge of a subject lies not only within an individual,  but also with that individuals physical and social environment. Game: A form of play that is bounded by rules, often competi tive, and relies on some sort of skill. Gamification: The use of game structures or game mechanics  to incentivize a desired behavior or directly cause a behavior  change. Game mechanics: The rule-based systems that are designed to  govern actions bounded within a game. Learning: The act of acquiring new or building upon and refin ing existing knowledge, behaviors, skills or values. Situated cognition: A sociocultural learning theory that posits  that knowing cannot be separated from doing and that knowl edge is dependent upon the external contexts. Situated cognition  challenges the assumption that knowledge can be transferred  from one context to an entirely novel one. Sociocultural learning: A family of learning theories that rejects  the notion that human development can be understood only from  the point of view of the individual. Social learning theories argue  that social interaction and the external world are interwoven and  inextricable from the individual. Transmedia: Telling a single story across a variety of different  media such as film, books, and video games. Video game: A game that relies on the electronic manipulation  of images. Zone of proximal development: The delta between what a learner  can do unaided, and what she can do with assistance when work ing towards a particular learning objective. Bibliography Bogost, I. 2011. Gamification is bullshit. Retrieved January  15, 2015 from http:bogost.comwritingbloggamifica tionisbullshit DeLoura, M. 2013 Games that can change the world.  Retrieved January 15, 2015 from http:www.whitehouse. govblog20131213games-can-change-world Fullerton, T. 2014. Game design workshop: A playcentric  approach to creating innovative games. New York, NY:  CRC Press. Gee, J. P. 2007. What video games have to teach us about  learning and literacy. Revised and updated edition. New  York, NY: Macmillan. Hamari, J.,  Koivisto, J. 2013. Social motivations to use  gamification: An empirical study of gamifying exer cise. Proceedings of the 21st European Conference on  Information Systems, Utrecht, Netherlands, June 58. Jenkins, H. 2010. Transmedia storytelling and entertainment:  An annotated syllabus. Continuum: Journal of Media   Cultural Studies 246 943958. Retrieved March 22,  2015 from EBSCO Online Database Academic Search  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?direct truedba9hAN55568720siteehost-live

Game-Based Learning 51 McGonigal, J. 2011. Reality is broken. London, UK: Jonathan  Cape. Richards, J., Stebbins, L.,  Moellering, K. 2013. Games for  a digital age: K12 market map and investment analysis.  In New York, NY. Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame  Workshop. Retrieved January 12, 2015 from: http:www. joanganzcooneycenter.orgwp-contentuploads201301 glpcgamesforadigitalage1.pdf Suggested Reading Afari, E., Aldridge, J., Fraser, B.,  Khine, M. 2013. Students  perceptions of the learning environment and attitudes  in game-based mathematics classrooms. Learning  Environments Research, 161, 131150. Retrieved March  22, 2015 from EBSCO Online Database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx? directtruedbehhAN85746571siteehost-live Bourgonjon, J., De Grove, F., De Smet, C., Van Looy, J.,  Soetaert, R.,  Valcke, M. 2013. Acceptance of gamebased learning by secondary school teachers. Computers   Education, 67. 2135. Retrieved March 22, 2015 from  EBSCO Online Database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedb ehhAN89271053siteehost-live DiSessa, A. A. 2001. Changing minds: Computers, learning,  and literacy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Flanagan, M.,  Nissenbaum, H. 2014. Values at play in  digital games. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Werbach, K.,  Hunter, D. 2012. For the win: How game  thinking can revolutionize your business. Wharton Digital  Press. Essay by Marjee Chmiel, PhD
Direct Instruction Abstract This article presents an overview of Direct Instruction, a teacherdirected curriculum specifically designed to address the learning  needs of underprivileged students who are at-risk of failing.  This system of teaching was developed by Siegfried Engel mann in the 1960's and has recently resurfaced as a viable form  of instructing those identified students who could benefit from  the highly intensive, sequential instructions. Direct Instruction  has certain characteristics: an academic focus; a teacher-directed  curriculum; clarity to goals; review of past learning; presenta tion of new material in small steps; the monitoring of student  progress through questioning; provision for feedback with cor rections; provision for independent exercise; and, the revision of  the lesson's goals based on review. Elements of Direct Instruc tion are also incorporated within software that is used to enhance  the learning of at-risk students. Overview Direct Instruction is a system of teaching that was developed  by Siegfried Engelmann in the 1960's, as a way to address the  learning needs of underprivileged at-risk students. Studies have  shown that the programs work best in Kindergarten and Grade  1; however, the programs also have been proven to work effec tively in Pre-K through 6th grades, in secondary programs, in  adult special education, and for remedial students. This teacher-directed program begins with a highly developed  classroom script that breaks down complex skills into specific  sequential components. Students are taught each component.  The teacher models the desired behavior, provides practice and  feedback at each step, and tests students to determine mastery. If  100 mastery is not achieved, then the teacher takes steps to reteach skills until all students have acquired mastery Engelmann   Osborn, 1999. The highly directive program focuses on topics  such as: reading, mathematics, language, science, social science,  fact learning or cultural literacy, and handwriting. The program  requires ongoing intensive technical support for teachers. Described as a highly structured, intensive teaching program,  Direct Instruction is geared to address the needs of underprivi leged children as a way to accelerate learning for at-risk students.  The oldest version of Direct Instruction was called DISTAR and  originated in the Carl Bereiter-Siegfried Engelmann Preschool  at the University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana in the 1960's.  Engelmann, an education specialist and professor at the univer sity, asserted that if a student failed, the reason behind this failure  was the instructional sequencing rather than the fault of the stu Abstract Overview Application Development of Curriculum Typical Application Higher Order Thinking Use of Achievement Groups Assessments Improving Reading Instruction Improving Reading Comprehension Vocabulary Instruction Computer Mediated Instruction  Direct  Instruction Viewpoints Criticisms of Direct Instruction Countering Criticisms Through Use of  Perceived Best Practices Effective Methods in Teaching Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Direct Instruction 53 dent. He further stated that just because a teacher covered certain  material didn't mean that the student learned the material. Hence,  he developed a program that had certain characteristics: an aca demic focus; a teacher-directed curriculum; clarity to goals;  review of past learning; presentation of new material in small  steps; the monitoring of student progress through questioning;  provision for feedback with corrections; provision for indepen dent exercise; and, the revision of the lesson's goals based on  review. Direct Instruction gained recognition when the federal gov ernment's Follow Through Projectin 1967 confirmed the  effectiveness of Direct Instruction. The goal of the Follow  Through Project, a 500 million dollar endeavor, was to raise  performance in poverty-stricken districts. Agencies across the  United States were invited to implement their programs in order  to discover programs that would meet the 50 rise in perfor mance that the project anticipated. Of the over 20 programs that  were involved, only Direct Instruction came close to the mark  of 50. The Follow Through Project  was cancelled in 1995  due to budget cuts Ryder, Burton,  Silberg, 2006. However,  Engelmann's work continued and was expanded into several  instructional packages that focused on reading, math and lan guage, and included the addition of general comprehension and  analytic skills to the early mastery of skills agenda that was pro moted in the earliest DISTAR model. A hallmark of Direct Instruction is its fully scripted program  of instruction. Lessons are heavily researched and designed to  teach concepts, with each sequential lesson built on previously  mastered skills and understandings. Classroom scripts are writ ten, tested, rewritten, retested, and piloted until developers are  assured that 90 of students can acquire the specified knowl edge the first time around Engelmann  Osborn, 1999. Teachers need orientation and adequate professional devel opment to be successful in implementing Direct Instruction.  The program requires teachers to ask up to 300 questions in  at least six small group sessions each day. Teachers perform  reading checks every five to ten lessons until the class has  reached 100 mastery Engelmann  Osborn, 1999. Even the  novice teacher can follow the procedures of Direct Instruction  and foster success. In-class coaches are commonly offered for  support when the commercially produced Direct Instruction  program is first introduced to a school system. Coaches moni tor each individual teacher and offer support when problems  evolve. In-class coaches can be employers of the contractors  who promote the program or teachers who have been trained in  Direct Instruction. Direct Instruction has evolved further to include best practices in  literacy development. The program is used in small groups, as a  way of developing communities of learners where students meet  group and community goals. Teachers give brief placement tests  to ensure that each student begins where he or she belongs; the  organized short lessons are implemented sequentially. Although once linked to instruction in many content areas, the  more recent approaches to Direct Instruction have been coupled  with systematic and explicit phonics instruction. In recent years,  there has been a renewed interest in Engelmann's original pro gram, due to the Department of Education's "Reading First"  initiative, with its focus on more defined reading instruction  across schools. Within the "15 Elements of Effective Adoles cent Literacy Programs" presented by the Alliance for Excellent  Education 2004 is described the need for direct, explicit com prehension instruction "in the strategies and processes that  proficient readers use" p. 4. The "Reading Next" program, an  expansion of the "Reading First" program, emphasizes this point  in the instruction of older children. In May 2006, the National Council on Teacher Quality published  its findings of the state of reading instruction. It asserted that  "the current reading failure rate of 20 to 30 percent could be  reduced to the range of 2 to 10 percent" if elementary teachers  incorporated certain research based practices in their classrooms  p. 1. These practices include characteristics of Direct Instruc tion: explicit instruction in letter sounds, syllables and words;  teaching phonics in a sequence; practicing skills to a point of  automaticity; and, frequent assessment and instructional adjust ments to determine student progress. Direct Instruction has  evidenced itself to be a program that has the ability to increase the  literacy skills in at-risk students. One area of significant under performance by the at-risk student was that of writing skills.  Study participants' metacognitive skills positively transferred to  their writing performance. Accordingly, at-risk students need an  extended hands-on practice with writing strategies throughout a  writing process Eunjyu, 2013. Direct Instruction in mastery of  phonics is also more effective than other teaching approaches in  helping students become skilled, independent readers Raynor et  al., 2001. Physical education programs have also incorporated  Direct Instruction in their curriculum, as a way to implement and  assess basic skills. Demonstration is a major part of the modeling  in physical education programs. Teachers in science programs also support the implementation  of Direct Instruction in their curriculum. David Klahr 2006,  professor of psychology at the Carnegie Mellon University, has  reviewed a spectrum of teaching methods in science instruction  and has asserted that Direct Instruction has its place in the science  classroom. Direct Instruction becomes an effective model when  teaching a process. Specifically, the design of experiments is an  activity that is easily retained when Direct Instruction is used to  promote this skill. The Direct Instruction curriculum itself is a  highly tuned curriculum supported by such organizations as the  National Institute for Direct Instruction and the Association for  Direct Instruction. While the Direct Instruction program has a highly specific  curriculum and strategies for implementation, the term direct  instruction has evolved to include any teacher-directed approach  to instruction that involves the components of explicit step-by  step instruction and student mastery at each step. Teachers have 

Direct Instruction 54 developed their own scripts, preparing lesson plans that include  fast-paced directed instruction, with regular checks for under standing and feedback. Recently, educational technology has  included hybrid direct instruction opportunities for students,  motivating students to work on their own to improve their skills. Application Development of Curriculum Developers of Direct Instruction curriculum follow a specific  protocol before a program is implemented in classrooms across  the country. Developers review all state and national standards  and then analyze current curricula. They develop a program and  pilot it with anywhere from 12 to 30 students. As students work  through this material, teachers review the process and change  areas that are not appropriate for implementation. There can be  up to four or so revisions to any particular program before a cur riculum is determined to be appropriate for distribution. Typical Application Kozloff 2003 outlines a typical application of Direct Instruc tion. First, teachers frame the task that the students will learn.  The teacher models information verbally or through demonstra tion. The teacher may repeat the model to ensure that all students  have observed the model. Teachers lead the students to repeat  information and then perform a routine together, repeating the  routine until all students have expressed understanding. Students  then perform the task independently and are tested to see if they  have acquired the material. The teacher then verifies what the  students have learned, and praises their efforts. Skills are taught  until student responses have reached automaticity and students  are able to generalize their learning into new and untaught situ ations. Higher Order Thinking Teachers of Direct Instruction explicitly and systematically teach  students higher order thinking skills. They assume that students  do not know how to make inductive and deductive generaliza tions on their own, so they teach each part directly, step-by-step.  Teachers introduce do-objectives, informing students what they  will be able to do when they are done with the tasks. Specifically,  teachers facilitate the performing of certain logical operations  such as induction and deduction. To promote inductive thinking,  the teacher models the review of specific elements and students  note them by comparing and contrasting elements across exam ples. Students then induce generalizations of concepts from their  review of examples. To promote deductive thinking, students  review general concepts and examine new examples. Use of Achievement Groups Prior to skill development, students are tested and assigned to  achievement groups. Training provided usually revolves around  small modules where teacher directs the instructional process  depending on the skills acquired, providing a set of procedures  that fit with instructional targets and arrange the environment  accordingly. The main goal of this strategy is to reach with stu dents the mastery level before learning a new skill Al-Makahleh,  2011. Students who progress more quickly in certain areas are  periodically assigned to faster groups. They may return to their  original group when they have acquired certain skills. Assessments Testing is a frequent part of Direct Instruction. Teachers assure  mastery throughout the learning process, determining who is  moving ahead or falling behind. Students are moved from one  achievement group to the other, to assure that all students are  progressing. Direct Instruction requires 100 mastery before the  teacher goes on to the next subset of skills or activities Engel mann  Osborn, 1999. Improving Reading Instruction Direct instruction is used to teach basic skills in reading. Teach ers explain a reading skill, step-by-step, and supervise practice.  Instruction begins with phonemic awareness activities that  includes the direct teaching of a set of letter-sound relationships  in a clearly defined sequence, and then moves to include com plex phonics and decoding lessons, and progresses to a focus  on comprehension and analysis of content. Study skills are also  covered in reading instruction, including use of reference materi als, graphs, tables and maps. Scientific research informs us that Direct Instruction has a greater  contribution to growth in reading than instruction that provides  non-sequential or no phonics instruction. Other benefits of using  Direct Instruction in teaching reading include the improvement  of word recognition, spelling, reading comprehension and flu ency. Improving Reading Comprehension For those teachers involved in literature-based learning, Direct  Instruction is appropriate for enhancing the reading comprehen sion of students. As discussed by John Savage 1994, Direct  Instruction is particularly effective with students whose intellec tual abilities are below those of others of the same chronological  age. Direct Instruction appears to be most appropriate for teach ing specific comprehension strategies such as: showing causal  relationships in texts; using graphic and semantic organizers;  using questioning to guide and monitor student learning; teach ing students to ask questions about their reading; recognizing  story structure; and for summarization. Steps to providing clear  direct instruction include: direct explanation, modeling, guided  practice and application. Vocabulary Instruction The Center for Improvement of Early Reading Achievement  2003 states that Direct Instruction is an effective way to teach  vocabulary, particularly when the words represent complex con cepts that are not readily used in day-to-day experiences. This  method of teaching vocabulary providing students with specific  word instruction and teaching word-learning strategies leads to  improved reading comprehension.

Direct Instruction 55 There are specific Direct Instruction strategies that aid in deep ening students' knowledge of word meanings. Teaching to  specific words before reading helps students learn new words,  as well as comprehend the text. Using new words in different  contexts improves word learning. Teachers should also provide  extended exposure to new words. Direct Instruction in the learn ing of new words and understanding word meanings include the  use of dictionaries and other reference material, and promote  the study of word parts and use of context clues while reading  rich texts. Instruction should include words that are important  to understanding a concept, words that are used over and over  again, and difficult words that are particularly challenging for  students to understand. Computer Mediated Instruction  Direct Instruction Direct Instruction curriculum is applied to the use of drill-andpractice and tutorial software to enhance the learning of various  student populations. Drill-and-practice software aids at-risk stu dents in need of individual instruction and practice. The software  can be less threatening to this student population and can remedy  specific weaknesses in reading and in understanding of materi als in high-stakes testing situations. The software is self-paced  and usually develops practice in math, vocabulary and spell ing, specifically addressing lower level skills. Students work on  example items one at a time, and receive immediate and detailed  feedback. Tutorial software also incorporates Direct Instruction curriculum  within its instructional sequence. Students can learn a topic with out any help from a teacher or from other materials. The software  includes an instructional sequence of explanation, practice, and  feedback. Often, this form of computer-mediated instruction is  used for review of materials or when students desire self-paced  learning. Viewpoints Criticisms of Direct Instruction There are many criticisms that surround Direct Instruction.  Leontovich 1999 describes Direct Instruction as being a racist  program that emphasizes rote learning and assumes that minor ity children cannot assimilate higher order thinking skills. Other  critics of Direct Instruction criticize it for being too rigid and  concentrating too heavily on basic skills. Direct Instruction also  has a history of problematic implementation, as some adminis trators have thought that the teacher guides would give teachers  all the support they needed to implement programs. This can  result in dissatisfied teachers and lower-than-expected achieve ment levels. Countering Criticisms Through Use of Perceived Best  Practices In contrast to the criticisms that have arisen from Direct Instruc tion programs, Kozloff and Bessellieu 2000 state that, in  actuality, Direct Instruction incorporates many of the best prac tices that are common in today's classrooms. For instance, Direct  Instruction promotes the discourse of social activity and learn ing, such as paying attention, waiting turns, addressing audience,  and learning how to learn. This convergence of important factors  includes the right kind of comprehensible input, a supportive  context, large amounts of time and conducive psychological  characteristics e.g., patience, tolerance of ambiguity, and inte grative motivation Morrow, 2013. The program also includes  a wide variety of literary genres that are developmentally  appropriate and interesting to students. Direct Instruction also  enhances higher order thinking, as it is taught explicitly. There is  minimum rote learning promoted. Practice is also incorporated in Direct Instruction, as students  repeat readings so that they can review different objectives with  each reading. This type of practice is necessary in promoting flu ency, internalizing knowledge, and enhancing independence. Effective Methods in Teaching As more and more school systems are holding their teachers  accountable for student learning, controversy arises as to what  is the most effective method for presenting knowledge. Three  methods that are often used in the classroom are inquiry-based  learning, discovery learning, and Direct Instruction. Inquiry  helps students learn by engaging them in a range of different  types of investigations, from descriptive to experimental. Dis covery learning actively engages students in the discovery of  their own procedures, promoting productivity and creativity.  Direct Instruction promotes the coordination of information  and skills into teacher-directed instruction. There is evidence  that students can benefit from many different teaching methods.  David Klair 2006 states that whatever teaching methodology  is most popular at the time, an effective teacher uses the more  productive strategy for any given situation. Terms  Concepts Automaticity: Skills are taught until students have fully internal ized them and reproduction of the skill is automatic. Students can  then generalize their learning in new, untaught situations. Skills  cognitively move from short to long-term memory. In reading  instruction, automaticity refers to automatic word recognition. Classroom Scripts: Classroom scripts are the step-by-step  instructions for the implementation of skills in the Direct Instruc tion classroom. Discovery Learning: Students are actively engaged in the dis covery of their own procedures, promoting productivity and  creativity. Do -Objectives: Teachers inform students of the objectives they  will be able to perform when their learning is complete.

Direct Instruction 56 Inquiry-Based Learning: Students learn by engaging in a range  of different types of investigations, from descriptive to experi ential. Mastery: Mastery is the acquisition of a skill or knowledge. Phonemic Awareness: Phonemic awareness is the understand ing that the sounds of a spoken language work together to make  words. Phonics Instruction: Phonics instruction is the teaching of the  relationship between letters of a written language and the indi vidual sounds of a spoken language. Sequential Learning: Sequential learning is the understanding of  new information in linear steps where each step follows logically  from the previous ones. Bibliography Al-Makahleh, A. 2011. The effect of direct instruction  strategy on math achievement of primary 4th and 5th  grade students with learning difficulties. International  Education Studies, 44, 199-205. Retrieved December 12,  2013, from EBSCO Online Database Education Source  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN69755320siteehost-live American Federation of Teachers. Six promising schoolwide  reform programs. Retrieved April 10, 2007, from http: www.aft.orgedissueswhatworkssixdiindex.htm Association of Direct Instruction. Retrieved April 10,  2007, from http:www.adihome.orgphpshopdi di.php?username Ayers, S., Housner, L., Dietrich, S., Ha Young, K., Pearson,  M., Gurvitch, R., Pritchard, T.,  Dell'Orso, M. 2005,  Fall. An examination of skill learning using direct  instruction. Physical Educator, 62, 136 144. Retrieved  April 10, 2007, from EBSCO online database Educational  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN18809351siteehost-live Balajthy, E. 1996. Using computer technology to aid the  disabled reader. In L. Putnam Ed., How to become a bet ter reading teacher  pp. 331-343. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice-Hall. Bessellieu, F., Kozloff, M.,  Rice, J. 2007. Teacher's per ceptions of direct instruction teaching. Retrieved April 10,  2007, from http:people.uncw.edukozloffmteacherper ceptdi.html Cassidy, J.,  Wenrich, J. 199899, DecemberJanuary.  Literacy Research and practice: What's hot, what's not,  and why. The Reading Teacher, 52, 1-11. Retrieved April  10, 2007, from EBSCO online database Educational  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedblfhAN1355406sitelrc-live Center for the Improvement of Early Reading Achievement.  2003, June. Put reading first: The research building  blocks for teaching children to read Pamphlet. Jessup,  MD: National Institute for Literacy at ED Pubs. Chase, J.,  Curtis, M. 2003. Children and reading difficul ties. In J. Flood, D. Lapp, J. Squire, and J. Jensen Eds.,  Handbook of research on teaching the English language  arts  pp. 413-420. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Clowes, G. 2001, June. If the children aren't learning, we're  not teaching: An interview with Siegfried E. Engelmann.  Retrieved April 10, 2007, from http:www.heartland.org educaitonjun01engelmann.htm Engelmann, S.,  Osborn, J. 1999. Language for learning:  Teacher's guide. Columbus, OH: SRA-McGraw-Hill. Eunjyu, Y. 2013. Empowering at-risk students as autonomous  learners: Toward a metacognitive approach. Research   Teaching in Developmental Education, 301, 35-45.  Retrieved December 12, 2013, from EBSCO Online  Database Education Source Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN92585563 siteehost-live  Grossen, B. 2004. Success of a direct instruction model at a  secondary level school with high-risk students. Reading  and Writing Quarterly, 20 2, 161 178. Retrieved April  10, 2007, from EBSCO online database Educational  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN12377208siteehost-live Kozloff, M. 2003, Fall. Technical proficiency, direct instruc tion, and educational excellence. Direct Instruction News,   216-220. Retrieved April 10, 2007, from http:people. uncw.edukozloffmtechproficiency.htm Kozloff, M. 2004, February. Direct instruction is applied  philosophy. Retrieved April 10, 2007, from http:people. uncw.edukozloffmditechprof.htm Kozloff, M.,  Bessellieu, F. 2000, April. Direct instruction  is developmentally Kozloff, M.,  Bessellieu, F. 2000, April. Direct instruction  is developmentally appropriate. Retrieved April 10, 2007,  from http:people.unew.edukozloffmdidevelapp.html

Direct Instruction 57 Kozloff, M., LaNunziata, L.,  Cowardin, J. 1999, Jan.  Direct instruction in education. Retrieved April 10, 2007,  http:people.uncw.edukozloffmdiarticle.html Leontovich, M. 1999, August. Directly controversial: Direct  instruction makes enemies, converts. Title I Report.  Retrieved April 10, 2007 from http:titlei.comsamples direct.htm McCoy, K.,  Prehm, H. 1987. Teaching mainstreamed  students: Methods and techniques. Denver, CO: Love  Publishing. Morrow, C. 2013. Caught or taught: Indirect and direct  instruction. Perspectives TESOL Arabia, 202, 6-12.  Retrieved December 12, 2013, from EBSCO Online  Database Education Source Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN88260845 siteehost-live National Council of Teacher Quality. 2006, May. What edu cation schools aren't teaching about reading and what  elementary teachers aren't learning: Executive summary.  Washington, DC: NCTQ. National Institute for Direct Instruction DI. Retrieved from  http:www.nifdi.org Radosh, D. 2004. The pet goat approach. New Yorker, 80  20, 28-29. Retrieved April 10, 2007, from EBSCO online  database Literary Reference Center. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedblfhAN14105617 sitelrc-live Raynor, K., Foorman, B., Perfetti, C., Pesetsky, D.,   Seidenberg, M. 2001. How psychological science  informs the teaching of reading. Psychological Science in  the Public Interest, 2, 31-74. Rittle-Johnson, B. 2006, Jan. Promoting transfer: Effects  of self-explanation and direct instruction. Child  Development, 77, 1 -15. Retrieved April 10, 2007, from  EBSCO online database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN19615927siteehost-live Roblyer, M. 2006. Integrating educational technology into  teaching 4th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. Rupley, W.  Blair, R. 1989. Reading diagnosis and remedia tion. 3rd ed. Columbus, OH: Merrill. Ryder, R., Burton, J.,  Silberg, A. 2006, Jan. Longitudinal  study of direct instruction effects from first through third  grades. The Journal of Educational Research. 99 3,  179 191. Retrieved April 10, 2007, from EBSCO online  database Educational Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN193 23266siteehost-live Savage, J. 1994. Teaching reading using literature. Madison,  WI: Brown and Benchmark. West, S.  Skoog, G. 2006, April. The current science  education war: Inquiry or Direct instruction. The Texas  Science Teacher, 8 -10. Retrieved April 10, 2007, from  EBSCO online database Educational Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN21147324siteehost-live Suggested Reading Adams, G.,  Engelmann, S. 1996. Research on direct  instruction: 25 years beyond DISTAR. Seattle, WA:  Educational Achievement Systems. Bereiter, C.,  Engelmann, S. 1966. Teaching disadvantaged  children in the preschool. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall. Deshler, D., Schumaker, J.,  Woodruff, S. 2004. Improving  literacy skills of at-risk adolescents: A schoolwide  response. In D. Strickland and D. Alvermann, Ed.,  Bridging the literacy achievement gap grades 4-12. New  York: Teachers College Press. Dixon, R.,  Engelmann, S. 1999. Spelling mastery.  Worthington, OH: SRAMcGraw Hill. Engelmann, S.,  Brunner, E. 1995. Reading master.  Worthington, OH: SRAMcGraw Hill. Engelmann, S.,  Carnine, L. 1995. Connecting math con cepts. Worthington, OH: SRAMcGraw Hill. Engelmann, S., Carnine, L.,  Johnson, G. 1999. Corrective  reading. Worthington, OH: SRAMcGraw Hill. Fallan, K., Light, J., McNaughton, D., Drager, K.,  Hammer,  C. 2004, Dec. The effects of direct instruction on the  single-word reading skills of children who require aug mentative and alternative communication. Journal of  Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47, 1224-1239.  Retrieved April 10, 2007,from EBSCO online database  Educational Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN18337915sit eehost-live Jitendra, A., Edwards, L., Sacks, G.,  Jacobson, L. 2004,  Spring. What research says About vocabulary instruc tion for students with learning disabilities. Exceptional 

Direct Instruction 58 Children, 70, 299-322. Retrieved April 14, 2007, from  EBSCO online database Educational Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN12409135siteehost-live Kinney, D.,  Robertson, D. 2006, Fall. Identifying students'  reasons for selecting a computer-mediated or lecture class.  AMATYC Review  27 37-47. Kozloff, M. What direct instruction is or is not. Retrieved  April 10, 2007, from http:people.uncw.edukozloffm whatdiis.html Kozloff, M.,  Rice, J. 2001, July. Direct approaches to lit eracy instruction Inventory of essential knowledge and  skills. Retrieved April 10, 2007, from http:people.uncw. edukozloffmdiinventoryrevised.html Rosenshine, B.,  Stevens, R. 1984. Classroom instruction  in reading. In P. Pearson, P. Mosenthal, M. Kamil,  R.  Barr, eds., Handbook of reading research. New York:  Longman. Ross, S., Nunnery, J., Goldfeder, E., McDonald, A., Rachor,  R., Hornbeck, M.,  Fleischman, S. 2004. Using school  reform models to improve reading achievement: A longi tudinal study of direct instruction and success for all in an  urban district. Journal of Education for Students Places at  Risk 4 357-388. Retrieved April 10, 2007, from EBSCO  online database Educational Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhA N14593563siteehost-live Tarver, S. 1998. Myths and truths about Direct Instruction.  Effective School Practice, 17, 18 22. Essay by Tricia Smith, Ed.D. Dr. Tricia Smith is an Assistant Professor of English at Fitchburg State College in Fitchburg, Massachusetts, and teaches theory and  pedagogy courses in English Education. She has written several articles on online instruction, advising, and collaborative learning. Her  other areas of interest include linguistics and young adult literature.
Instructional Modeling Abstract This article explores modeling as an instructional methodology  in a variety of educational contexts. Modeling occurs whenever  a teacher demonstrates a concept or skill for a student. Addi tionally, modeling occurs whenever individuals learn behaviors,  attitudes, values, and beliefs through observation. Discussion  focuses on the various definitions and benefits of modeling. A  wide range of applicable educational situations are highlighted  including modeling for reading comprehension and music  instruction, modeling for demonstration of life skills for visually  impaired students, and modeling sustainability and environmen tally sound practices in school settings. Issues and alternative  viewpoints are also discussed with regard to the negative effects  of excessive modeling and the complexity and difficulty faced  when attempting to model for instructional purposes. Overview Haston 2007 indicates that modeling occurs whenever a teacher  demonstrates a concept for a student. In its most basic form, a  teacher models for students by working through a sample prob lem, demonstrating how to perform a particular task, dictating  his or her thought process out loud when reading or solving a  difficult problem, etc. Modeling occurs frequently in classrooms  as students often need an example to follow before attempting  to fully apply a particular skill on their own. Teacher modeling  is often the first step in the learning process, followed by guided  practice and eventually individual application without assistance.  The overall goal of modeling, as an instructional methodology,  is to provide an example for students to follow in order to be  able to integrate a particular behavior, successfully perform a  task, or acquire a specific skill on their own. Teacher modeling is  also used in co-teaching contexts where the experienced teacher  can provide effective modeling for a teacher candidate, who  would be able to use it in his or her own future classroom Patel   Kramer, 2013. Modeling is not only an effective instructional methodology; it  is also a process that occurs naturally outside of the academic  context. Haston 2007 extends the definition of modeling as  a process through which individuals learn behaviors, attitudes,  values, and beliefs through observations. Not only do teach ers model for academic purposes, they also model through  their everyday actions and communication with students about  beliefs, values, and attitudes. Many teachers serve as role models  for youth, thereby modeling appropriate behavior and attitude.  Chiou  Yang 2006 suggest that when students recognize  teachers as role models, teachers have a direct impact on what  students learn. Higgs  McMillan 2006 support the notion that  teachers act as models for students. They claim most students  generally view teachers as competent individuals and therefore  internalize the behaviors and attitudes observed and experienced  in the classroom setting. Methe  Hintze 2003 further sup port the assertion that school leaders, teachers, and classroom  assistants influence student behavior through demonstrating and  modeling desired behavior. Ideally, acquisition of desired behav iors during instructional sessions is followed by generalization  of these behaviors to contexts similar to classroom activities for  all participants Ledford  Wolery, 2013. Abstract Overview Benefits of Modeling Applications Modeling Reading Instruction Modeling in Music Education Modeling for Visually Impaired Students Modeling Sustainability in Schools Viewpoints Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Instructional Modeling 60 Social learning theory as discussed by Bandura 1977, 1986;  cited in Methe  Hintze, 2003 further illuminates the modeling  process as observational in nature. Learning often takes place  in the absence of direct reinforcement as people learn naturally  through imitation of models Haston, 2007. Just as a young child  mimics words heard in a conversation, people, in general, aim to  emulate behaviors observed. Bandura 1977 claims that highly  valued individuals can have positive effects on other individuals  and can thereby encourage desirable behavior through ongoing  visual feedback. Methe  Hintze 2003 suggest that teachers  act as facilitators of desirable behavior and thus are often in the  position of highly valued individuals with much influence over  student behavior and attitude. Higgs  McMillan 2006 highlight that research strongly indi cates modeling is an effective way to teach knowledge, skills and  behaviors. They also assert that effective modeling motivates  students to learn and helps them to develop core values. When  students are exposed to multiple models whether academic or  value based, behaviors and skills are often learned quickly and  efficiently as students internalize observed models and integrate  observed behaviors and values with their own. Benefits of Modeling Riva  Korinek 2004 indicate modeling has been demon strated to be an effective instructional methodology in a variety  of contexts. They specifically highlight modeling as an effec tive process for teaching and learning complex problem solving,  evaluation, writing tasks, leadership, and communication among  others. In an academic setting, students benefit greatly from  exposure to instructional models because they are able to  develop clear understandings of expectations for both process  and product. Once students observe a teacher model exactly how  to follow a specific process or how to perform a particular task,  they are much more likely to be successful when it comes to  applying the skills learned. Additionally, teachers are not always the only individuals mod eling in classroom settings. Peers often model for instructional  purposes by guiding each other through acquisition of specific  skills or through processes necessary for successful completion  of tasks, etc. When peers model for each other, both individuals  benefit tremendously from the teaching and learning relationship.  When a student is able to effectively model or teach a particular  concept or skill to another individual, he or she takes on the role  of a teacher and thereby demonstrates a complete understand ing of the concept or skill taught. Furthermore, peer modeling  encourages strong peer relationships and increased self-esteem  and self-confidence. Riva  Korinek 2004 support the notion that modeling is  effective when direct learning outcomes are intended, but can  be equally as powerful when no teaching or learning is intended  at all. Haston 2007 discusses how modeling allows students to  learn naturally and intuitively. When teachers effectively model  behaviors, attitudes, and values, students absorb and integrate  what they observe with little, if any, direct instruction. Therefore,  teachers model and students learn without actually being aware  that teaching and learning is occurring. Haston 2007 further  highlights that, as students improve as a direct result of model ing, they begin to become more independent and creative in their  own thought processes. Once they acquire the skills necessary  via modeling, students are often able to build upon learned skills  to develop their own understandings. Applications As discussed, modeling occurs in a variety of educational con texts from direct instructional methodologies to more implicit  and natural situations. The following section focuses on a variety  of applicable situations in which modeling plays a major role.  Modeling as a direct teaching methodology is explored in the  context of both reading and music instruction. Next, modeling  as an instructional technique for visually impaired students is  discussed. Finally, modeling of behaviors, attitudes and values is  highlighted in the context of sustainability and environmentally  sound practices in schools. Modeling Reading Instruction Methe  Hintze 2003 discuss the findings of many researchers  regarding the impact of teacher modeling on reading instruction.  They assert that teacher modeling is a common element identi fied across a variety of reading programs and they highlight the  strong relationship between on-task reading behavior and teacher  modeling. When teachers model on-task reading behaviors and  demonstrate for students why reading is important and critical  to success, students are more likely to be on-task when read ing Methe  Hintze, 2003. One specific way teachers model  on-task reading involves a common practice, Sustained Silent  Reading SSR. During SSR, students are required to read a book  of their choice silently, on their own, without interruption for a  specified period of time. Teachers that model on-task behavior  by reading a book of their choice as students read, implicitly  communicate to students the importance of reading. Walker 2005 discusses the direct effects of teacher modeling  on reading comprehension via the think-aloud technique. When  teachers articulate their thought process for students and make  strategies they use to comprehend text transparent to students,  students are more likely to apply such strategies when reading  on their own. Walker 2005 asserts modeling of the think-aloud  technique promotes strategy use, self-efficacy, and increased  engagement in the reading process and comprehension of text.  She claims that struggling readers directly benefit from teachers  who model their own thoughts and self-statements as they read. When teaching reading comprehension strategies, teachers  model a variety of techniques that assist with comprehension  of text. Teachers may model the prediction process by articulat ing predictions out loud as they read a text to students. They  may model thoughtful questions by pausing and asking differ

Instructional Modeling 61 ent questions while reading. Teachers may model connection  making by detailing, out loud, specific connections they make  between the text and their own lives. Through active listening  and direct observation of strategies teachers use to comprehend  text, students slowly, but surely, begin to integrate such strate gies and techniques into their own reading. Modeling in Music Education Whereas modeling in reading instruction is most effective when  teachers think out loud and clearly articulate their thought pro cess for students, modeling in music education works in the  opposite way, and is most effective when students are exposed to  minimal verbal explanation of what a teacher is thinking while  playing a musical instrument Haston, 2007. Haston 2007  asserts that the most appropriate use of modeling in a music  classroom occurs when teachers teach new musical concepts  or demonstrate specific performance skills without reference to  printed music. He further asserts that modeling can occur via  live performance or recordings, in group settings or in individ ual instruction, or by encouraging older students to model for  younger students via peer mentoring relationships. Haston 2007 claims that music instruction lends itself primar ily to aural modeling processes because students learn implicitly  by listening and aiming to match what they hear via the model.  A choral director or teacher may model staccato for students  by demonstrating it using the voice or an instrument and then  requiring students to repeat. A string teacher may model how to  hold the bow, where to place it and how to hold the fingers when  playing a string instrument. Haston 2007 further asserts that  all music teachers can model good and poor tone quality, style,  diction, articulation and phrasing in addition to a variety of other  musical concepts and understandings. However, he illuminates that despite all of the evidence indicat ing the benefits of modeling in music instruction, researchers in  various studies claim that modeling is employed only 10 to 25  percent of the time in music education classes Haston, 2007.  Should music educators expect students to better emulate musi cal performance skills and acquire deeper understandings of  musical concepts, they need to employ modeling techniques  more frequently in classroom settings. Modeling for Visually Impaired Students Modeling is a strategy largely used with visually impaired stu dents to help them acquire life skills necessary to be successful.  O'Connell et al. 2006 highlight specific modeling strategies that  are employed when teaching visually impaired students, such as  tactile modeling, physical guidance and demonstration. As stu dents are taught a modeled process, they are able to reproduce  the actions and increase their understanding of what they need to  do O'Connell et al., 2006. O'Connell et al. 2006 further state  that once students understand what they need to do to perform a  specific skill, they are able to create a mental picture of the pro cess based on the model and are therefore able to reproduce the  specific action or skill. Tactile modeling and physical guidance are two specific mod eling techniques used for instructional purposes with visually  impaired students. Tactile modeling involves participation via  touch that can help a student learn and understand a skill by feel ing and exploring the model's body in the direction of movement  O'Connell et al., 2006. Tactile modeling enables a student to  take control over his or her learning as he or she is able to choose  specific movements to focus on for information gathering pur poses O'Connell et al., 2006. Physical guidance differs slightly  in that the student performs a particular movement with the model  to better understand the feel, rhythm, and motion of the move ment being instructed O'Connell et al., 2006. The model literally  places the student's body in the position necessary to perform a  particular task and moves with the student to model the actions.  Both forms of modeling are highly effective in helping visually  impaired students understand movements behind specific skills. O'Connell et al. 2006 highlight the research of Bandura 1997  indicating that new skills can be acquired through physical dem onstration, pictorial or verbal instruction describing exactly how  to perform a given task. When teachers explain verbally how  to perform a specific task or demonstrate physically the pro cess necessary, students acquire the skill quickly and efficiently.  Bandura 1997 asserts the most effective way of translating  information about how to perform a specific skill or action to a  visually impaired student is via proficient modeling. Modeling Sustainability in Schools Higgs  McMillan 2006 discuss multiple ways educators can  model environmental sustainability in schools with the goals of  helping students better understand concepts related to sustain ability and incorporate sustainable practices into their daily  behaviors. The researchers primarily focus on four distinct ways  in which schools model sustainability: role modeling, modeling  via campus facilities and operations, modeling via school gover nance, and modeling via school culture. Although the researchers  directly discuss the effects of modeling on sustainability and  environmentally sound practices, the information extrapolated  from their research with regard to modeling can be applied in a  variety of educational contexts for a variety of purposes, not just  sustainability. The most direct form of modeling with the most impact on student  attitudes and beliefs involves observed behaviors that promote  sustainability Higgs  McMillan, 2006. When teachers model  sustainable practices such as recycling empty cans, using recy cled paper, driving hybrid cars, and conserving energy, students  are more likely to integrate these behaviors into their daily lives.  Direct observation of such behaviors in trusted adults results in  changed behaviors on behalf of students primarily because stu dents observe these behaviors daily and begin to incorporate what  they learn via observation into their own daily actions. Higgs  McMillan 2006 further discuss the role that campus  facilities and operations play in teaching students about sustain ability. They assert that by making "green" facilities and the 

Instructional Modeling 62 operations necessary to sustain "green" practices transparent to  students, students are more likely to become directly involved  in maintaining and promoting such environmentally sound prac tices. Higgs  McMillan 2006 claim that by involving students  in the operations of the school, students gain a deeper under standing and appreciation for the waste, consumption, inequities,  governance and economics of the school as these components  become much more visible and tangible. The more effort schools  put forth to model sustainability via environmentally sound facil ities and operations, the greater the impact on student behaviors,  attitudes and beliefs. A third way in which schools model sustainability involves  modeling via school governance. Higgs  McMillan 2006  highlight specific schools that promote sustainable practices via  direct student involvement in the decision making process in  order to model social equity and civic participation. By mod eling the participatory process in school governance, schools  give students and faculty power to influence decisions. Higgs   McMillan 2006 assert that schools modeling social equity  and civic participation via shared decision making, whether for  sustainability or not, empower students and help them to feel a  sense of ownership of their own education. Finally, Higgs  McMillan 2006 focus on the effects of  modeling sustainability via school culture and tradition. The  researchers highlight the fact that traditions, rituals and ceremo nies play a major role in establishing school culture. Therefore,  modeling values, beliefs and attitudes via school traditions and  rituals directly impacts student behavior. Students are more  likely to adopt behaviors if they continually and directly observe  people and institutions that model and respect such values, rather  than simply being told that it is important to hold certain values.  Higgs  McMillan 2006 firmly believe that modeling helps  students transfer abstract ideas into personal, tangible applica tions. They assert that direct observation of specific behaviors is  essential if educators expect students to carry out such behaviors  on their own. The more opportunities educators seize to model  attitudes, beliefs and behaviors for students, the more likely  students are to be prepared to integrate such values into their  everyday lives. Viewpoints Although research highlights the fact that modeling is a highly  effective strategy for increasing reading comprehension, teach ers often struggle with implementing modeling techniques in the  classroom. Pressley 2002 indicates the think-aloud strategy is  rarely used in classrooms because of the complexity involved  in modeling the actual thought process for students. Walker  2005 discusses how teachers are moving away from asking  rote comprehension questions with determined answers toward  more critical thinking questions involving complex comprehen sion processes. However, teachers continue to have difficulty  implementing the think-aloud strategy. Although it should be a  common practice in classrooms, it is not Walker 2005. One of the main reasons this particular modeling strategy is diffi cult to implement is because teachers need to make their thinking  explicit for students. Rather than just simply performing a task  or comprehending text implicitly while reading, teachers need  to voice, out loud, the process they use to determine mean ing from text. While this may seem simple on the surface, it is  actually quite difficult to implement in the classroom setting.  Furthermore, thinking aloud must occur frequently for students  to actually internalize the strategies and begin to use them on  their own. An additional concern raised by researchers with regard to  modeling as an effective teaching methodology involves inhibi tion of creativity Gardner, 1994; cited in Haston, 2007. When  modeling is used too frequently and employed to an extreme,  some educators believe that modeling can, in turn, stifle a child's  individuality and creativity. While it is true that modeling can  have tremendous benefits for students in terms of helping to con struct knowledge and shaping their beliefs, attitudes and values,  teachers need to be careful with regard to the extent that model ing practices are employed in the classroom as students cannot  always imitate what they see and hear. Educators also need to  ensure that students evolve into independent, creative thinkers.  In addition, a study of teachers responding to questions about  the moral work of teaching revealed that teacher participants  commonly believed that modeling is a primary means by which  moral education occurs Sanger  Osguthorpe, 2013. Terms  Concepts Aural Modeling: Aural modeling requires students to learn  implicitly by listening and aiming to match what they hear via  the model. Modeling: Modeling occurs whenever a teacher demonstrates a  concept for a student. In its most basic form, a teacher models  for students by working through a sample problem, demonstrat ing how to perform a particular task, dictating his or her thought  process out loud when reading or solving a difficult problem etc.  Haston 2007 extends the definition of modeling as a process  through which individuals learn behaviors, attitudes, values, and  beliefs through observations. Social Learning Theory: Social learning theory as discussed by  Bandura 1977, 1986; cited in Haston, 2007 describes the mod eling process as observational in nature. Learning often takes  place in the absence of direct reinforcement as people learn natu rally through imitation of models.

Instructional Modeling 63 Sustained Silent Reading SSR: During SSR, students are  required to read a book of their choice silently, on their own,  without interruption for a specified period of time. Tactile Modeling: Tactile modeling involves inspection via touch  that can help a student learn and understand a skill by feeling and  exploring the model's body in the direction of movement. Think Aloud: A modeling strategy used primarily in reading  comprehension instruction. Teachers articulate their thought  process for students and make strategies they use to comprehend  text transparent to students thus encouraging students to apply  such strategies when reading on their own. Bibliography Bandura, A. 1977. Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs,  NJ; Prentice Hall. Bandura, A. 1997. Self-efficacy: The exercise of control.  New York: W. H. Freeman Chiou, W.  Yang, C. 2006. Teachers modeling advantage  and their modeling effects on college students' learning  styles and occupational stereotypes: A case of collabora tive teaching in technical courses. Adolescence, 41 164,  723-737. Retrieved June 15, 2007 from EBSCO Online  Database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN236 00991siteehost-live Gardner, H. 1994. The arts and human development. New  York: Basic Books. Haston, W. 2007. Teacher modeling as an effective teach ing strategy: Modeling is a technique that can help your  students learn effectively in many situations. Music  Educators Journal, 93 4, 26-30. Retrieved June 15,  2007 from EBSCO Online Database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN24344139siteehost-live Higgs, A.  McMillan, V. 2006. Teaching through model ing: Four school's experiences in sustainability educa tion. Journal of Environmental Education, 38 1, 39-53.  Retrieved June 15, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN23675635sit eehost-live Ledford, J. R.,  Wolery, M. 2013. Peer modeling of aca demic and social behaviors during small-group direct  instruction. Exceptional Children, 794, 439-458.  Retrieved December 19, 2013, from EBSCO Online  Database Education Source Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN882 66507siteehost-live Methe, S.  Hintze, J. 2003. Evaluating teacher modeling  as a strategy to increase student reading behavior. School  Psychology Review, 32 4, 617-623. Retrieved June 15, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN11924948siteehost-live O'Connell, M, Lieberman, L.,  Petersen S. 2006. The use  of tactile modeling and physical guidance as instructional  strategies in physical activity for children who are blind. Patel, N. H.,  Kramer, T. A. 2013. Modeling collaboration  for middle-level teacher candidates through co-teaching.  Teacher Educator, 483, 170-184. Retrieved December  19, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database Education Source  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?direct truedbehhAN88786116siteehost-livePhysical  Education Teacher, 100 8, 471. Retrieved June 15,  2007 from EBSCO Online Database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN22415391siteehost-live Pressley, M. 2002. Reading instruction that works: The case  for balanced teaching 2nd ed. New York: Guilford. Riva, M.  Korinek, L. 2004. Teaching group work:  Modeling group leader and member behaviors in the  classroom to demonstrate group theory. Journal for  Specialists in Group Work, 29 1, 55-63. Retrieved  June 15, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN13127574siteehost-live Sanger, M. N.,  Osguthorpe, R. D. 2013. Modeling as  moral education: Documenting, analyzing, and address ing a central belief of preservice teachers. Teaching   Teacher Education , 29167-176. Retrieved December 18,  2013, from EBSCO Online Database Education Source  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN83653172siteehost-live  Walker, B. 2005. Thinking aloud: Struggling readers often  require more than a model. The Reading Teacher, 58 7,  688-692. Retrieved June 15, 2007 from EBSCO Online  Database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN167 38076siteehost-live

Instructional Modeling 64 Suggested Reading Block C.,  Israel, S. 2004. The ABC's of performing highly  effective think-alouds. The Reading Teacher, 58, 154-167. De Groot, C. 2001. From description to proof. Mathematics  Teaching in the Middle School, 7 4, 244-248. Retrieved  June 15, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN5760425siteehost-live English, L., Fox, J.,  Watters, J. 2005. Problem posing and  solving with mathematical modeling. Teaching Children  Mathematics, 12, 156-163. Retrieved June 15, 2007 from  EBSCO Online Database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN18456815siteehost-live McAlister, A., Ama, E., Barroso, C., Peters, R.,  Kelder,  S. 2000. Promoting tolerance and moral engagement  through peer modeling. Cultural Diversity  Ethnic  Minority Psychology, 64; pp. 363-373. McGee, L.  Schickedanz, J. 2007. Repeated interactive  read-alouds in preschool and kindergarten. The Reading  Teacher, 60 8, 742-751. Retrieved June 15, 2007 from  EBSCO Online Database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN24958563siteehost-live Widdowson, D., Dixon, R.  Moore, D. 1996. The effect of  teacher modeling of silent reading on students' engage ment during silent sustained reading. Educational  Psychology, 16, 171-180. Wilen, W.,  Philips, J. 1995. Teaching critical thinking: A  metacognitive approach. Social Education, 59, 135-138. Essay by John Loeser, M.Ed. John Loeser is an Assistant Head of an elementary school in San Mateo, California. He received his Master's of Education in School  Leadership from Harvard University. His research interests include differentiated instruction, improving instructional practice, and  strategic change and leadership in schools. He is a member of the National and California Association of Independent Schools, and the  Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. He currently resides in San Mateo, California with his wife.
Programmed Instruction Abstract The programmed instruction movement was developed by  American psychologist B. F. Skinner during the 1950s. Pro grammed instruction, modeled after the scientific method, arose  as a response to teacher shortages and to increasing student  populations. It automates instruction through breaking up cur riculum into small, self-contained, manageable frames that are  then logically sequenced in a systematic manner and presented  through technological devices. Ultimately, the goal of pro grammed instruction is to control learning through measuring  observable outcomes and through devising precise method ologies of teaching that are guaranteed to work. Programmed  instruction has been extinguished as a movement, but its influ ences form the foundation for much of modern education.  Systematization of instruction through codified objectives, eval uation methods especially through standardized testing, and  techniques of teaching that emphasize a back to the basics, stepby-step approach are, for example, some of the ways in which  programmed instruction influenced the educational field as it is  understood in the present. Overview Programmed instruction is a pedagogical approach that views  curricula as a sequence of organized frames that guide a student  through the learning process. Rooted firmly in the theoretical  foundations of science, programmed instruction is based on the  assumption that learning occurs best when material is broken  up into small, logically sequenced individual units. Another  assumption of programmed instruction, one rooted not specifi cally in science itself, but in B. F. Skinner's interpretation of it,  is that learning occurs best when learners succeed frequently.  Hence, in programmed instruction courses, students are "tested"  after each small part of material, called a frame, is presented;  their success on these assessments is virtually guaranteed by fol lowing a classical linear model of instruction Skinner, 1958.  Developed in the 1950s, programmed instruction enjoyed less  than two decades of popularity before losing favor in the field  of education theory, and is now largely defunct as a pedagogical  method. The move toward programmed instruction was ignited by  Sidney Pressey 18881979, an educational psychologist  who developed the first "teaching machine," which he called a  "simple apparatus which gives tests, scores, and teaches" 1926,  p. 549. The field was not given shape, however, until American  psychologist B. F. Skinner 19041990 provided a theoretical  foundation. Skinner proposed his model for "teaching machines"  out of a concern for increasingly large student-teacher ratios and  as a solution for addressing individual differences in students at  Abstract Overview How Programmed Instruction Works Decrease in Popularity Contextual Dimensions Philosophical  Scientific Dimensions Applications Implementations with Specific Academic  Subjects Classroom  Lesson Configurations Development of Programmed Instruction  Material Types of Responses Types of Feedback Measuring Effectiveness When to Use Programmed Instruction Influences of Programmed Instruction Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Programmed Instruction 66 a time when it was unclear that overworked teachers were able  to do so Pocztar, 1972. Skinner wrote that, "in any other field  a demand for increased production would have led at once to  the invention of labor-saving capital equipment," that education  was not in step with developments in automation that had taken  place since the Industrial Revolution Skinner, 1958, p. 969. An  efficient and effective pedagogy was called for: one modeled on  the structure of science itself. How Programmed Instruction Works Programmed instruction theoretically claims to be more efficient  and effective than more traditional modes of pedagogy. Les sons are implemented through instructional frame sequences. A  sample sequence of six frames is presented in Figure 1 below.  This sequence was adapted from Skinner's example 1958 and  if implemented, would be part of a spelling lesson consisting  of several hundred frames. The student would walk through the  sequence frame by frame without having access to later frames,  as in Figure 1 below. The example given here is called a linearly  programmed sequence because each student proceeds from step  one through step six in exact sequence, without deviations. In a  branching program, the assessment on each frame is in the form  of a multiple choice question, instead of in the form of a con structed response. Each multiple choice option sends the student  to a different frame: if they are incorrect, they are told to either  restart, to take some extra steps, or to repeat the previous frame  and try again. If they are correct, they progress sequentially  without deviations from the linear path. Figure 1: Sample Frame Sequence that Teaches How to Spell  "Transmission" This example is adapted from B. F. Skinners frame sequence on  how to spell manufacture Skinner, 1958. Objective: learn how to spell TransmissionA Sequence of  Six Frames Transmission means to send a message.  Copy the word  1.  here:             Note that part of the word is like mission.  When you  2.  transmit a message, you are going on a mission to relay your  message.  Fill in the blanks: T r a n s       . The other part of the word is like trans.  This is the same  3.  prex as in transatlantic, or to the other side of the Atlantic.  When you transmit something, you send a message  transto the other.  Fill in the blanks:      m i s s i o n. The same letter is missing all three places. Fill in the blanks:  4.  T r a n  m i   i o n. Unscramble the following: a i i m n n o r s s s tFill in the  5.  blanks here:            . Now, write the word here that means to send a message:    6.           .   Programmed instruction courses can be implemented using vari ous technologies. One premise of programmed instruction is that  it automates the presentation of curricula, increasing efficiency  so that teachers have time to pay more attention to students' per sonal needshence the need for technology. Technology does  not refer to specific machine-driven processes, but rather to a  structure of organization that imposes order and control. For  example, a programmed course can be implemented through  the technology of a book, as Robert Mager illustrates in Pre paring Objectives for Programmed Instruction 1962. During  the 1950s and 1960s, when programmed instruction was enthu siastically supported, it was implemented primarily through a  combination of books, simple automated machines that recorded  answers, and teachers' input. Computers had not yet entered a  public awareness that was still fascinated by the new invention  of the television setalthough the integrated circuit, the precur sor to the modern computer, was invented in 1958, the same year  Skinner published his Teaching Machines. Decrease in Popularity Support and implementation of programmed instruction courses  cooled in the late 1960s due to the method's high costs, con cerns about student boredom, and an increasing awareness that  research was not able to conclusively prove that programmed  instruction was indeed more efficient or effective than other  types of instruction Kulik, 1982; McDonald, 2005. Today,  certain premises of the field have resurfaced within computerassisted instruction, though most of the original assumptions of  programmed instruction have been modified to reflect changing  attitudes and research. For example, the number of steps in a  programmed course has been significantly reduced, reflect ing research on the effects of overprompting Holliday, 1983.  Not all learning that occurs with the assistance of a computer,  however, falls in the category of programmed instruction. Many  online courses, for example, allow students to take quizzes and  tests and submit assignments using a computer but do not pur port to "teach" material in step-by-step lessons broken up into  individual, logically sequenced parts. The field of computerassisted instruction is thus similar to programmed instruction in  that it aims to automate parts of teaching so that it can educate  more learners, but differs in its core assumptions and approach. Contextual Dimensions Philosophical  Scientific Dimensions Scientific undertakings aim to understand processes of nature  through empirical observation and through systematic analysis  of experimental results. Methodologically, science proceeds  through logical, self-contained, reproducible steps as it makes  observations and subsequently derives laws. It seeks to break up  experience into measurable parts, to organize them in a system atic manner, and ultimately, to control and predict experience  through its implementations. This approach differs greatly from  other ways of imagining or understanding the world. It is gen erally accepted, for example, that what characterized human  consciousness prior to the rise of rationalism was a "mytho

Programmed Instruction 67 logical" or "poetic" essence Eliade, 1998. Many educational  theorists believe, for example, that breaking down fluid, com plex phenomena into small, rational parts ultimately disturbs or  does violence to those phenomena and does injustice to learning  Aoki, 2004. Programmed instruction was imagined by Skinner as the full  implementation of these scientific aims and premises in the realm  of education. Programmed instruction was not formulated as just  another teaching methodology, pedagogical philosophy, or edu cational implementation. Rather, it was the very embodiment  of science in all aspects of the field of education. Programmed  instruction breaks up the field of education into small, selfcontained, manageable parts that it then logically sequences in  a systematic manner. Ultimately, the goal is to control learning  through measuring observable outcomes and through devising  precise methodologies of teaching that are "guaranteed" to work  Skinner, 1958even relationships between students and teach ers are codified and explained in terms of behavioral objectives  and laws of communication and learning. In mechanical ways of  learning, "communication was conceived as the transmission  of information from one place the sender to another place the  receiver through a medium or channel" Vanderstraten et al.,  2006, p. 165. Determinism Programmed instruction is thus grounded in assumptions of  determinism McDonald et al., 2005the view that we can  predict future events or behaviors, in the case of programmed  instruction based on current knowledge of "laws" that are  "true." For example, proponents of programmed instruction  posited that if students followed through such a course com pletely, they would be "guaranteed" to show improved scores on  their evaluations. This "guarantee" stems from the conviction  that programmed instruction is modeled after science, which  is itself backed by truth, and that therefore, an implementation  of fundamental, scientific learning "laws" in curricula would  be guaranteed to produce learning. According to McDonald et  al. 2005, "Programmers believed that an effective instruc tional product was the sum of its constituent parts, and that  if all the factors were presented in the correct order, students  would succeed" p. 87. Laws of learning, according to Skinner  and the proponents of programmed instruction, dictated that  curricula be implemented by systematically dividing material  into in small, logical, linearly-sequenced parts. McDonald et  al. wrote that the assumption of determinism manifested in pro grammed instruction is in the form of less responsibility for  students. Because steps were so small in order for learning to  be "guaranteed", students often got bored, motivation became  a problem, and less "genuine exploration" occurred in class rooms McDonald et al., 2005, p. 89. Further, this assumption  implies that aptitude and skills are irrelevant to success in  school. The scientific method, as applied to education in the  form of programmed instruction, theoretically works each and  every time, with all students. Materialism Programmed instruction is also grounded in the assumption of  materialism McDonald et al., 2005. Materialism is the view  that only observable things can be manipulated by scientific  methods. Thus, all aspects of programmed instruction are cen tered upon observable behavior and specific content that can  be broken up into learning objectives. Education is seen as a  process that produces terminal outcomes in studentsdefined  in terms of "what will be accepted as evidence that the learner  has achieved the learning objective" Mager, 1962, p. 12. The  implications of this assumption are that programmed instruction  courses were often found to distort material in order to make it  conform to a measurable format McDonald et al, 2005. For  example, history is taught as a list of important dates and people;  English as grammar, syntax, and composition rules; and math ematics as a rigid step-by-step process Calvin et al., 1969. The theoretical underpinnings of science and consequently, of  programmed instruction did not prove effective or practical as  applied to education, and by the mid to late 1960s the move ment had started to lose supporters. Many schools found that  the rigid step-by-step process not only did not cater to student  differences as claimed by theorists, but ignored them see, for  example, Edling et al., 1964. The attempt to break down student  behaviors into observable behavior was initially theoretically  promising and had much support from a world fascinated by new  technologies and scientific developments. However, in practice,  the creative, "mythopoetic" element of education, the process  through which students explore their worlds in a non-linear,  exploratory fashion seemed lost and contributed to the relatively  quick demise of programmed instruction Slattery, 2004. Historical  Socio-Cultural Dimensions An interest in increasing the efficiency of education arose late in  the nineteenth century within the work of educational philosophers  Franklin Bobbitt 1918, W. W. Charters, and David Snedden  Drost, 1967, among others. Inspired by engineer F. W. Taylor's  theories on scientific management, these pedagogues' work helped  establish a scientific approach to educational theory and practice  geared toward increasing efficiency of learning through training  learners for their "future lives in the workplace,  without any  extra, useless education" Goodson et al., 1998, p. 52. With the  advent of technological discoveries such as Pressey's apparatus  and Skinner's learning machines, the social efficiency movement  took a different shape: instead of stripping content material to the  barest essence needed for the workforce, it was able to claim such  an efficient methodology that content did not have to be sacrificed.  However, the premise of "just the basics" remained a guide for  planning programmed instruction materials. "Programmers" sug gested that each frame be presented in its simplest form, without  extra, "distracting" material Skinner, 1958. Foundations in Psychology Within the sciences, programmed instruction was developed  initially from within the field of psychology. Ivan Pavlov 1849

Programmed Instruction 68 1936, a Russian psychologist, prepared the stage with his  research on conditioned reflexes. Pavlov belonged to the behav iorist school of psychology, a branch concerned with explaining  behavior. He was able to program the reflexes of dogs so that  they would respond not only to natural stimuli such as food, but  to conditioned stimuli such as noises. Programmed instruction  would take from Pavlov the idea that the behavior of students  could be conditioned to elicit appropriate responses when  prompted by environmental stimuli Pocztar, 1972. Edward Thorndike 18741949, an American psychologist,  provided the next layer of the foundation for programmed  instruction through his research on cats and his subsequent  discovery of the "law of effect." The law of effect states that  responses that are reinforced following appropriate stimuli are  imprinted in the behavior of the subject. Reinforcement in this  sense is said to have a feedback effect: the results from previous  experiences "feed back" into the subject's knowledge and affect  future behaviors. In programmed instruction courses, reinforce ment in the form of a questionanswer after each frame is thought  to provide feedback to the learner and thus to ensure the imprint ing of desirable behaviors. John B. Watson 18781958, another American psychologist  and a student of Thorndike's, rejected explanations for behavior  in terms physiological functions that could be conditioned. Both  Pavlov and Thorndike explained behavior in terms of internal  processes of chemistry or brain function. Watson, however, pro posed that only what is observable is scientifically measurable  and can be manipulated. He did not reject that brain processes  affect behavior, just that brain processes cannot be directly  observed and thus form a "black box," a component that cannot  be studied. Watson thus started a new movement within the  psychological school of behaviorism known as pure, or materi alistic, behaviorism. Pure behaviorism influenced programmed  instruction as it came to be defined only in terms of observable  behavior. Thus, students' internal, emotional, or psychological  states were ignored by programmers as irrelevant to learning.  Only overt behavior was measured and was considered superior  to covert behaviors such as psychological responses as an indica tion of learning Miller et al., 2006. B. F. Skinner 19041990 was a pure behaviorist significantly  influenced by Watson. His well-known pigeon experiments led to  his formulation of programmed instruction as a process of shap ing through the "successive approximation" of behavior see, for  example, Deterline, 1962, p. 11. Skinner observed that pigeons  could be trained to distinguish between colored dots when pre sented with food as they pecked at the "correct" color. Skinner's  pigeon experiments strengthened the position of "pure" or mate rialist behaviorists that insisted on measuring only observable  behaviors without relating them to bodily chemistry, as Pavlov's  school did. This observation further grounded the assumption of  programmed instruction that claimed "guaranteed comprehensibil ity" and guaranteed learning for all students, regardless of mental  capacity, ability, or skill Scriven, 1969, p. 5. Without assuming  anything about the physiological aspects of a learner, programmed  instruction guarantees the same results for all students. Skinner's development of programmed instruction "ushered in the  era of the industrialization of teaching and educational research"  Pocztar, 1954, p. 9. Initial observations of the scientific laws  of learning applied in the laboratory suggested that successive  approximations of behavioral patterns conditioned through rein forcement would lead to more efficient and effective learning.  Systematic classification and organization could now be applied  to the study of behavior in order to derive precise laws of learning  that theoretically promised to work for all learners. In prac tice, the behavior of students proved much more complex than  pigeons' responses to Skinner's experiments, however, and ulti mately resisted the reductionism and systematic breaking-down  of programmed instruction's methodologies McDonald, 2005. Applications Implementations with Specific Academic Subjects Programmed instruction has been found experimentally to be  more effective in some disciplines than others. Specifically, stud ies have shown that students who take programmed instruction  courses in the humanities or social sciences have higher scores  on assessments than those in regular classrooms. However, when  programmed instruction was used to teach mathematics or the  physical sciences, students did not perform better on assess ments than those in regular classrooms Kulick et al., 1982. One  possible reason for these results is that within the physical sci ences and mathematics, curricula were already implemented in  a linear sequence of progressively complex material. Mathemat ics and the physical sciences already defined their objectives in  terms of broken-down, simple components, while material in the  social sciences and humanities tended to be taught in a multiperspective fashion, through creative exercises and explorations  of material. These results do not imply, however, that programmed instruc tion should be used exclusively in the teaching of humanities  or social sciences. Rather, the results that showed a high cor relation between student outcomes on final examinations and the  use of programmed instruction are thought to be explainable by  the way in which students were tested during these experiments.  In regular humanities courses, for example, students were not  accustomed to exercises and examinations that objectified their  learning and broke down their responses in multiple choice or  short answer fashion. However, programmed instruction courses  in the same field were designed specifically to train students to  answer the kinds of questions asked as part of the experiments  Kulick et al, 1982. Both groups of students were given the  same tests based on programmed instructions' goals and objec tives. So the only conclusive result of these studies was that  students trained in answering multiple choice questions did so  better than those trained in a regular classroom through more  diverse methods.

Programmed Instruction 69 Classroom  Lesson Configurations Programmed instruction courses are designed for individual  learners. There is no cooperative aspect to programmed instruc tion other than teacher feedback on student responses. Therefore,  the programmed instruction classroom is divided into inde pendent units desks, cubicles, computersmachines at which  students work alone. Each student works at her or his individual  pace, while the teacher walks around the classroom attending  to individual learners' questions and concerns. Programmed  instruction lessons are designed with several principles to guide  them. The following principles are taken from Pocztar 1972  but are present in many programmed instruction books and man uals as guides to building programmed instruction curriculum  materials: Step-by-Step The first such guideline is the "step-by step" principle that states  that student learning is more effective when correct behavior is  reinforced often. Therefore, programmed instruction lessons are  broken up into hundreds of frames. After each frame, students  are asked a question they must reply before moving on. These  responses are thought to "feed back" into the students' behavioral  patterns and to reinforce correct behavior. Active Learning Another principle of programmed instruction is that students are  thought to be active, not passive learners. The process of answer ing a question after each frame is thought to engage students in  active behavior, rather than allowing them to be passive receivers  of information. The underlying assumption is that overt behavior  such as answering a question is an indicator of activity, while  covert behavior is relegated to the realm of passivity. From this  viewpoint, a student who reads an essay without answering ques tions or who listens to a lecture without engaging in discussion is  a "passive" learner. Success Students should be given a chance to succeed as often as pos sible. Behavior is thought to be imprinted regardless of whether  the response is correct or not, so incorrect responses and "error"  are considered detrimental to learning because they are thought  to reinforce incorrect behavior. Questions presented after each  frame are thus typically low in difficulty, assuring that most stu dents succeed on the first try. Immediate Feedback The immediate feedback principle is based on Pressey's discov ery that immediate feedback "teaches" students. Pressey first  designed his "apparatus that gives tests and scores" as a mul tiple choice machine: students pressed one of four buttons that  represented possible answers to the question posed. Pressey dis covered that his machine not only gave tests and scored, but also  taught students. Because students received immediate feedback  after each response, they were found more likely to remember  and internalize their mistakes. Sequence Programmed instruction is also based on the principle that learn ing progresses logicallyand linearly. Therefore, sequence is  thought to be of critical importance especially to subject materi als that rely significantly on the buildup of previous knowledge  versus on a specific skill set Payne et al., 1967. Individual Pace Finally, the principle of individual pace assures that programmed  instruction is implemented in a way that accommodates all  learners. Because there is no cooperative aspect to programmed  instruction and because each student works independently,  programmed instruction material should be designed to be acces sible to all learners through its logical sequence. Each student  should be able to follow the material independently and proceed  at a comfortable pace. Development of Programmed Instruction Material Mager 1962 suggests the following steps for the development  of programmed instruction material: 	 identifying terminal behavior; 	 defining desired behavior through describing conditions  necessary for it to occur; and 	 specifying criteria for acceptable performance p. 12. First, the behavior that is expected must be systematically ana lyzed and codified in objective terms. Then, conditions necessary  to the learning of the behavior are determined, and lastly, criteria  for evaluation are established. Bullock 1978 defines four steps in the creation of programmed  instruction material: 	 Training needs assessment, 	 Task analysis, 	 Target audience analysis, and 	 Objective and criterion tests. First, the practical needs of students are considered and what  needs to be "conditioned" trained is defined. Second, task  analysis breaks down the training defined into small, sequen tial, manageable parts. Target audience analysis provides the  programmer with information about the level at which material  should be presented. Finally, tests are designed to determine if  the objectives initially defined were met. Types of Responses Each frame in a programmed instruction sequence is followed by  a question that prompts a response. Types of responses fall into  two categories: constructed responses, used in linear program ming such as entries in charts, short answer, or fill-in-the-blank  responses and discrimination responses, used in branching 

Programmed Instruction 70 programs such as multiple choice questions, grids, ordering or  ranking questions, or matching activities Bullock, 1978. There  is some debate in the programmed instruction community as to  which method is more effectivea linear, constructed response  implementation or a branching, multiple choice implementation  Miller et al, 2006. Types of Feedback After a student provides a response to a question, feedback is  provided. This can take several forms. Jaehnig et al. 2007 clas sify all feedback into five general types: 	 Knowledge of response: The student receives immedi ate feedback on whether they responded correctly or  incorrectly. However the correct result is not given and  an explanation is not provided. This type of feedback has  been found to have limited usefulness and is not recom mended. 	 Knowledge of correct response: Similar to knowledge  of response feedback with the added benefit that students  are told what the correct answer is. 	 Elaboration feedback: Not only gives the correct answer  but reinforces it through extra explanations. 	 Delayed feedback: Refers to answers provided at the end  of a course instead of throughout a sequence of frames  and is not recommended by programmed instructors as it  does not conform to the step-by-step principle of rein forcement. 	 Review feedback: Students are asked to repeat an incor rect response until they perform correctly. Measuring Effectiveness Kulick et al. 1982 conducted a meta-review of programmed  instruction studies, which revealed four categories of pro grammed material evaluation 1982. Two ways in which the  effectiveness and efficiency of programmed material is tested  are through student performance on final exams and through  performance on retention exams given after a period of time  has passed since the course. A way to test the accuracy of pro grammed instruction courses is through aptitude-achievement  correlations that relate how well a student does to "objective"  measures of their aptitudes. Finally, attitudes of students in  programmed instruction courses should be gauged for motiva tion and other psychological factors. Kulick et al. state that in  programmed instruction this is done through scores on attitude  measuresagain, through a multiple choice survey 1982. When to Use Programmed Instruction Programmed instruction is useful when a high level of recall  is desired. Because material is repeated so often after each  frame, recall is thought to improve. Programmed instruction is  also useful when "significant shaping" and practice are needed  when active processing is required, when "validated instruction"  is needed, and when "de-centralized instruction" is called for  Bullock, 1978, p. 13-14. Programmed instruction is also useful  when attention to detail is necessary. Because each frame holds  only the minimal information necessary to answer the question  presented at the end of the frame, students are required to under stand all material and pay attention to all the details before being  able to answer correctly and move on. Influences of Programmed Instruction Programmed instruction as theoretically described by Skinner  and as implemented in the 1950s and 1960s has been extin guished as a movement, but its influences form the foundation  for much of modern education. Pedagogy has entered the realm  of the "social sciences" and as such embodies many of the sci entific assumptions and implications of programmed instruction.  Systematization of instruction through codified objectives, eval uation methods especially through standardized testing, and  techniques of teaching that emphasize a back to the basics, stepby-step approach are, for example, some of the ways in which  programmed instruction influenced the educational field as it is  understood in the present Slattery, 2004. Terms  Concepts Behaviorism: A school of thought in psychology that aims to  understand behavior through internal, bodily mechanism, overt  responding, or a combination of both. Programmed instruction  was proposed from within a behaviorist tradition. Conditioning: The process of learning; in psychology, condi tioning refers to the process of reinforcement through feedback  and the subsequent imprinting of correct behavioral patterns. Constructive Responding: After each frame in a programmed  instruction sequence is presented, a response is elicited from the  student in order to reinforce learning. Constructive responding  refers to answers that are provided by the student, for example,  short answer or fill-in-the-blank. Discrimination Responding: Discrimination responding occurs  when students are presented with possible answer choices and  have to choose the correct answer, as in multiple choice ques tions. Feedback: Feedback is the process through which responses are  reinforced based on the previous experiences of students. Frame Sequence: Programmed instruction material is presented  through a frame sequence, logically sequentially organized.  Reinforcement through soliciting of responses and subsequent  feedback occurs after every frame. Instructional Frame: An instructional unit that is self-contained,  small, and free of extra, distracting information. Frames are  organized in sequences to form a lesson; a lesson can have hun dreds of frames.

Programmed Instruction 71 Overt Responding: Overt responding occurs when response  behavior can be observed. Programmed instruction is based on  the assumption that overt responding is active, versus covert  responding, which cannot be observed. Pure Behaviorism: A branch of behaviorism that disregards  internal, bodily mechanisms in explanations of behaviors and  relies instead on observing overt behaviors. Reinforcement: Reinforcement occurs after the presentation of a  stimulus elicits a response that results in an increased response  rate, or learning. Bibliography Aoki, T. 2004. Curriculum in a new key: The collected works  of Ted T. Aoki. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Bobbitt, F. 1918. The curriculum. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Brette, O. 2003. Thorstein Veblen's theory of institutional  change: beyond technological determinism. European  Journal of the History of Economic Thought , 10 3,  455477. Bullock, D. 1978. Programmed instruction. Englewood  Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications, Inc. Calvin, A. 1969. The Teacher's Role in Programmed  Instruction. In A. Calvin Ed., Programmed instruction:  Bold new venture  pp. 3754. Bloomington: Indiana  University Press. Deterline, W. 1962. An introduction to programmed instruc tion. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc. Drost, W. 1967. David Snedden and education for social effi ciency. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. Edling, J., Ginther, A., Herbert, J., Schramm, W.,  Thelen,  H. 1964. Four case studies in programmed instruction.  New York: Fund for the Advancement of Education. Eliade, M. 1998. Myth and reality. Long Grove, Illinois:  Waveland Press. Emurian, H. 2005. Web-based programmed instruction: evi dence of rule-governed learning. Computers in Human  Behavior , 21 6, 893915. Epperson, D.,  Schmuck, R. 1962. An experimentalist cri tique of programmed instruction. Educational Theory, 12,   247254. Fernald, P.,  Jordan, E. 1991. Programmed Instruction  Versus Standard Text in Introductory Psychology.  Teaching of Psychology, 18 4, 205212. Retrieved  August 24, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database  Academic Search Premier. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbaphAN6382315siteeh ost-live Garner, W. 1966. Programmed instruction. New York: The  Center for Applied Research in Education, Inc. Genovese, J. 2005. Why educational innovations fail: An  individual difference perspective. Social Behavior   Personality: An International Journal , 33 6, 569577.  Retrieved August 24, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database  Academic Search Premier. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbaphAN18276402siteeh ost-live Goodson, I., Anstead, C.,  Mangan, J. M. 1998. Subject  knowledge: Reading in the study of school subjects.  Bristol, PA: Falmer Press. Greer, N.,  Blank, S. 1977. Cognitive style, conceptual  tempo and problem solving: Modification through pro grammed instruction. American Educational Research  Journal, 14 3, 295315. Hartley, J. 1974. Programmed instruction 1954-1974:  A review. Innovations in Education and Teaching  International , 11 6, 278291. Hedlund, D. 1967. Programmed Instruction: Guidelines  for Evaluation of Published Materials. Training   Development Journal, 21 2, 915. Retrieved August 24,  2007 from EBSCO Online Database Academic Search  Premier. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtru edbaphAN7454583siteehost-live Holland, J. 1967. A quantitative measure for programmed  instruction. American Educational Research Journal, 4  2, 87101. Holliday, W. 1983. Overprompting science students using  adjunct study questions. Journal of Research in Science  Teaching , 20 3, 195201. Individualized instruction: A recurrent theme. 2012.  TechTrends: Linking Research  Practice to Improve  Learning, 56 6, 1214. Retrieved December 11, 2013  from EBSCO Online Database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN82763730siteehost-live

Programmed Instruction 72 Jaehnig, W. 2006. Audio narration and reading ability  in programmed instruction. ProQuest Information   Learning: UMI Disseration. Jaehnig, W.,  Miller, M. 2007. Feedback types in pro grammed instruction: A systematic review. Psychological  Record, 57 2, 219232. Retrieved August 24, 2007 from  EBSCO Online Database Academic Search Premier.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedba phAN24658186siteehost-live Kang, H.,  Zentall, S. 2011. Computer-generated geometry  instruction: A preliminary study. Educational Technology  Research  Development, 59 6, 783797. Retrieved  December 11, 2013 from EBSCO Online Database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN67318192sit eehost-live Kaufman, R. 2004. Development of Systems Applications:  the Systems Approach to Programming. In G. Ofiesh  Ed., Trends in the programmed instruction: Papers  from the first annual convention of the national society  for programmed instruction  pp. 3335. Washington,  D.C.: National Education Association, Department of  Audiovisual Instruction. Kuhn, T. 1996. The structure of scientific revolutions.  Chicago: University Of Chicago Press. Leh, J. M.,  Jitendra, A. K. 2013. Effects of computermediated versus teacher-mediated instruction on the  mathematical word problem-solving performance of  third-grade students with mathematical difficulties.  Learning Disability Quarterly, 36 2, 6879. Retrieved  December 11, 2013 from EBSCO Online Database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN87368875si teehost-live Lysaught, J.,  Williams, C. 1963. A guide to programmed  instruction. Indianapolis: Wiley Publishing, Inc. Mager, R. 1962. Preparing objectives for programmed  instruction. San Francisco: Fearon Publishers, Inc. McDonald, J., Yanchar, S.,  Osguthorpe, R. 2005. Learning  from programmed instruction: Examining implica tions for modern instructional technology. Educational  Technology Research  Development, 53 2, 8498.  Retrieved August 24, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database  Academic Search Premier. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbaphAN17029263siteeh ost-live Miller, M.,  Malott, R. 2006. Programmed Instruction:  Construction Responding, Discrimination Responding,  and Highlighted Keywords. Journal of Behavioral  Education, 15 2, 109117. Retrieved August 24, 2007  from EBSCO Online Database Academic Search Premier.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedba phAN21541197siteehost-live Nash, A., Muczyk, J.,  Vettori, F. 1971. The relative practi cal effectiveness of programmed instruction. Personnel  Psychology, 24 3, 397418. Retrieved August 24, 2007  from EBSCO Online Database Psychology and Behavioral  Sciences Collection. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbpbhAN6267912siteehost-live Olsen, F. 1969. Programmed Instruction in the Nongraded  School. In A. Calvin Ed., Programmed instruction:  Bold new venture  pp. 181-192. Bloomington: Indiana  University Press. Payne, D., Krathwohl, D.,  Gordon, J. 1967. The Effect  of Sequence on Programmed Instruction. American  Educational Research Journal , 4 2, 125132. Pocztar, J. 1972. The theory and practice of programmed  instruction: A guide for teachers . Paris: UNESCO. Pressey, S. L. 1926. A simple apparatus which gives tests  and scores-and teaches. School  Society , 23 586,  549552. Scriven, M. 1969. The Case for and Use of Programmed  Texts. In A. Calvin Ed., Programmed instruction: Bold  new venture  pp. 336. Bloomington: Indiana University  Press. Skinner, B. F. 1974. About behaviorism. New York: Alfred  A. Knopf, Inc. Skinner, B. F. 1965. Science and human behavior. New York:  The Free Press. Skinner, B. F. 1968. The technology of teaching. New York:  Appleton-Century-Crofts. Skinner, B. 1958. Teaching Machines. Science, 128 3330,  969977. Slattery, P. 2004. Understanding Curriculum as  Institutionalized Text. In W. F. Pinar Ed., Understanding  curriculum  pp. 661-790. New York: Peter Lang  Publishing. Talyzina, N. 1981. The psychology of learning. Moscow:  Progress Publishers.

Programmed Instruction 73 Thorndike, E. 1912. Education: A first book. New York:  MacMillan Co. Tudor, R.,  Bostow, D. 1991. Computer-programmed  instruction: The relation of required interaction to practi cal application. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis ,  24 2, 361368. Vanderstraeten, R. 2006. How is Education Possible?  Pragmatism, Communication and the Social Organization  of Education. British Journal of Education Studies, 54 2,  160174. Suggested Reading Green, E. 1962. The Learning Process and Programmed  Instruction. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc. Kohn, A. 1993. Punished by rewards: the trouble with gold  stars, incentive plans, A's, praise, and other bribes.  Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co. Kulik, C.-L., Schwalb, B.,  Kulik, J. 1982. Programmed  Instruction in Secondary Education: A Meta-Analysis of  Evaluation Findings. Journal of Educational Research, 75  3, 133139. Retrieved August 24, 2007 from EBSCOhost  Research Databases: http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbaphAN4904939siteehost-live Moore, J. 2013. Three views of behaviorism. Psychological  Record, 63 3, 681691. Retrieved December 11, 2013  from EBSCO Online Database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN89562036siteehost-live West, R.,  Hamerlynck, L. A. Eds. 1992. Designs for  excellence in education: The legacy of B. F. Skinner.  Longmont, CO: Sopris West, Inc. Essay by Ioana Stoica Ioana Stoica is a doctoral candidate in educational philosophy and policy studies at the University of Maryland, College Park, where  she serves as the program coordinator for the Center for Undergraduate Research. Ioana also teaches dance and movement in the DC  Public Schools and is an Associate Director for the Duncan Dancers of Washington. Previous to her doctoral work, she received Bach elor of Science degrees in mathematics and in electrical engineering, and worked on research and published in artificial intelligence and  quantum physics.
Instructional Design Abstract The concept of Instructional Design was adopted as a means  of organizing learning and providing objective-based method ologies for conveying knowledge. Instructional Design Theories  and Models are still changing over time, as educational philoso phies and current trends in modern education evolve. This article  presents an overview of the concept of Instructional Design  ID in American education, and provides further insights into  specific aspects of Instructional Design such as the Behaviorist,  Programmed Instruction, Constructivist and Direct Instruction  approaches which are still used in some form today. Instructional  Systems Design is used in technological, computer and indus trial learning for training in the rapidly changing environments  of the modern information age. Overview Instructional Design can be defined as the systematic devel opment of instructional specifications using learning theory  to ensure the quality of instruction. It includes the analysis of  learning needs and objectives and the development of a delivery  system including instructional materials and activities to meet  those objectives. Evaluation of all instruction and learner activ ities is central to the theory. Its main foundation is that of an  objective-oriented model for managing the instructional process,  which is rooted in theories that specify how high-quality instruc tion should be performed. A successful learning situation is one  in which behavior goals are reached through mastery of a series  of small steps or tasks which represent a larger objective. Each  step or task is clearly defined and outcomes and activities are  continually assessed to evaluate efficiency. Instructional Design theory has evolved over many decades and  consists of several different models which can be applied to  many types of learning situations. As a discipline, Instructional  Design developed slowly from the time of Plato and Socrates to  the philosophers of the 17th and 18th centuries. By the turn of  the 20th century, the concepts of learning theory and educational  psychology were beginning to take form in modern thought. The  turmoil of the first half of the 20th century brought political and  social changes which in turn encouraged new ways to look at the  purpose and functions of our education system. By the 1950's,  educational theories abounded, and Instructional Design was  quickly adapted to many theories and models. Theories that were used to approach Instructional Design were  originally conceived in the military. During World War II, per sonnel had to be trained quickly and efficiently to perform their  duties. Military researchers developed training films and cor responding programs to get the troops ready. The development  of this task-oriented method of instructional technology spurred  further research into the formulation of theoretical models of  learning Leigh, n.d. Abstract Overview Influence of Behaviorism Instructional Design in the Schools  Beyond Further Insights Stimulus-Response Theory Behaviorism Programmed Instruction Operant Conditioning Constructivism John Dewey  Pragmatism Direct Instruction  DISTAR Madeline Hunter  Theory into Practice Computer-Assisted Learning Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Instructional Design 75 Influence of Behaviorism The developers of early Instructional Design models were associ ated with the Behaviorist school of learning theory. Behaviorism  looked at learning as a stimulus, response, and reinforcement  process S-R-R, first outlined by Ivan Pavlov's Classical Con ditioning theory, and continued by B. F. Skinner. Such reactive  behavior was documented in animals and adapted to human  learning situations, positing that all behavior is explained by  external events. The influence of Behaviorism on learning led  to a form of Instructional Design that incorporated immediate  feedback and reinforcement with drill and practice procedures  and programmed instruction that allowed the learner to repeat  tasks that were not performed correctly until they were mastered.  Behavioral outcomes were directly connected to instruction sys tems. The 1950's in America were characterized by a huge economic  boom which followed World War II. The launch of the Soviet  satellite Sputnik triggered an education panic in the U.S., prompt ing politicians and educators to send large amounts of Federal  money to research on education, especially concentrating on  studies in cognition and instruction. In Universities around the  country, theoretical models of learning were being developed by  educational theorists and psychologists such as B. F. Skinner and  Benjamin Bloom. Skinner's work in Operant Conditioning and  Stimulus-Response-Reinforcement theory ultimately led to what  is considered a first incarnation of Instructional Design, called  Programmed Instruction PI. PI emphasized formulating behav ioral objectives, breaking down instructional content into smaller  units and rewarding correct responses early and often. Benja min Bloom's 1956 taxonomy of educational objectives Bloom's  Taxonomy and theory of mastery learning formed the basis of  a standardized design process introduced by Robert Glaser in  1962. Glaser's model linked learner analysis to the design and  development of instruction. His 'instructional systems' assessed  students' entry-level behavior to determine the extent to which  they would learn needed objectives. This not only tested the  learners, but tested the learning system as well. Also in 1962, Robert Mager developed the idea of Learning or  Behavioral Objectives. His central concept was that training  needs should be analyzed and the learning goals objectives of  the program be defined. Each objective should then be broken  down into smaller tasks. Each behavioral objective should have  three criteria: Behavior, Condition and Standard. In 1965 Robert  Gagn introduced the Nine Events of Instruction, a series of dis tinct steps necessary for learning to occur. Gagn also introduced  the concept of task analysis, previously used in military training,  which broke each task to be mastered down to its most basic  components, or subtasks. The theories of both of these scholars  are still used today in modern Instructional Design systems. Instructional Design in the Schools  Beyond During the 1960's and 1970's, Instructional Design in one form  or another was widely adopted in the public schools as the most  effective teaching process available. Robert Morgan and Leslie  Briggs conducted several studies which demonstrated that an  instructionally designed course could yield up to a 2:1 increase  over conventionally designed courses in terms of achievement,  reduction in variance, and reduction of time-to-completion.  This was four times greater than that of a control group which  received no training. New teachers were extensively trained in  Instructional Design, primarily with the Behaviorist approach. Instructional Design models flourished in the 1970's and into the  1980's, with many researchers contributing to the field, such as  Robert Branson and W. Dick and L. Carey. With the onset of the  Information Age, many organizations established formal educa tion and training departments to educate employees in the rapidly  developing uses of computers and technology. Instructional  Design programs proved effective and efficient in introducing  employees to new technological methods and concepts and train ing them to perform the new skills needed. Instructional Systems Design ISD, as the field is now some times called, has become a significant tool in the computer and  technology training fields, as well as in computer-aided edu cation in the schools. It has also been adopted in one form or  another in corporate training programs for technical and other  employees. Today, the ADDIE Model of Instructional Systems  Design is widely used in all forms of instruction, particularly  web-based and on-line computer instruction. Second to ADDIE  is the Dick and Carey Model of Instructional Design, although it  has recently been criticized as rigid. Since the 1990's, the models have moved away from the Behav iorist approach and adopted a Constructivist approach to creating  learning environments with less formal structure and facilitated  by teachers. These are based on the theory of Constructivism,  which differs vastly from Behaviorism in that it holds that  knowledge is internal and tested by the individual in reality.  Instructional Design models in today's school classroom are  vastly different from their behavioral roots, but still valuable  tools for effective teaching. Further Insights The following relevant concepts have influenced and shaped  Instructional Design in the Twentieth century, including their  applications in Education today: 	 Stimulus-Response theory 	 Behaviorism 	 Programmed instruction 	 Operant Conditioning 	 Constructivism 	 John Dewey and Pragmatism 	 Direct Instruction and DISTAR

Instructional Design 76 	 Madeline Hunter and Theory into Practice 	 Computer-Assisted learning Stimulus-Response Theory Stimulus-Response theory is the premise that stimuli exist that  directly cause unconditioned, or instinctive physiological and  behavioral responses in humans and animals. Ivan Pavlov first  studied this phenomenon in 1927, which led to his model of  Classical Conditioning. Pavlov demonstrated that stimulus and  response could be controlled, or conditioned, to manipulate the  responses into changed behaviors. His most famous experiment  involved the association of food unconditioned stimulus to the  salivation response unconditioned response of a dog. When  paired with the sound of a bell conditioned stimulus, the sight  of the food causes the dog to salivate. However, after condi tioning, the dog learns to salivate only at the sound of the bell  conditioned response, with no food present. Pavlov's Classical  Conditioning theory, based on stimulus-response, was ultimately  embraced by the Behaviorist school of learning psychology, and  modified by B. F. Skinner's theory of Operant Conditioning, in  which post-response consequences were introduced to provide  additional motivation for positive behavioral outcomes. Behaviorism Behaviorism is a school of psychology which holds that all  behavior of all organisms is caused directly by responses to our  environment. First introduced by John Watson and B.F. Skin ner, Behaviorism has been widely studied and incorporated into  educational learning theory. The doctrine of Behaviorism holds  that psychology is the science of behavior, and not of the mind,  and that behavior is explained exclusively by external, observ able events. This movement ran in direct opposition to Sigmund  Freud's school of Psychoanalysis, which was gaining popular ity simultaneously. In the classroom, behavioral teaching is  the arrangement of consequences and reinforcement by which  students learn. Through Operant Conditioning, punishment  will deter poor learning results and reinforcement will encour age positive ones. Today, Skinnerian Behaviorism is generally  considered radical. Instructional Design incorporates behavioral  objectives in its models, which encourage the mastery of tasks  and learning. For example, an evaluation portion of the learning  activity that is executed with letter grades is a form of stimu lus-response-reinforcement. A good letter grade A is positive  reinforcement. A poor letter grade F is punishment. Programmed Instruction First popularized by B.F. Skinner in the 1950's, Programmed  Instruction is a teaching method that provides students with  small, manageable and precisely defined increments of learning  followed by positive reinforcement for mastery. Programmed  Instruction is considered the first phase of several developments  that led to Instructional Design. Today, Programmed Instruc tion is still used in computer-aided classrooms and is generally  broken down into two types. Linear Programmed Instruction  guides the student through a set sequence of tasks and students  do not advance to the next step until the current step is success fully completed. Branched Programmed Instruction allows the  student to choose different paths to the correct outcome, and  assumes that the learning process can be different for different  learners. Both styles offer frequent and immediate feedback and  reinforcement. While Programmed Instruction is still used in  schools today for some types of learning, it is primarily found in  industrial settings and in the armed forces, where training large  numbers of personnel for specific tasks is required. While many educators agree that Programmed Instruction and  the Behaviorist approach to Instructional Design can serve as  valuable supplement to other teaching methods, others have  criticized the approach as not providing enough learning syn thesis for problem-solving in other environmental situations.  Norma Feshback and J. W. Eshleman are two critics of the  theory. They have written that Programmed Instruction does  not account for individual differences in students and does not  apply well to higher-level material. Feshback believes that Pro grammed Instruction may be more appropriate for a specific  group of students at a specific level, but not for general groups.  Eshleman points out that Programmed Instruction does not intro duce students to new material after the initial task, and its rigid  sequencing is not appropriate for all learning contexts. Operant Conditioning Also known as Behavior Modification, Operant Conditioning  uses systems of consequences to modify behavior. It was first  studied by Edward Thorndike in the 1920's; he theorized that  positive behavior was ingrained over time by successful out comes. In other words, organisms could learn to use only the  behavior that produced a rewarding outcome and discard behav iors that did not. Later, B. F. Skinner, a Behaviorist, expanded the  model and constructed a more detailed theory. The central con cepts of his theory of Operant Conditioning are reinforcement,  punishment and extinction. Reinforcement is a consequence that  causes a behavior to occur more frequently, while punishment  is a consequence that causes a behavior to occur less frequently.  Extinction is the lack of either consequence after a response,  rendering the response inconsequential. This will eventually  also lead to a reduction in the occurrence of the inconsequential  behavior. Operant Conditioning is incorporated in Instructional  Design by the use of positive reinforcement for the mastery of  tasks and objectives. Constructivism Constructivism is attributed to the work of philosopher and  developmental psychologist Jean Piaget, who pioneered the  cognitive learning theory. The constructivist theory holds that  knowledge is constructed internally within the individual, and  we continually construct new knowledge through experience.  In the classroom, the constructivist theory is usually employed  with less formal structure in the planning of lessons and teach ers take the role of facilitators who guide students to their own  conclusions. Students discover knowledge through a journey of  interaction and experience through the learning process. Rather  than the step-by-step systematic approach to learning inherent in 

Instructional Design 77 Behaviorism, Constructivists believe that learning is ultimately  social and cognitive, and Constructivism in schools fosters peer  learning in a culturally and socially relevant environment. Today,  most Instructional Systems Design models use a Constructivist  approach. John Dewey  Pragmatism While Programmed Instruction and behaviorist approaches to  Instructional Design were prominent in the mid-twentieth cen tury, another view was making its way into education theory.  John Dewey was a philosopher and educational reformer, and  had died before learning theory became an educational dis cipline. Dewey was a leader in the school of Pragmatism, and  believed that education should not be the mere teaching of facts  but an interactive process which should require critical thinking  skills to bring knowledge into a student's life. He argued that  traditional reinforcement and programming in instruction did  not lead to deep learning. He promoted "learning by doing" and  pioneered several efforts at school reform toward the Progres sive education movement in the 1930's, which ultimately failed.  While popular, few of Dewey's philosophies were ever adopted  into mainstream Instructional Design. However, in the latter part  of the 20th century many of his theories have been revisited by  new reformers in the field. Direct Instruction  DISTAR One of the most widely used yet controversial Instructional  Design models in recent years is the Direct Instruction model.  Siegfried Engelmann and Wesley C. Becker developed the  model to provide systematic instruction for disadvantaged ele mentary school children. DISTAR Direct Instruction System for  Teaching Arithmetic and Reading programs were implemented  around the country in underperforming schools. While Direct  Instruction is considered a comprehensive model of school  reform in the 1980's and 90's, it has been highly controversial  among educational theorists regarding its efficacy. Humanists  have questioned the return of DI to a rote-style, teacher-directed  model which discourages social growth and inquiry. However,  recent long-term studies such as Project Follow Through have  shown that lower-socioeconomic groups taught by a DI model  have been shown performance improvement. Still, many educa tors feel that DI should only be used in limited situations or not  at all and not as a primary method. Madeline Hunter  Theory into Practice Perhaps no one more than Madeline Hunter found problems in  traditional Instructional Design theory. An educator and pro lific writer, Hunter recognized foremost that most Instructional  Design theory and models did not spell out in plain language  specific methods that teachers could implement in the real life  classroom. Hunter followed a Direct Instruction model and  developed the Theory into Practice teaching model. She demon strated with specific examples how a teacher should incorporate  objectives and goals into everyday lesson plans. Her Seven  Components of Teaching are still taught to and used by class room teachers today. Computer-Assisted Learning With the increase in new media, especially the explosion of the  Internet, computer-assisted learning has become widely adopted  in schools. Instructional Design for computer-aided educa tion has also evolved quickly. Originally, computer enhanced  programs employed a basic Behaviorism-based approach with  heavy emphasis on Programmed Instruction. Today, like in most  classrooms, a Constructivist approach has become the norm. One  of the leading educational theorists in the computer-aided learn ing field is Seymour Papert. Known as the father of Artificial  Intelligence, Papert has developed a learning approach called  Constructionism, an offshoot of Constructivism. He was one of  the first to bring information technology to the classroom. His  Logo computer language and MIT Media Lab are at the forefront  of developing instruction for computer learning. Terms  Concepts ADDIE Model: An early 1975 Instructional Systems Design  model adopted by the armed forces and is still widely used in the  industrial and technology fields today. ADDIE stands for Analy sis, Design, Development, Implementation and Evaluation. Behaviorism: A school of thought in psychology which holds  that all behavior can be studied and explained scientifically  through observable actions and responses. Internal thoughts and  feelings are not considered as they cannot be seen. Bloom's Taxonomy: A classification of educational objectives  developed by Benjamin Bloom. Knowledge is categorized into  three domains: the Affective, the Cognitive, and the Psychomo tor. Within each domain occur different levels of learning, from  simple recall to higher critical skills. Also called the Taxonomy  of Educational Objectives. Classical Conditioning: The process of manipulating stimuli to  condition behavioral responses. Constructivism: A school of thought in psychology which holds  that knowledge is constructed internally within the individual,  and we continually construct new knowledge through experi ence. Dick and Carey Model: An ISD model similar to ADDIE but  more complex in orientation. While still used today, it has been  criticized by some as too cumbersome for the average design  process. Instructional Design: the systematic development of instruc tional specifications using learning theory to ensure the quality  of instruction. Learning Objectives: A clearly defined goal or set of goals to be  reached and mastered in a learning activity.

Instructional Design 78 Mastery Learning: An Instructional Design method in which stu dents are provided a specific series of tasks and do not advance  to the next task until the first is mastered. Model of Learning: A theoretical outline for instruction which  follows a learning theory. Nine Events of Instruction: A model developed by Robert M.  Gagn which proposed that nine conditions had to occur for  successful learning. They are: Gain attention, Inform learner of  objective, Stimulate recall of prior learning, Present stimulus  material, Provide learner guidance, Elicit performance, Provide  feedback, Assess performance and Enhance retention transfer. Operant Conditioning: The process of modifying behavior  through reinforcement--rewarding positive or punishing nega tive responses. Programmed Instruction: A method of instruction which adopts  the behaviorist theory of learning. Reinforcement: The encouragement of a desired behavior or  response with positive feedback or reward, in order to increase  the frequency of the desired behavior. Task Analysis: The process of breaking down a task into its  fundamental components to understand how the task should be  learned and performed. Bibliography Cates, W.M. 1993. Instructional technology: The design  debate. Clearing House, 66 3. Retrieved October 20,  2006 from EBSCO online database, Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN9705041245siteehost-live Chevalier, R.D. 2011. When did ADDIE become addie?.  Performance Improvement, 506, 10-14. Retrieved  December 15, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN62675250sit eehost-live Christie, N.V. 2012. An interpersonal skills learning taxon omy for program evaluation instructors. Journal of Public  Affairs Education, 184, 739-756. Retrieved December 15,  2013, from EBSCO Online Database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN83072049siteehost-live Graham, G. 2005. Behaviorism. Stanford encyclopedia of  philosophy.  Retrieved October 19, 2006 from Stanford  University website: http:plato.stanford.eduentriesbehav iorism Luebke, S.,  Lori, J. 2013. Use of Bloom's Taxonomy in  developing reading comprehension specifications. Journal  of Applied Testing Technology, 141, 1-27. Retrieved  December 15, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN90461431sit eehost-live Leigh, D. n.d. A brief history of instructional design.  Retrieved October 18, 2006 from Performance  Improvement Global Network website: http:www.pigncispi.comarticleseducationbrief20history.htm McNeil, S. 2006. A hypertext history of instructional design.  Retrieved October 18, 2006 from University of Houston  College of Education website: http:www.coe.uh.edu coursescuin6373idhistorybehaviorism.html Pascopella, A. 2005. Catalyst for change. District  Administration 41 10. Retrieved October 20, 2006 from  EBSCO online database, Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN18426708siteehost-live Ryder, M. n.d. Instructional design models. Instructional  technology connections.  Retrieved October 18, 2006  from University of Colorado at Denver, http:carbon. cudenver.edumryderitc5fdataidmodels.html Shibley, I., Amaral, K.E., Shank, J.D.,  Shibley, L.R. 2011.  Designing a blended course: Using ADDIE to guide  instructional design. Journal of College Science Teaching,  406, 80-85. Retrieved December 15, 2013, from EBSCO  Online Database Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhA N62246180siteehost-live Spector, J. M. 2001. Philosophical implications for the design  of instruction. Instructional Science, 29  45, 381-402.   Retrieved October 20, 2006 from EBSCO online data base, Education Research Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN16980117 siteehost-live Programmed instruction. n.d. WikEd.  Retrieved  October 18, 2006 from University of Illinois,  Urbana-Champaign http:wik.ed.uiuc.eduindex.php Programmed5finstruction Wiburg, K. M. n.d. An historical perspective on instruc tional design: Is it time to exchange Skinner's teaching  machine for Dewey's toolbox? Retrieved October 19, 2006  from http:internettime.comitimegroupIs20it20 Time20to20Exchange20Skinner's20Teaching20 Machine20for20Dewey's.htm

Instructional Design 79 Suggested Reading Bloom, Benjamin. 1956. The taxonomy of educational objec tives. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley. Dewey, John. 1959. Dewey on education: Selections from the  child and the curriculum. New York: Teacher's College  Press. Gagne, Robert M. 1965. The conditions of learning. New  York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Gagne, Robert M., Leslie Briggs and Walter W. Wager. 1992  Principles of instructional design. 4th ed. Forth Worth:  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers, 1992. Skinner, B.F. 1954. Behavior of organisms. Acton, MA:  Copley. Thorndike, E. 1966. Human learning. New  impression edition Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Essay by Karen A. Kallio, M.Ed. Ms. Kallio earned her B.A. in English from Clark University and her Master's in Education from the University of Massachusetts at  Amherst. She lives and works in the Boston area.
Differentiated Instruction Abstract This article presents an overview of differentiated instruction, an  instructional philosophy that respects and celebrates the varied  ways in which individuals learn. Differentiated instruction  embraces years of brain research regarding ways in which we  learn best and utilizes this data to inform every day instructional  practice in K-12 classrooms. The central tenet of differentiated  instruction is that each individual's learning map is unique and  therefore, a "one size fits all" curriculum and instructional prac tice will not reach every learner. By differentiating the curriculum  elements of content, process and product according to the unique  characteristics of each student including readiness level, learning  profile and interest, teachers work to ensure success for every  learner. Although many differentiated instructional techniques  exist, this article directly discusses learning contracts, Role Audience FormatTopic RAFT, stations, centers, tiered activi ties and curriculum compacting. Overview Differentiated instruction is a philosophy of teaching that stems  from the belief that all students are different. Students differ with  regard to how they learn best, their strengths and weaknesses,  their cultural and family backgrounds, what they are interested  in learning about, etc. Differentiated instruction embraces these  differences and creates learning opportunities that are respectful  of student individuality and uniqueness. Carol Ann Tomlinson,  the leading researcher in the field of differentiated instruction,  asserts that differentiated instruction integrates what we know  about constructivist learning theory, learning styles, and brain  development with empirical research on influencing factors of  learner readiness, interest, and intelligence preferences Tomlin son  Allan, 2000. When differentiating instruction, teachers may choose to dif ferentiate one or more curriculum elements including content,  process, and product. Content refers to the actual curriculum  objectives for a unit of study or specifically, what teachers expect  students to know and be able to do by the end of the unit. Pro cess encompasses the variety of ways that students make sense  of key ideas and use essential skills. Products include all vehicles  through which students demonstrate and extend what they have  learned Tomlinson  Dockterman, 2002. When differentiating,  teachers adapt these core curriculum elements based on one or  more student characteristics including readiness, interest, and  learning profile at any time in a lesson or unit. Readiness Readiness refers to a student's entry point relative to a particular  understanding or skill Tomlinson, 1999. In any given class Abstract Overview Readiness Learning Profile Interest Traditional vs. Differentiated Classrooms Application: Differentiated Instruction  Applied in the K-12 Classroom Strong Curriculum Foundation Respectful Tasks Assessment Flexible Grouping Student Choice Classroom Management Differentiated Learning Models K-12 Viewpoints Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Differentiated Instruction 81 room, there always exists a range of readiness levels. Students  who are not quite ready to learn a given concept may need more  one-on-one time with a teacher, more deliberate step-by-step  instructions, varied activities and final products requiring dif ferent skill sets, and more opportunities for direct instruction.  Conversely, advanced students might be able to move ahead at a  faster pace, follow more complex directions, or even slow down  to explore a topic in greater depth Tomlinson, 1999. When  considering readiness levels, teachers ensure that students are  successfully and appropriately challenged at a level commen surate with their ability to understand a particular concept at a  specific time. Learning Profile A student's learning profile is a preferred way of learning which  may be influenced by learning style, intelligence preference,  gender and culture Tomlinson  Eidson, 2003. Howard Gard ner's research 1983 regarding multiple intelligences serves as  a primary force behind helping to differentiate according to the  variety of learning styles and intelligences in a classroom. Gard ner discusses eight major intelligences including 	 VerbalLinguistic 	 LogicalMathematical 	 VisualSpatial 	 BodilyKinesthetic 	 MusicalRhythmical 	 NaturalistEnvironmental 	 Interpersonal 	 Intrapersonal Sternberg 1988, 1997 added another element for teachers to  consider with research related to analytical, creative, and prac tical intelligences. When differentiating by learning profile,  teachers ensure that students learn through a modality that best  matches their strengths. Interest Teachers may also differentiate content, process or product  according to student interest. When students are interested in  learning about a topic, they are motivated, eager and enthusias tic about taking advantage of opportunities to explore and add  to their knowledge base. By skillfully connecting curriculum to  student interest, teachers are able to capitalize on motivation and  enthusiasm that may not otherwise be present if a student has  little or no interest in a particular topic. Traditional vs. Differentiated Classrooms Traditional classrooms tend to "teach to the middle" and use  a "one size fits all" model of instruction. When confronted with  large class sizes, whole class instruction often seems the easi est methodology to employ and the one type of instruction that  most teachers feel comfortable using, as it mirrors how they  were taught when younger. When teaching in a "one size fits all"  model, teachers pay little attention to individual differences and  aim to use as much of the text as possible to ensure coverage of  the curriculum. Traditional classrooms employ assessment at the  end of the unit and rarely use assessment data to drive instruc tion on a day to day basis Tomlinson  Dockterman, 2002.  If grouping strategies are used, most often homogeneous abil ity groups are created with the intention of providing remedial  instruction for those students who need extra help and provid ing challenge for those who need an extra "push." This is most  apparent in traditional high school environments where track ing is used for curriculum delivery and students are divided into  remedial, regular and honors courses. As Fahey 2000 indicates,  this model greatly impacts the quality of instruction provided,  creates quite an inequitable structure, and sends a negative mes sage to students regarding expectations for performance. The differentiated classroom , on the contrary, greatly empha sizes and values student differences. Teachers are sensitive to  student learning differences and develop curriculum oppor tunities that are responsive and appropriately challenging for  each individual student. After careful examination of readiness  levels, learning profiles and interest, teachers focus on a vari ety of instructional methodologies that reach each learner and  create opportunities for students to make intelligent choices  regarding the learning process. Ongoing assessment plays a  crucial role and provides invaluable information to teachers as  they work from day to day to develop lessons that best meet  student needs. The differentiated classroom is responsive as  opposed to reactive and truly emphasizes and celebrates diver sity of learning styles. It does not assume that one student's  road map for learning is identical to anyone else's Tomlinson   Dockterman, 2002. As American public education moves steadily into the future,  students continue to enter classrooms with ever more diverse  backgrounds, learning styles, and interests. Orfield and Kur laender 2001 remind us that our schools are bursting with  diversity and our awareness of this diversity continues to increase  rapidly. In addition, Mills  Keddie found that, across many  parts of the world, at the same time that the student population  is becoming increasingly diverse, bringing to classrooms diver gent racial, ethnic, cultural, and socioeconomic experiences, the  teacher population is becoming more homogeneous, primarily  white and middle class Mills  Keddie, 2012. Although edu cators recognize the reality of diversity, traditional classroom  practices dominate and as Kohn 2004 states, many educators  are becoming increasingly uncomfortable with the perceived  disconnect between the traditional classroom experience and the  expectations of our future citizens. Marx 2000 clearly identified ten trends in education for the 21st  Century. Among these trends, Marx discusses the need for edu cators to realize that we will soon be a nation of minorities with  widely different backgrounds and perspectives, that the "one 

Differentiated Instruction 82 size fits all" classroom does not address the increasing diversity  reflected in society, and that we must hold all students to high  expectations once reserved for only a select few. Differentiated  instruction may just be the model that holds the key to enable  educators to respond to increasing diversity in classrooms and  to ensure that all children are appropriately challenged through  modalities best suited for optimal learning potential. Application: Differentiated Instruction  Applied in the K-12 Classroom Strong Curriculum Foundation A powerful and clearly articulated curriculum is an abso lute requirement for differentiating instruction. Differentiated  instruction does not work if clearly defined learning objectives  are not in place. In order to successfully differentiate content,  process or product, teachers need to know exactly what they  expect students to be able to do and understand by the end of a  unit of study. Often, it is quite useful to begin with the end-goals  in mind and work backwards to define the different processes  and products that can be used to achieve the objectives Wiggins   McTighe, 1998. Tomlinson  Dockterman 2002 indicate  that once a teacher has a strong curriculum in place, he or she  can modify instructional methodologies according to readiness,  learning profile and interest so that each learner comes away  with the understandings and skills necessary to move to the next  level of learning. Respectful Tasks Tomlinson 1999, 2003 discusses the critical importance of  developing tasks that are respectful of each learner in a class room. When teachers take the time to assess student readiness,  learning profile and interest, they, in turn, respect the uniqueness  and individuality of each learner. By respecting readiness levels,  holding high expectations for student growth, increasing degrees  of difficulty as students develop understandings and skills, and  developing tasks that are equally interesting, important and  engaging, Tomlinson 1999 asserts that teachers deeply respect  the identity of each individual in the classroom. When teachers create tasks respectful of different readiness  levels, learning profiles and interests, all students benefit,  including those with significant learning differences and those  who are gifted. Lawrence-Brown 2004 discusses the impact of  differentiated instruction on the learning outcomes for students  with disabilities and concludes that classrooms employing dif ferentiated instruction with appropriate supports benefit both  students with and without disabilities. Reis  McCoach 2000  studied the effects on gifted children and further indicate that in  classrooms where instruction is appropriately differentiated for  learners, gifted students feel challenged, encounter both strug gles and successes, are called on to develop advanced study  and production skills, and are able to develop their particular  interests. Assessment In a traditional classroom, assessment is typically summative  and designed to collect data regarding those students who mas tered major concepts and those who did not at the end of a unit  of study. This type of assessment is of little use when aiming  to maximize student potential throughout the learning process  because it provides relatively no information regarding how best  to "reach" students through different modalities. The informa tion obtained is typically used to assign grades and to evaluate  student performance once the unit is complete. Should a student  misunderstand a concept or need re-teaching at some point,  teachers are unable to detect these needs when using one culmi nating assessment. In a differentiated classroom, assessment takes on a variety of  forms. Benjamin 2006 asserts that "students are more likely  to be successful if the assessment system encompasses a broad  spectrum of abilities and modes of expression" pg. 59. When  differentiating instruction, assessments are both summative and  formative in nature. Summative assessments provide meaning ful data regarding student understanding of core concepts while  formative assessments provide information that assists teachers  to formulate and modify their instruction to meet the needs of a  diverse student population. Pre-, ongoing, and final assessments  are all major components of a differentiated classroom. Pre-assessments play a crucial role as they provide the neces sary information for teachers to skillfully create flexible groups  for different learning purposes. Such assessments may take the  form of interest surveysinventories, parent questionnaires with  younger students, or quick pre-tests as well as a variety of other  options. Pre-assessments help teachers determine student readi ness for a particular concept, preferred learning styles andor  levels of interest in a particular component of a unit of study  Tomlinson, 1999. Ongoing assessments are used throughout the unit of study to best  meet the needs of individual students. Both formal and informal  assessments help teachers to regroup students for a particular  concept, recognize when re-teaching is necessary, and success fully determine optimal instructional methodologies to reach  all learners Tomlinson, 1999. Ongoing assessments may take  the form of homework assignments, performance tasks, miniprojects, or student presentations as well as other options. Once  a unit of study is complete, a final assessment may be given to  evaluate overall student performance and understanding of core  learning objectives. Final assessments can be varied to provide  opportunities for students to demonstrate understanding through  many different modes of expression. Flexible Grouping Flexible grouping strategies are a hallmark of differentiated  instruction and are of critical importance when aiming to meet  the needs of a diverse student population. Traditional grouping  practices tend to focus on ability and "pigeonhole" students into 

Differentiated Instruction 83 a particular group level. High performing students are grouped  with other high performing students and low performing stu dents are partnered with others of the same ability. There is little  movement from group to group and students tend to stay with the  same groups throughout the year. To the contrary, flexible grouping requires a more holistic per spective with regard to ability, learning profile and interest. Lewis   Batt 2005 indicate that the most important aspect of flexible  grouping is that the groups are not static. Rather, they change  frequently. Teachers conduct formal and informal assessments to  move students from group to group as often as necessary. Pettig  2000 further claims that "the dynamic flow of grouping and  regrouping is one of the foundations of differentiated instruc tion" pg. 16. Flexible grouping strategies provide opportunities  for students to work with different people throughout the year  and to more deeply appreciate the richness and complexity of  diverse learning styles, abilities, and interests among their peers. Student Choice Student choice is another essential element of a differentiated  classroom. Students are empowered to make intelligent choices  aligned with their readiness, learning style or interest. As Ben jamin 2006 indicates, when students have choice, it provides  them with a sense of self-determination that translates into  increased commitment. A central tenet of differentiated instruc tion asserts that students feel empowered, are more motivated  and enthusiastic about learning, take on more responsibility, and  make more meaningful connections during the learning process  when they are provided with an opportunity for choice. For example, a student may choose a specific final product from  a learning contract that best matches hisher learning style or  interest. Heshe may choose to work alone on a project, with a  partner, or in a group. Heshe may choose to work while listen ing to music or, alternatively, work in complete silence. Pettig  2000 states that "choice validates student's opinion and pro motes self-efficacy," and therefore plays a crucial role in the  differentiated classroom pg. 17. Classroom Management Classroom management takes on quite a different meaning in a  differentiated classroom as teachers need to be adept at facili tating multiple groups, all working on varied activities at one  time. This can be especially difficult in a classroom with a large  student-teacher ratio and space limitations. Teachers need to  configure classroom furniture to create multiple spaces for dif ferentiated learning opportunities as well as facilitation of both  small and large group instructional methodologies. Furthermore,  teachers need to think critically about materials, supplies and the  best ways to maximize time. An anchor activity is one management strategy used in differen tiated classrooms to "anchor" a group of students, engaging them  in a meaningful task directly related to the unit of study, while  the teacher meets with a small group of students to introduce,  re-teach, or assess a particular skill or understanding. Anchor  activities are not "busy work" and therefore must be designed  with a purposeful connection to what students are currently  studying in class. Anchor activities provide the means necessary  to ensure that all students are purposefully working on curricu lum related tasks and they free the teacher to appropriately allot  time to those students who may need further clarification, guid ance, or challenge. Differentiated Learning Models K-12 There are a variety of learning models used in a differentiated  classroom to reach all learners at different levels. A few of the  more common methodologies are discussed below. Learning Contracts A learning contract is one differentiated  instructional technique used by teachers primarily to provide an  element of choice in an assignment. Starting with the main objec tive or skill for a particular lesson, teachers work backward and  create a minimum of two options on a contract for students to  choose in order to demonstrate understanding. Options are differ entiated according to learning style. For example, when studying  conflict and resolution in literature, a teacher may develop a  contract that allows students to choose between writing a song,  creating a short skit, writing a three-paragraph essay, or painting  a picture to depict the central conflict and the resolution. Alterna tively, contracts can be differentiated according to interest. For  example, when studying colonization, a teacher may develop a  contract including options related to economy, government, roles  of womenmenchildren, and relations with Native Americans.  Students choose which option best matches their interest. When  developing a learning contract for a particular unit of study, the  options are essentially limitless and depend greatly on the creativ ity and ingenuity of the teacher. By extention, behavior contracts  can also be valuable, especially when they build a link between  school and home Hawkins et al., 2011. Role  Audience  Format  Topic RAFT A RAFT is a dif ferentiated activity used primarily to encourage writing across  the curriculum. In a RAFT, students take on a specific role and  develop a final product for a target audience related to a core  concept or topic from a unit of study Billmeyer  Barton,  1998. For example, when studying fractions and decimals, stu dents may take on the role of a fraction and write a letter to a  decimal explaining how the two are related to each other. When  working on concepts related to persuasive writing, students may  take on the role of advertisers producing an ad campaign for  children illustrating why their cereal product is the healthiest  option for a nutritional breakfast. No matter what type of RAFT  a teacher creates, heshe begins with the major skills or concepts  that students should be able to do or understand and then works  backwards to differentiate multiple options that can either be  assigned or chosen by interest. Stations Stations refer to different locations in a classroom  where a teacher organizes materials for students to work on  specific tasks related to a curriculum objective. When stations 

Differentiated Instruction 84 are used, multiple locations are required as students generally  rotate from station to station individually or in groups. Stations  work well in a differentiated classroom because they provide for  a strong balance between student choice and teacher choice. Fur thermore, stations lend themselves easily to flexible grouping as  every student does not need to visit every station, but can rather  spend more time studying a concept in depth or even work in a  small group or one-on-one with the teacher Tomlinson, 1999. Learning Centers Centers are often easily confused with  stations because, in principle, they are very similar. However,  Kaplan et al. 1980 define a learning center as an area in the  classroom containing a variety of activities or materials devel oped specifically to teach, reinforce, or extend a skill or concept.  Centers require students to take on a high degree of responsibil ity for their own learning as the tasks are independent of teacher  direction and students need to be self-motivated to explore and  work on their own or with a partner. Centers generally contain  a variety of activities that are differentiated for varying degrees  of complexity and depth. Tomlinson 1999 also indicates that  interest centers further enhance the differentiated classroom as  they provide opportunities for students to explore concepts they  are particularly interested in learning about. Tiered Activities Lewis  Batts 2005 describe tiered activi ties as a collection of assignments designed at different levels  of complexity and depth according to student readiness levels.  Teachers employ tiered activities when aiming to create opportu nities for students to focus on the same concepts, but at varying  levels of complexity Tomlinson, 1999. This type of instruction  directly addresses the differing needs of both struggling students  and advanced students and offers a direct alternative to the "one  size fits all" model employed in most traditional classrooms. A  typical tiered activity is guided by one overarching skill that a  teacher expects all students to know, understand and be able to  do i.e. identify the characteristics of a triangle. Tier one may  require students to write or draw a description of the main char acteristics of a triangle. Tier two may require students to compare  and contrast the main characteristics of a triangle with another  figure. Finally, tier three may require students to identify the main  characteristics of a triangle and discuss the implications these  characteristics have for the use of the triangle in society. Curriculum Compacting Curriculum compacting is a meth odology employed for those students who can demonstrate they  have already mastered a particular skill or understanding. Rather  than repeat mastered material, students are provided with the  opportunity to work on alternative, more challenging assign ments. By using the results from a pre-assessment, teachers can  easily determine level of mastery and appropriately assign stu dents to a compacted activity, thus carving time for the teacher  to meet directly with those students who need extra support. As  Lewis and Batts 2005 claim, accurate records are extremely  important when compacting the curriculum as teachers need to  be sure to provide accountability and a rationale for creating an  opportunity for students to work on alternative assignments. Viewpoints Two conflicts that teachers often struggle to resolve are the  perceived mismatches between differentiated instruction and  grading systems as well as differentiated instruction and stan dards. The traditional box that most grading systems operate  within does not quite match with the reality of what takes place in  a differentiated classroom. When different students are working  on different activities at different times, teachers often grapple  with how to grade student performance. Tomlinson 2005 dem onstrates that the barrier is more imagined than real and that the  ultimate goal of grading systems is to be accurate, reflective of  student performance, and useful for growth and development. Similarly, teachers grapple with how to reconcile the perceived  mismatch between increasing standards based accountability and  differentiated instruction. They worry that if they are required to  address all of the content and performance standards in order to  ensure success on standardized tests, it is even more difficult to  be responsive to all of the diverse learning needs and styles in  a classroom. McTighe and Brown 2005 assert, however, that  differentiation and standards can not only peacefully coexist,  they must coexist if we seek to continually improve our schools.  All students can and must be held to the same high expectations  and standards for learning. It is the teaching methodologies,  however, that must be differentiated to ensure that each student  successfully meets the standards. It is difficult to challenge the underpinnings of differentiated  instruction, as every classroom includes a range of learners with  varying abilities, learning styles and interests. Although there still  exist many traditional classrooms and many teachers continue to  employ "one size fits all" instructional techniques, these teachers  are not intentionally negatively impacting student learning out comes. The real issue at stake is the level of time, support, and  energy necessary to change George, 2005. There is no doubt  that creating a highly differentiated classroom environment can  be very difficult for some teachers as they need to consider many  different facets of teaching and learning in order to reach each  individual student. Moreover, most teachers have been exposed  to very few models of differentiated instruction throughout their  own education and therefore find it difficult to transfer these  instructional methodologies into their own classrooms. As Tom linson 2005 states, "one reason responsive teaching is scarce  is that teachers lack images of such classrooms. We teach as we  were taught. Furthermore, most educators have had little oppor tunity to study in depth the need for differentiation" p. 183. School leaders need to support teachers in their endeavors to  adapt teaching methodologies to incorporate differentiation.  They need to provide time and exercise much patience. Fur thermore, teachers need extensive professional development  opportunities to hone their craft and study differentiation and  how it applies in the classroom setting. In many ways imple mentation of the Common Core State Standards, adopted by  forty-five of the United States following their release in 2010, 

Differentiated Instruction 85 continue to raise the bar for what is expected of current and  future teachers. This requires deep understanding and knowl edge that cannot be accomplished through quick-hit training. In  order to encourage successful implementation, education and  professional development for teachers must be ongoing and  deep Liebtag, 2013. Moreover, Holloway 2000 discusses  the need for universities to develop pre-service programs that  help teachers understand differentiated instruction. We need to  prepare the next cadre of teacher leaders with the skills nec essary to employ these instructional techniques. Once these  teachers are in our schools, we need to support, encourage,  and nurture them Holloway, 2000. Tomlinson reminds us that  substantial change is slow. When aiming to employ differen tiated instructional methodologies in the classroom, schools  need to start small, avoid overload and prepare for the long  haul Tomlinson, 1999. Terms  Concepts Anchor Activity: An anchor activity is a management strategy  used in differentiated classrooms to "anchor" a group of stu dents, engaging them in a meaningful task directly related to  the unit of study, while the teacher meets with a small group  of students to introduce, re-teach, or assess a particular skill or  understanding. Curriculum Compacting: Curriculum compacting is a meth odology employed for students who demonstrate they have  already mastered a particular skill or understanding. Rather  than repeat mastered material, students are provided with the  opportunity to work on alternative, more challenging assign ments. Flexible Grouping: Flexible groups are not static but rather  "fluid" in terms of students consistently moving in and out of  different groups according to a holistic perspective with regard  to readiness level, learning profile, and interest. Formative Assessments: Formative assessments provide infor mation that assists teachers to formulate and modify their  instruction to meet the needs of a diverse student population on  an ongoing basis. Learning Center: A learning center is an area in the classroom  containing a variety of activities or materials developed specifi cally to teach, reinforce, or extend a skill or concept. Learning Contract: A learning contract is a differentiated  instructional technique used by teachers primarily to provide an  element of choice in an assignment. Contracts can be differenti ated according to readiness level, learning style, or interest. Learning Profile: A students learning profile is a preferred way  of learning that may be influenced by learning style, intelligence  preference, gender and culture. Multiple Intelligences: Gardner 1983 discusses eight major  intelligences including verbal  linguistic, logical  mathematical,  visual  spatial, bodily  kinesthetic, musical  rhythmical, natu ralist  environmental, interpersonal and intrapersonal. These  intelligences serve as indicators to help assess learning prefer ences and styles. Ongoing Assessment: Ongoing assessments are used through out a unit of study to best meet the needs of individual students.  They may take the form of homework assignments, performance  tasks, mini-projects, or student presentations as well as other  options. Readiness: Readiness refers to a student's entry point relative to  a particular understanding or skill. In any given classroom, there  always exists a range of different readiness levels. RoleAudienceFormatTopic RAFT: A RAFT is a differen tiated activity used primarily to encourage writing across the  curriculum. In a RAFT, students take on a specific role and  develop a final product for a target audience related to a core  concept or topic from a unit of study. Pre-Assessment: Pre-assessments help teachers determine stu dent readiness for a particular concept, preferred learning styles  andor levels of interest in a particular component of a unit of  study. They may take the form of interest surveysinventories,  parent questionnaires with younger students, or quick pre-tests  as well as a variety of other options. Stations: Stations refer to different locations in a classroom  where a teacher organizes materials for students to work on spe cific tasks related to a curriculum objective. When stations are  used, multiple locations are required as students generally rotate  from station to station individually or in groups. Summative Assessments: Summative assessments are given at  the end of a unit of study to provide meaningful data regarding  mastery and student understanding of core concepts. Tiered Activities: Tiered activities are a collection of assignments  designed at different levels of complexity and depth according to  student readiness levels. Bibliography Benjamin, A. 2006. Valuing Differentiated Instruction.  Education Digest, 72 1; pp. 57-59. Retrieved May 17,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?direct truedbehhAN22680784siteehost-live Billmeyer, R.  Barton, M. 1998. Teaching reading in the  content areas: If not me, then who? Aurora, CO: McRel.

Differentiated Instruction 86 Fahey, J. 2000. Who wants to differentiate instruction? We  did. Educational Leadership, 58 1; pp. 70-72. Retrieved  May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN4027114siteehost-live Gardner, H. 1993. Multiple intelligences: The theory in prac tice. New York: Basic Books. Gardner, H. 1997. Reflections on multiple intelligences: The  theory in practice. Phi Delta Kappan, 78 5; pp. 200-207.  Retrieved May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online database,  Education Research Complete, http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN9512053705 siteehost-live George, P. 2005. A rationale for differentiating instruction  in the regular classroom. Theory into Practice, 44 3;  pp. 185-193. Retrieved May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online  database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN175 39464siteehost-live Hawkins, E., Kingsdorf, S., Charnock, J., Szabo, M.,  Middleton, E., Phillips, J.,  Gautreaux, G. 2011. Using  behaviour contracts to decrease antisocial behaviour in  four boys with an autistic spectrum disorder at home and  at school. British Journal of Special Education, 384,  201-208. Retrieved December 11, 2013, from EBSCO  Online Database Education Source Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhA N69972208siteehost-live  Holloway, J. 2000. Preparing teachers for differentiated  instruction. Educational Leadership, 58 1; pp. 82-83.  Retrieved May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN4027119site ehost-live Kaplan, S., Kaplan, J., Madsen, S.,  Gould, B. 1980.  Change for children: Ideas and activities for individual izing learning. Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman. Kohn, A. 2004. Challenging Students and how to have  more of them. Phi Delta Kappan, 86; pp. 184-194.  Retrieved May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN15015123sit eehost-live Lawrence-Brown, D., 2004. Differentiated instruction:  Inclusive strategies for standards-based learning that  benefit the whole class. American Secondary Education,  32 3; pp. 34-62. Retrieved May 17, 2007 from EBSCO  online database Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhA N13991396siteehost-live Lewis, S.,  Batts, K. 2005. How to implement differenti ated instruction. Journal of Staff Development, 26 4;  pp. 26-31. Retrieved May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online  database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN202 17434siteehost-live Liebtag, E. 2013. Moving forward with Common Core State  Standards implementation: Possibilities and potential  problems. Journal of Curriculum  Instruction, 72,  56-70. Retrieved December 11, 2013, from EBSCO Online  Database Education Source Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN92612449 siteehost-live Marx, G. 2000. Ten trends: Educating children for a pro foundly different future. Arlington, VA: Educational  Research Service. McTighe, J.,  Brown, J. 2005. Differentiated instruction  and educational standards: Is dtente possible? Theory  into Practice, 44 3; pp. 234-244. Retrieved May 17,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?direct truedbehhAN17539459siteehost-live Mills, C.,  Keddie, A. 2012. Fixing student deficit in con texts of diversity: Another cautionary tale for pre-service  teacher education. International Journal of Pedagogies   Learning, 71, 9-19. Retrieved December 11, 2013, from  EBSCO Online Database Education Source Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN85204977siteehost-live Orfield, G.,  Kurlaender, M. 2001. Diversity challenged:  Evidence on the impact of affirmative action. Cambridge,  MA: Harvard Education Publishing Group. Pettig, K. 2000. On the road to differentiated practice.  Educational Leadership, 58 1, pp. 14-18. Retrieved  May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online database, Education  Research Complete, http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN4027101siteehost-live Reis, S. M.,  McCoach, D. B. 2000. The underachievement  of gifted students: What do we know and where do we  go? Gifted Child Quarterly, 44; pp. 152-170. Retrieved  May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN3405869siteehost-live Sternberg, R. 1988. The triarchic mind: A new theory of  human intelligence. New York: Viking Press.

Differentiated Instruction 87 Sternberg, R. 1997. What does it mean to be smart?  Educational Leadership, 54 6; pp. 20-24. Retrieved  May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN9703145800siteehost-live Tomlinson, C. 1999. The differentiated classroom:  Responding to the needs of all learners. Alexandria, VA:  Association of Supervision and Curriculum Development. Tomlinson, C.,  Allan, S. D. 2000. Leadership in dif ferentiating schools and classrooms. Alexandria, VA:  Association of Supervision and Curriculum Development. Tomlinson, C.,  Docterman, D. 2002. Different learners  different lessons. Instructor, 112 2; pp. 21-25. Retrieved  May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN8967356siteehost-live Tomlinson, C.,  Eidson, C. 2003. Differentiation in prac tice: A resource guide for differentiating curriculum  grades K-5. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision  and Curriculum Development. Tomlinson, C.  Eidson, C. 2003. Differentiation in prac tice: A resource guide for differentiating curriculum  grades 5-9. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision  and Curriculum Development. Tomlinson, C. 2005. Grading and differentiation: Paradox or  good practice? Theory into Practice, 44 3; pp. 262-269.  Retrieved May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN17539455sit eehost-live Tomlinson, C. 2005. This issue: differentiated instruction.  Theory into Practice, 44 3; pp. 183-184. Retrieved  May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN17539461siteehost-live Wiggins, G.,  McTighe, J. 1998. Understanding by Design.  Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and  Curriculum Development. Suggested Reading Larsen, K. 2004. Sink or swim. Library Media Connection,  23 3; pp. 14-16. Salend, S. 2005. Report card models that support com munication and differentiation of instruction. Teaching  Exceptional Children, 37 4; pp. 28-34. Retrieved May 17,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN16366703siteehost-live Sternberg, R.,  Zhang, L. 2005. Styles of thinking as a  basis of differentiated instruction. Theory into Practice,  44 3; pp. 245-253. Strong, R., Perini, M.,  Harvey, T. 2004. Creating a  Differentiated Mathematics Classroom. Educational  Leadership, 61 5; pp. 73-78. Retrieved May 17, 2007  from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN12182303siteehost-live Tomlinson, C. 1999. Mapping a route toward a differentiated  instruction. Educational Leadership, 57 12; pp. 12-16. Tomlinson, C. 2000. Differentiated instruction: Can it work?  Education Digest, 65 5; pp. 25-31. Retrieved May 17,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN2666290siteehost-live Tomlinson, C. 2003. Fulfilling the promise of the differenti ated classroom: Strategies and tools for responsive teach ing. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and  Curriculum Development. VanSciver, J. 2005. NCLB fitfully fits differentiated instruc tion. Education Digest, 70 9; pp. 37-39. Retrieved  May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN16987868siteehost-live VanSciver, J. 2005. Motherhood, Apple Pie, and  Differentiated Instruction. Phi Delta Kappan, 86 7; pp.  534-535. Retrieved May 17, 2007 from EBSCO online  database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN1631 4587siteehost-live Essay by John W. Loeser, M.Ed. John Loeser is an Assistant Head of an elementary school in San Mateo, CA. He received his Master's of Education in School Leader ship from Harvard University. His research interests include differentiated instruction, improving instructional practice, and strategic  change and leadership in schools. He is actively involved with the National and California Association of Independent Schools, and the  Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. He currently resides in San Mateo, CA with his wife.
The Socratic Method Abstract For some teachers and administrators, just asking a lot of ques tions in class is considered Socratic method. However, the term  is more specifically applied to an array of teaching methods  that developed over the last eighty years. The Socratic method,  when applied to reach specific goals and objectives can be called  teacher-directed, or curriculum-directed. In the student-centered,  or seminar method, the teacher must give up the didactic role  of knowall lecturer and transition toward becoming an equal  participant in a conversation. Even when teachers are able use  seminars on a regular basis, many issues arise, such as meeting  state standards while still giving students intellectual and aca demic freedom. Overview As Moeller and Moeller 2002 indicated, there is not an official  definition of Socratic method. The term is derived from Socrates,  the ancient Greek philosopher, who was made famous in Plato's  Dialogues for asking questions, and especially for answering  questions with more questions. The Socratic method was not  passed down from ancient Athens across continents and millen nia Schneider, 2013. It is traditionally seen as an experiential  learner-centred pedagogy that values creativity and intellectual  independence Gorry, 2011. On a simple level, the term refers  to constantly asking questions in order to further investigate core  issues and ideas. The Socratic method can be used for all ages,  although some, like, Strong 1997 suggested different frequency  and length for various ages. For some teachers and administrators, just asking a lot of ques tions in class is considered Socratic method. However, the term  is more specifically applied to an array of teaching methods that  developed over the last century. According to Strong 1997 the  term "Socratic Seminars" was first coined by Scott Buchanan  in 1937 and has evolved ever since through St. John's College,  the University of Chicago, the Great Books Foundation, and  the Paideia program. In particular, authors like Strong 1997,  Copeland 2005 and Tredway 1995 trace much of the pro liferation of the Socratic method to Mortimer Adler's 1982  Paideia Proposal. Abstract Overview Questioning for Deeper Investigation Applications Traditional Teacher-Directed Discussion  Method Student-Centered Socratic Seminar Method Getting Started Pre-Seminar Activity The Text The Opening Question The Facilitator The Students Post-Seminar Activity Issues Classroom Management Curriculum Connections Relinquishing the Reins Asking QuestionsFacilitating Participation Assessment  Grading Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

The Socratic Method 89 Questioning for Deeper Investigation Questions are central to any application of the Socratic method,  but crucial differences emerge when considerations such as how  the questions are asked and under what circumstances they are  being asked are taken into account. These differences become  clear when the applications and purposes are examined. A brief  look at Plato's Dialogues can reveal the idea that Socrates, despite  asking questions, was actually steering his students toward a  pre-determined goal. Whether this was the case or not, teach ers wishing to use the Socratic method face a crucial fork in the  road: Are the students being guided by the questions to a specific  destination or are they free to explore their own interests? This distinction is best illustrated by the difference between dia logue or conversation on one hand, and discussion on the other.  Dialogue and conversation are meant to be free flowing and may  or may not lead to any resolution. In this sense, they can be consid ered student-centered, since the students themselves follow what  interests them. Discussions are meant to arrive at specific answers,  and, therefore, can be considered teacher-directed or curriculumdirected. Copeland 2005 considered dialogue an inductive  process that produced more questions and ideas, whereas discus sion was a deductive process that led to fewer questions and ideas. Applications Traditional Teacher-Directed Discussion Method The Socratic method, when applied to reach specific goals and  objectives, can be called teacher-directed, or curriculum-directed.  In this situation, the students are guided by the questions the  teacher asks in order to reach pre-determined destinations. The  students are not free to explore in the sense that there is a specific  point to be made or a lesson to be learned by the conversation.  The teacher knows most or all of the answers to the questions  he or she poses in this application, creating or perpetuating the  teacher-knows-all dynamic. In the teacher-directed application, the teacher retains intellec tual authority over the classroom and the material, even when  asking questions. In other words, the students view the teacher  as the dispenser of knowledge who has the final say in conversa tion. These teachers often endorse and encourage certain answers  and ask leading questions where the answer is embedded in the  question. Moeller and Moeller 2002 referred to these teachers  as pseudo-Socratic teachers who actually practice nothing more  than disguised lectures. There are benefits to the teacher-directed application. Teachers  who want to break away from straightforward lecturing may find  asking questions more interesting, not only for themselves but  for the students as well. After all, questions invite dialogue and  encourage new ideas. Teachers may be pleasantly surprised to  hear what their students are actually thinking, rather than hearing  a steady stream of regurgitated information. Students may find  the experience more engaging since their ideas are being voiced. The real benefit of Socratic method comes in a seminar format,  when the students are empowered to explore what they feel  is important, when they are taught how to think, not what to  think. Student-Centered Socratic Seminar Method Most of these applications of Socratic method are student-cen tered. Hence, the term "seminar" will be used in this paper to  generically refer to the many variations of the student-centered  approach. These include, but aren't limited to: 	 Touchstones Seminars, 	 Junior Great Books Seminars, 	 Paideia Seminars, 	 Harkness Table, 	 Socratic Seminars, 	 Socratic Circles, 	 Literature Circles, and 	 The fishbowl method. Although each has its own set of specific rules, they all share  similar ideas. In the student-centered, or seminar method, the teacher must  give up the didactic role of know-all lecturer and transition  toward becoming an equal participant in a conversation. This  can be a difficult process for some teachers. The dialogue in  such seminars is not driven to resolution by the teacher or by  the curriculum, but instead is steered by the students and their  interests in an open-ended way. From the students' perspective,  seeing the teacher as a learner as well can be extremely benefi cial. Since the teacher doesn't have all of the answers, as not all  issues have resolution, learning appears as more a process than  a product. Because the structure of a student-centered Socratic method  encourages students to do the work of thinking and analysis in a  cooperative manner, there are a large number of benefits. Strong  1997 and Copeland 2005 list many of the typical virtues of  Socratic method: 	 Increased critical thinking and reading skills 	 Increased speaking and listening skills 	 Greater teamwork and politenes 	 Increased honesty and integrity 	 More willingness to accept criticism In addition, Tredway 1995 indicated that Socratic seminars  also build self-esteem, since students are engaged in significant  work. The emphasis for many seminars, then, is skills, rather  than content.

The Socratic Method 90 Although there is not yet a lot of specific research on Socratic  method, Strong 1997, for one, has shown that the students in  two separate schools made significant gains in critical think ing skills as measured by the Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking  Appraisal. Getting Started Teachers wishing to start a student-centered version of the  Socratic method, or seminar, should first establish classroom  expectations and procedures for having conversations. This  includes general things, like being polite and courteous, and  specific recommendations, such as disagreeing with ideas  rather than people. Many seminar programs, like those from  Touchstones and Junior Great Books, have clear and useful rec ommendations. At first, teachers may need to take measures for creating artificial  dialogue by using talking sticks, raising hands, and taking turns  around in circles. However, seminar practitioners like Strong  1997 and Copeland 2005 have suggested shedding the con straints as soon as possible, to create more natural conversation.  Two strangers meeting on a sidewalk, after all, will not raise  their hands to speak to each other. Participants, including the teacher, should be arranged in a circle,  so that all may see one another. In the case of large classes, an  inner and outer circle can be formed. Ball and Brewer 2000  have suggested a horseshoe shape for the outer circle, so that  there are no students seated behind the teacher. There are sev eral techniques, such as the fishbowl and Socratic Circles, for  engaging the inner and outer circles. Copeland 2005 has also  suggested changing the lighting in the classroom, in order to help  students transition into dialogue mode. There are six basic components of a seminar conversation: 	 The pre-seminar activity, 	 The text, 	 The opening question, 	 The facilitator, 	 The students involved, and 	 The post-seminar activity. Pre-Seminar Activity Pre-seminar activities are for preparing the students for the actual  dialogue of the seminar. Often students must read and annotate  the text in order to participate in a seminar. Moeller and Moeller  2002, Copeland 2005, and Ball and Brewer 2000 all share  strategies for annotating texts. Journaling, free writing and other  techniques for connecting to prior knowledge can be useful as  well. The Text The text is a general term for the central focus of the seminar.  A "text" can be a poem, a short story, a painting, a primary  resource, song lyrics, or anything else that the students and the  teacher wish to explore thoroughly. The text can be read ahead of  time for homework, or at the beginning of class. Text selection is extremely important. A poorly chosen text can  fall flat, failing to engage students, whereas a well-chosen text  can carry conversation through several class periods. A text  should be rich in ideas and able to produce numerous questions  that have no right answers. In the beginning shorter pieces are  better, since they allow students to move line by line and learn  to construct meaning. According to Strong 1997, the ideal text  is "one in which students know the meaning of each word indi vidually but have no understanding of the paragraph as a whole,"  p. 21. Longer texts can be used, but often anything longer than  a few pages will generate too much dialogue and may not be  focused enough to be useful for most teachers. Poems, which  tend to be short but dense with ideas, may be a good place for  many teachers to begin. Riddles, on the other hand, which often  appear to have a right answer, tend not to work well. For those  who are unsure where to begin with text selection, Copeland  2005 and Ball and Brewer 2000 provide lists of selections  that have worked well. There are mixed views on text selection. Some, like Copeland  2005, suggested the most important reason for choosing a text  has to do with connecting it to the curriculum, whereas others,  like Strong 1995, are more interested in the conversation that  the text produces. Teachers may find that establishing their pur pose for using Socratic methods may help clarify the process of  selecting texts. The Opening Question The opening question starts the actual seminar itself. Because  it is meant to promote useful dialogue, the opening question  should not have a right answer. Instead, it should challenge  students to find evidence, formulate ideas, and converse with  others. Copeland 2005, p. 61 defined a good starting question  as one that had specificity, was based in opinion, was focused on  the meaning the writer was trying to convey, and had the poten tial to produce multiple answers. Zeiderman 1989 insisted that  the question should be short and simple. Moeller and Moeller  2002 included an evaluative checklist that can help teachers  frame better questions. The Facilitator The facilitator of a student-centered Socratic method must move  away from didactic instruction and toward constructivist or dia logic instruction. Here, the teacher is more of a coach or tutor,  rather than a lecturer. The general rule is to say as little as pos sible, letting the students do the work of thinking and analysis.  As Copeland 2005 wrote, "Ultimately, the less the teacher par

The Socratic Method 91 ticipates, the more ownership, control, and investment students  feel for the conclusions their conversation draws" p. 32. Taking a backseat to the process does not mean that a seminar  facilitator has it easy. On the contrary, the seminar facilitator has  multiple roles that must be juggled in order for the seminars to  be as successful as possible. Copeland 2005, for example, sug gested four specific roles for Socratic Circles: 	 Selecting text; 	 Keeping inner circle dialogue moving; 	 Directing feedback of the outer circle; and 	 Assessing the students and the seminar. Over time, the role of the facilitator can undergo subtle changes.  Strong 1997 suggested five roles that are roughly sequential: 	 Justifier of the activity; 	 Socratic questioner; 	 Provider of synthesis and clarification; 	 Process coach; and 	 Genuine participant. Each step moves the seminar facilitator closer to the studentcentered model, where finally, the teacher is a participant as well  as a student. The Students The students, or participants, must share responsibility for the  quality of the seminar. They should be taught how to participate  effectively, including: annotating the text, actively listening to  one another, speaking clearly and succinctly, and working coop eratively. Students generally lack these skills in the beginning  of a seminar process, but can develop them over time through  reflection, direction instruction, and, most importantly, practice. Post-Seminar Activity Post-seminar activities typically consist of writing activities  in one form or another. Quizzes, essays, and journal entries  are often assigned, both as a means of assessing the student's  participation in the seminar, but also to gauge the student's com prehension of the concepts involved. Reflecting on the seminar itself is also extremely important,  since it provides an opportunity for students to improve. Billings  and Roberts 2006 in a yearlong study of the Paideia Seminar  method in one teacher's classroom concluded "that teaching  practice only improves when it takes place consistently within a  full Teaching Cycle of deliberate planning, careful practice, and  thoughtful assessment" p. 2. Copeland 2005, Ball and Brewer  2000 and others provide reflection forms that can be useful for  reflecting on the quality of the seminars. Issues Many issues are raised when a teacher wishes to endeavor a stu dent-centered Socratic methods class. For starters, many teachers  will not find adequate examples in their own histories as students  to inform their practice as teachers. This can leave teachers in an  exploratory mode, and, unsure of the benefits or values of semi nar, they only try one once in a while. Since seminar methods are  most valuable developed over time, sampling them unsystemati cally will not reveal their true potential or value. Classroom Management Even when teachers are able use seminars on a regular basis,  many issues arise. Concerns about making connections to district  or state standards face most teachers, especially those in par ticular years when standardized tests are administered. Related  to this is the concern about relinquishing the reins of authority.  Giving up control of the classroom and taking a back seat to the  proceedings can be scary even for veteran teachers. Seminar methods rely heavily on questions, starting with a great  deal of importance placed on the opening question. With many  teachers experiencing the unpleasant silence that follows a con fusing or poorly phrased question, the idea of an entire seminar's  success being contingent on asking "good" questions can be  intimidating. Add to this a typical restriction that the facilitator's  role is to just ask questions and the pressure can be too much. Even when a teacher can make sufficient connections to the cur riculum and is confident in his or her own ability to ask questions,  there are still issues with the students and how they partici pate. Some students will attempt to dominate the conversation,  while others may not speak at all. Some students will search for  opportunities to argue a point just for the sake of arguing, while  others will struggle to voice their opinions. Some students will  cite the text effectively, while others will tell loosely connected  anecdotes. Teachers will want to track and manage student par ticipation, but this process can be very time consuming. Seminar methods are often about developing critical thinking  and reading skills and these both raise issues about assessment.  Trying to measure the quality of a student's thinking or speaking  skills is not only difficult, but may seem remarkably arbitrary  as well. Many questions arise: When is a comment "good"? Are  questions worth more than statements? What about a comment  that at first seems off task and irrelevant but leads to the most  fruitful dialogue in the entire seminar? How does talking a lot  compare to listening well? These and other questions make  assessment extremely complicated. Curriculum Connections For many teachers, the biggest challenge to using studentcentered Socratic methods will be in making connections to a  required curriculum. Since seminars attempt to pass responsibil ity over to the students and their interests, specific curriculum 

The Socratic Method 92 goals can be difficult to achieve. If possible, the easiest way to  use seminar methods is to find shared goals and purposes, such  as critical thinking, critical reading, cooperative learning, and  so on. According to Copeland 2005 "Critical reading, critical  thinking, discussion skills, listening skills, team-building skills,  vocabulary improvement, and student ownership are all valid  reasons for including Socratic circles in the classroom" p. 3. If  these goals are also part of the mandatory curriculum, then the  seminars themselves can be the focus, rather than the content,  freeing teachers to use whatever texts will inspire the students.  When student-centered Socratic methods cannot be the goal in  and of themselves, they can be connected to a curriculum. Relinquishing the Reins As Tredway 1995 indicated, the process of letting go makes  many teachers feel like the discussion might not have enough  direction. Students, though, do not often get opportunities in  school to dialog about issues that concern them, so they often  eagerly embrace seminars. When anchored by a text and with  clear seminar expectations, students can stay focused on the con versation quite easily. A teacher wishing to try a student-centered Socratic method  should be prepared to give up a lot of control of the dialogue.  This should not be confused with classroom authority that has  to do with enforcing school rules, etc. It may be tempting at  times for seminar teachers to interject with the correct answer,  but this undermines the whole idea of the seminar being studentcentered. This is perhaps why some programs recommend that  the teacher only ask questions. Teachers should let the students discover meaning for them selves, even if it means suffering through long, awkward  pauses. By letting go of the reins, the teacher sets up a situation  in which the students are actively engaged and doing the work  of thinking. Asking QuestionsFacilitating Relinquishing the reins and letting the students do all the work  is one thing, but keeping them actively engaged is another. As  Ball and Brewer 2000 pointed out, seminars are great for block  periods of 60-90 minutes since conversations about texts can pro ductively fill the time. But the idea of keeping students engaged  in a single conversation for that long can be intimidating, espe cially to teachers who do not feel clever enough or spontaneous  enough to ask fruitful questions. Effective facilitation starts with quality text selection and pre paring powerful opening questions. Sometimes these alone are  enough for entire seminars. Other times, the opening questions  fall flat or fizzle out and more are needed. Simple follow-up  questions such as, "Why?" and "Where in the text makes you  say that?" can work miracles for almost any teacher. Not only  do follow-up questions extend dialogue, but they force students  to dig deeper as well. Some teachers may find that many of their  questions are too similar. Moeller and Moeller 2002 suggested  teachers use three types of questions, factual, interpretation and  evaluation, to help create more variety. In terms of facilitating, teachers must first remember to stick to  the standard rules of their school and classroom. Misbehavior  is misbehavior in and out of seminars. As mentioned earlier,  teachers in seminar should be careful about providing answers,  but they should also be mindful of making procedural com ments, such as, "We should move on now." Comments like this  can imply to the students that there really is a specific goal in  mind for the seminar. In the beginning, however, students may  need nudging as they get stuck on repeating ideas, telling long  anecdotes or debating. Teachers should gently intervene in the  beginning, but over time should pass those responsibilities over  to the students. Participation From the teacher's perspective, tracking and managing student  participation is important in reflecting on the success of the sem inar and in student assessment. Studies on students' preferences  for course attributes indicate students prefer classes that rely less  on lecture and more on participatory engagement through class  activities and related experiences OConnor, 2013. A seminar  may fall flat because the opening question was poorly phrased,  because certain students dominated the conversation, because  students didn't cite the text enough, or numerous other reasons.  Many teachers use a simple tracking system of making tally  marks whenever a student participates. Ball and Brewer 2000  and Copeland 2005 included more complicated systems of tal lying types of contributions. From a student's perspective, participation can be intimidating,  since it involves so many possible tasks: reading, annotating, lis tening, citing, reasoning, speaking and more. For students who  are concrete thinkers, open-ended dialogue in a seminar can  seem like a whirlwind of activity without clear goals. Clarifying  student roles, therefore, becomes extremely important. Daniels  1994 created specific job sheets that delineate concrete tasks,  such as "illustrator," "scene setter," and "summarizer," for stu dents in Literature Circles that can be used in seminars. Ball and  Brewer 2000 proposed four categories of student responsibil ity, along with specific descriptions. Moeller and Moeller 2002  also provide job sheets that help to clarify student roles. Assessment  Grading Tracking participation is primarily quantitative, whereas assess ment and grading are more qualitative. Like any assessment that  strives to measure quality, assessing a seminar can be difficult.  Teachers should decide if they want to assess individual students  or not. Because seminars often supplement and enhance other  curricula, some teachers simply grade the seminar itself and not  students themselves. The individual grades are instead produced  from quizzes, tests, papers and so on. No single method is compre hensive, so many teachers use a variety of techniques, including  rubrics, self-assessments, classroom disposition checklists, obser vations, note taking, writing assignments, and follow-up projects.

The Socratic Method 93 Terms  Concepts Dialogic Instruction: A method where the students and the  teacher create meaning together around a central text, issue or  idea. Fishbowl Dialogue: A classroom dialogue method with an inner  and outer circle, where only the inner circle may speak. The  outer circle participants may enter the inner circle to speak using  various procedures. Junior Great Books Seminar: A classroom dialogue method  using the principles and structure created by the Great Books  Foundation. Harkness Table: A classroom dialogue method around an oval  table Harkness table developed at Phillips Exeter academy. Literature Circle: A classroom dialogue method where students  are assigned concrete jobs in order to facilitate participation. Paideia Seminar: A classroom dialogue method using the prin ciples and structure created by the National Paideia Center. Seminar: The term used in this paper to generically describe  student-centered Socratic methods. Socratic Circles: A classroom dialogue method with an inner and  outer circle, where only the inner circle may speak. The outer  circle participants typically observe and assess the inner circle  participants and help to reflect on the seminar. Socratic Seminar: A classroom dialogue method where the  teacher attempts to become an equal participant and shares  responsibility for the quality of the seminar with the students. Bibliography Adler, M. J. 1982. The Paideia proposal. New York:  MacMillan. Ball, H. W.  Brewer, P. 2000. Socratic seminars in the  block. Larchmont, NY: Eye on Education, Inc. Billings, L.  Roberts, T. 2006. Planning, practice, and  assessment in the seminar classroom. High School  Journal, 90 1, 1-8. Retrieved October 23, 2007 from  EBSCO Online Database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN22557951siteehost-live Copeland, M. 2005. Socratic circles: Fostering critical and  creative thinking in middle and high school. Portland,  ME: Stenhouse Publishers. Daniels, H. 1994. Literature circles: Voice and choice in  the student-centered classroom. York, ME: Stenhouse  Publishers. Educational Leadership, 53 1, 26-29. Retrieved October 23,  2007 from EBSCO Online Database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN9509246479siteehost-live Gorry, J. 2011. Cultures of learning and learning culture:  Socratic and Confucian approaches to teaching and  learning. Learning  Teaching 1755-2273, 43, 4-18.  Retrieved December 19, 2013, from EBSCO Online  Database Education Source Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN78163193 siteehost-live Moeller, J. V.  Moeller, V. M. 2002. Socratic seminars  and literature circles for middle and high school English.  Larchmont, NY: Eye on Education, Inc. O'Connor, K. J. 2013. Class participation: Promoting inclass student engagement. Education, 1333, 340-344.  Retrieved December 20, 2013, from EBSCO Online  Database Education Source Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN88141902 siteehost-live Schneider, J. 2013. Remembrance of things past: A history  of the Socratic method in the United States. Curriculum  Inquiry, 435, 613-640. Retrieved December 19, 2013,  from EBSCO Online Database Education Source  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN91914714siteehost-live  Strong, M. 1997. The habit of thought: From Socratic semi nars to Socratic practice. Chapel Hill, NC: New View  Publications. Tredway, L. 1995. Socratic seminars: Engaging students in  intellectual discourse. Zeiderman, H. 1989. A guide for leading discussions using  touchstones, Volume I. Annapolis, MD: Touchstones. Suggested Reading Adler, M. J. 1983. Paideia problems and possibilities. New  York: MacMillan. Adler, M. J. 1984. The Paideia program. New York:  MacMillan. Armstrong, H. W. 1995. Study is hard work. Jaffrey, NH:  David R. Godine, Publisher.

The Socratic Method 94 Bloom, B. S. 1956. Taxonomy of educational objectives. New  York: David McKay. Boghossian, P. 2006. Socratic pedagogy, critical thinking,  and inmate education. Journal of Correctional Education,  57 1, 42-63. Retrieved October 28, 2007 from EBSCO  Online Database Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhA N20990642siteehost-live Carter, M.  Holden, J. 1997. The Paideia seminar: A con structivist approach to discussion. Teaching and Change,  5 1, 32-49. Garlikov, R. The Socratic method: teaching by asking instead  of by telling. Retrieved July 30, 2007, from http:www. garlikov.comSocx005F;Meth.html. Garlikov, R. Teaching effectively: Helping students absorb and  assimilate material. Retrieved July 30, 2007, from http: www.garlikov.comteachingabsorb.html. Kasachkoff, T. Ed. 1998. In the Socratic tradition: Essays  on teaching philosophy. Lanham, MD: Rowman   Littlefield Publishers, Inc. Postman, N.  Weingartner, C. 1969. Teaching as a subver sive activity. New York: Dell Publishing. Silberman, M. 1996. Active learning: 101 strategies to teach  any subject. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. Essay by Charles Fischer, M.Ed. Charles Fischer has been a teacher in both public and private schools in a variety of settings, from rural Maine to inner city Atlanta. He  has worked with a wide range of students from 4th grade to AP English, including special needs and gifted  talented. In his spare time  he likes to write poetry, travel the world, and attend unusual professional development workshops.
Reflective Teaching Abstract Reflective teaching or practice is defined as "the thoughtful con sideration and questioning of what we teachers do, what works  and what doesn't, and what premises and rationales underlie our  teaching and that of others" Hubball, Collins, and Pratt, 2005,  p. 60. McApline and Weston 2000 state that expanding one's  knowledge through reflection increases one's ability to develop  as a teacher. Dewey identified three attitudes that facilitate  reflection: open-mindedness, responsibility, and wholehearted ness. Teachers can use a variety of methods to promote reflection  both in their professional lives and in their classrooms. Overview Reflective teaching has become a focus of interest and a power ful movement in teacher education. The complexity of teaching  requires teachers to question their practices for their own profes sional development in order to improve and to increase learner  performance Taole, 2012. The ability to reflect correlates with a  person's ability to reason logically Ostorga, 2006. Parsons and  Stephenson 2005 see critical reflection as a crucial part of the  complex activity of teaching. Teachers can make sound pedagog ical decisions, "if reflective thinking becomes a habit of the mind  based on specific epistemic views that promote its development"  p. 19. One's epistemological worldview, or an individual's system  of values and beliefs about the nature and acquisition of knowl edge, defines attitudes about teaching Ostoga, 2006; Schraw   Olafson, 2002. Through reflection, teachers can examine the  how and what of their teaching "by examining the underlying  premises on which they base their work" Hubball, Collins,   Pratt, 2005, p. 59. They can "reconstruct experiences," attending  to features of a situation and assigning new significance to them"  to make sense out of that which may no longer work within the  classroom Yusko, 2004. As Brookfield 1995 points out, "We  can stand outside ourselves and come to a clearer understanding  of what we do and who we are by freeing ourselves of distorted  ways of reasoning and acting" p. 214. History Reflective teaching or practice has its roots in the Enlightenment  era. John Dewey, an early-20th century educational philosopher,  was one of the first theorists in the United States to see teachers  as reflective practitioners who could reform education Zeichner   Liston, 1996. For Dewey, the purpose of reflective practice  is to change teachers' classroom practices or actions. Teachers  begin the process of reflection when they experience "a difficult,  troublesome event or experience that cannot be immediately  resolved" Zeichner  Liston, 1996, p. 8. Because of teachers'  concern about their practice, they analyze the experience. Abstract Overview History Reasons for Reflection Dewey's Attitudes Promoting Reflection Mezirow's Qualitative Aspects of Reflection Ganor's Problematizing Model Applications Reflective Activities Student Reflection Reflective Journaling Rubrics Actions of Reflective Teachers Conclusion Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Reflective Teaching 96 In the early 1980's, reflective practice began to appear in lit erature about teaching and learning Eryaman, 2007. Donald  Schon 1983 wrote widely about reflective practice, highlight ing its use in fields besides education, such as architecture and  medicine. Education theorist David Kolb 1984 promotes  reflection, viewing it as a necessary part of engaging the learner.  Psychotherapist Carl Rogers 1982 states that reflection is  appropriate to enhance self-discovery; he views self-discovery  as the only learning which significantly influences behavior. In  1986, educational philosopher Lev Vygotsky promoted reflec tion, as reflection helps students make connections between  themselves and the world around them. Sociologist C. Wright  Mills describes the three types of teachers who do or do not pro mote reflection. 	 Vulgar believers are not invested in reflection and are  not interested in listening to opposing views or analyzing  their own beliefs in any reflective way. 	 Sophisticated believers are interested in knowing about  opposing viewpoints, but only so they can argue against  others' positions. They do not see that their belief systems  may be flawed. 	 Critical believers are open to opposing views, understand ing that they may have weaknesses in their own thinking,  and are strengthened by different beliefs as cited in Valli,  1993. Reasons for Reflection McApline and Weston 2000 state that expanding one's knowl edge through reflection increases one's ability to develop as a  teacher. Schon 1983 promotes the idea of reflection by explain ing that the time when reflection occurs can have an impact on  the level of reflection. Teachers who regularly reflect do so for  many reasons. They reflect on: 	 The assumptions underlying teaching and learning; 	 The appropriateness of their instructional decisions; 	 Improving actions in a particular course; 	 Generalized knowledge or approaches to teaching; andor 	 Cognitive awareness of their reflective processes McAlp ine, Weston, Bethiaume,  Fairbank-Roch, 2004, p. 342. Dewey's Attitudes Promoting Reflection Dewey 1933 states that the function of reflection is "to trans form a situation in which there is experienced obscurity, doubt,  conflict, disturbance of some sort, into a situation that is clear,  coherent, settled and harmonious p. 100-101. He proposes  three attitudes that promote reflection: 	 Open-mindedness, 	 Responsibility, and 	 Wholeheartedness. Open-Mindedness Open-mindedness is the most important attitude of reflection and  is defined as the ability to remain open to multiple, alternative  ideas Parsons  Stephenson, 2005. While teachers may have  certain values and beliefs about how students learn, those who  are open-minded are aware that there is no one right way to teach.  Schon 1983 states that professionals need the "capacity to hold  several ways of looking at things at once without disrupting the  flow of inquiry" as they experiment with different problems p.  130. Open-mindedness leads "to a plurality of ways of notic ing, understanding and working towards improving practice and  policy" Ghaye, 2005, p. 182. Teachers are also open-minded  when they can listen to and accept strengths and weaknesses of  their perspectives Zeichner  Liston, 1996. Responsibility Another attitude that promotes reflection is responsibility. To  Dewey 1933, being a responsible teacher means intention ally reflecting upon one's actions to bring about improvements  in practice. Before they act, teachers reflect carefully about the  consequences to which action might lead them Zeichner and  Liston, 1996. They realize that there are consequences to teach ing personal consequences, academic consequences, and socio political consequences Valli, 1993. Ideally, students learn  that the best leaders inspire trust among followers by listening  to them, understanding them, and serving as mentors and role  models Chih-ling, 2013. Wholeheartedness Wholeheartedness, the third attitude proposed by Dewey 1933,  is the commitment to pursuing something worthwhile -in this  case, reflection Ghaye, 2005. Teachers who are wholehearted  in their reflection have attitudes that include the desire to learn  something new through their reflections Valli, 1993. Mezirow's Qualitative Aspects of Reflection Mezirow 1991 has categorized reflective thinking into qualita tive aspects of reflection; this leveling of reflection is called the  taxonomy of reflective thought. One category is non-reflective  action, which is considered superficial in nature. Within the  category of non-reflective action is habitual action. In habitual  action, a learned action is performed automatically, with little or  no reflective or conscious thought involved. Thoughtful action  includes prior knowledge, but there is no reflective appraisal of  this prior knowledge. Through introspection, one is aware of  feelings about learned actions Parsons  Stephenson, 2005. The second category of qualitative aspects of reflection is reflec tive action. Here, reflection begins through content reflection,  process reflection and contentprocess reflection. Through con tent reflection, the person reflects upon perceptions, thoughts,  feelings or actions. Through process reflection, reflection is on  the processes of perceiving, thinking, feeling, or acting. Content process reflection is a combination of both types of reflective  action Meziron, 1991; Parsons and Stephenson, 2005. Prem ise reflection is one's awareness of the reasons behind one's 

Reflective Teaching 97 perceptions, thoughts, feelings and actions. Often called critical  reflection, this is the highest level of reflective thought. Ganor's Problematizing Model Ganor 2005 proposes yet another reflective model that includes  problematizing, to ask questions and critique more deeply the  issue at hand, whatever that issue might be. By problematizing,  teachers respond "to the complexity of teaching and place value  on the way in which teachers reflect upon the questions they  have about their teaching" p. 52. Ganor 2005 has outlined  several patterns of reflection: 	 Unproblemized reflection: This type of reflection  focuses only on the practical strategies in which teachers  engage, with only superficial discussion about issues and  assumptions about teaching. 	 Problematized reflection: This type of reflection pro motes the idea that teachers have the insight to under stand student demographics, as well as the social and po litical conditions of the community, that could impact and  influence students' lives and successes in schools. This  type of reflection promotes the confrontation of existing  beliefs and a transition to newfound insights. 	 Critically problematized reflection: This type of reflec tion creates fundamental change in thinking that results  in radically different practice. Reflection can result in  innovative action that impacts the greater educational  community p. 56. Hubball, Collins, and Pratt 2005 state that there are several ele ments that facilitate reflection: 	 Those reflecting must be provided a structure or some  guidance for those engaging in reflection, that there must  be "an explicit rationale and criteria for critical analysis." 	 There must be integrative, reflective activities, with ongo ing reflection as part of a larger commitment to reflection. 	 Reflection should be "authentically related" to teachers'  actual teaching contexts. 	 Reflection can be individual, but collaborating with oth ers will enhance "a contextually-bound process." 	 Those involved in reflection must understand that there  are varying degrees of interest in different reflective  activities; some prompts may be more stimulating to one  person as opposed to another p. 62. Applications Reflective Activities Reiman 1999 suggests that there needs to be "guided reflective  frameworks" p. 603, or explicit prompts that help those reflect ing upon their practice to regulate and monitor their cognition  Schraw, 1998. Other reflective activities include: 	 Developmental portfolios, 	 Action research, 	 Writing educational philosophy statements, and 	 Telling stories within teacher dialogue groups Ganor,  2005. Brookfield 1995 outlines six additional points of entry for  teachers to enter in self-reflection: 	 Teaching Logs: Recording weekly events of teachers'  lives that have impressed themselves most vividly on  their consciousness. 	 Teacher Learning Audits: Responding to questions that  are expressly designed to probe how the teachers have  changed over the previous 12 months. 	 Role Model Profiles: Talking to colleagues that teach ers admire and outlining their qualities and abilities that  could be emulated. 	 Survival Advice Menus: Advising future teachers about  how they can survive in a job such as their own. 	 Videotaping: Viewing one's own teaching to see how  much teacher talk occurs instead of student talk. 	 Peer Observation: Inviting colleagues to view their  teaching p. 72. Student Reflection Teaching students to reflect is also a strategy used within the  classroom, as a means of helping students reach their full est potential Easley, 2006. Dewey 1933 sees reflection as  an education experience that fosters purposeful and meaning ful learning. Hubbs and Brand 2005 state that reflection can  "actively engage students with content in an intensely personal  way" p. 61. To Kolb 1984, reflective journaling within the  classroom can create learning conditions that result in meaning ful and purposeful learning. Students must be taught about the  purposes of reflection and the importance of self-knowledge in  learning. Kerka 1996 states that students who are reflecting  must trust the reader of their reflections, must be provided clear  expectations and must receive quality feedback. Reflective Journaling Reflective journaling is used as a tool for reflection. Seen as a  versatile strategy that can be used by students and teachers alike,  journaling can also be used for in-class learning activities that can  stimulate learners to link critical class concepts to reflective think ing. Reflective journals are defined as "written documents used  to stimulate learners to increase their awareness of their beliefs,  values, and practices" Billings and Kowalski, 2006, p. 104. Boud 

Reflective Teaching 98 2001 views journaling as a pedagogical device that can be used  to extract meaning from events and experiences in the classroom,  as well as to enhance writing and critical thinking skills. Journal ing becomes "a questioning attitude" Moon, 1999, p. 189. The  key advantage to journaling is "the ability to prompt learners to  think critically and process information in the affective domain, as  well as cognitively" Billings and Kowalski, 2006, p. 104. Reflec tive journaling can lead students through a transformative process,  as they move towards learning new material. Rubrics If journals are used to enhance reflection among students, rubrics  can be used to assess them. Rubrics are grading criteria given  to students at the time of the assignment. Sections on the rubric  can measure judgments about the depth of thought of journal  content; the completeness of entries; the relationship of course  concepts to the entries; as well as the connection between theory  and practice Billings  Kowalski, 2006. Lyons 2006 suggests  that there are five potential outcomes of sustained reflection.  They include: performing a defined action, based on reflections;  preparing systematically to reflect more; acting to deliberate in  an intentional fashion; knowing what we are about when we act,  and constructing meaning p. 154. Actions of Reflective Teachers Zeichner and Liston 1996 state that reflective teachers act in  specific ways. Reflective teachers: 	 Examine, frame, and attempt to solve the dilemmas of  classroom practice; 	 Are aware of and question the assumptions and values  they bring to teaching; 	 Are attentive to the institutional and cultural contexts in  which they teach; 	 Take part in curriculum development and are involved in  school change efforts; and, 	 Take responsibility for their own professional develop ment p. 6. Journaling Journaling is reflective in nature and can be used by teachers  within the classroom as a learner-centered assessment tool.  Teachers can use journaling for students to reflect within so that  the teachers can determine if and how students are understand ing content. Students can also reflect upon their understanding of  content by self-assessing where they need to devote more time  on a particular content area. Teachers can also use journaling  for formative assessment, as journaling entries can reveal insight  through student responses so that teachers can construct ques tions or future assignments. There are downsides to journaling,  as journaling can be perceived as busywork. Also teachers can  be disappointed in the level of reflection that students may place  in the assignment; reading journals also takes time on the part of  the teacher Angelo  Cross, 1993. Electronic Versions of Journaling Most recently, reflective journaling has taken the form of elec tronic media web logs or blogs. Blogs are postings on the web  that appear in reverse chronological order. They can be personal  or public in nature. Teachers may move to require reflective  journals to take the form of web blogs, as there is a time stamp  posted on each entry. The blogs are easily accessible, as they  only require a computer instead of many unwieldy notebooks.  Bouldin, Holmes, and Fortenberry 2006 state that teachers  must set guidelines for blogging that include expectations and  descriptions of journal prompts and ways to respect one another  as they share their responses. Assessment of Reflective Journals Journals can be assessed through frequency of postings, clarity of  writing, and relevancy of entries. Rouldin, Holmes, and Forten berry 2006 state that entries should be "thoughtful, engaged,  and relevant to course content" p. 2. Reflective Engagement Lyons 2006 defines reflective engagement as: a deliberate and intentional act of interrupting, or suspending,  one's teaching processes to interrogate or inquire into them sys tematically and to heighten one's conscious awareness of one's  practices and of one's students and then using that conscious ness to redirct one's practice and actually acting to change p.  166. Those teachers who are involved in these acts of inquiry may  reflect alone or with others to promote change in the classroom.  Change may include teaching students in a new way about con cepts or processes. Conclusion Reflective teaching or practice is challenging, as reflection  is often a struggle to begin and maintain. Reflective analysis  enables teachers to make appropriate instructional decisions;  however, the skills to make such analysis may take instruc tion and experience, and, therefore elude many pre-service  and novice teachers Thomas  Packer, 2013. Ostorga 2006  states that novices in reflection often do not understand their  own beliefs, values and attitudes about teaching or possess the  cognitive ability to reflect effectively. Often in teacher educa tion programs, novices reflect superficially. Boud and Walker  1998 state that novice reflections often are "diffuse and dispa rate in their reflections so that conclusions or outcomes may  not emerge" 897. Reflection has also become a buzzword or  catch-all term, as those in teaching may not clearly understand  the role of reflection in their professional lives Brookfield,  1995. Those who are "required" to reflect may be very uncom fortable with sharing ideas that they may consider to be too  superficial, particularly if they do not understand the value of  or purpose to reflection.

Reflective Teaching 99 NCATE, the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Edu cation, promotes reflection as an important element of teacher  education programs. Reflection on one's teaching is "likely to  raise the question of how one teaches and, in the end, to have a  positive effect on the improvement of teaching" Hubball, Col lins, and Pratt, 2005, p. 60. Ghaye 2005 states that through  the practice of reflection, teachers and students alike can learn  "to appreciate the successful aspects of our work, no matter how  small, and the practical wisdom that led to them" p. 182. Terms  Concepts Academic Consequences of Reflection: Valli 1993 states that  academic consequences of reflection are "the effects of one  teaching on pupils' intellectual development" p. 11. Blogs: A blog or web log is a website where entries are writ ten in chronological order and posted by time stamps. Recently,  blogs have been a source for posting reflective journal entries. Formative Assessment: Formative assessment is a form of assess ment that provides for immediate evidence of student learning in  a particular course or at a particular point in a program. For mative assessment improves the quality of student learning and  should not be evaluative or involve grading students. By infor mally evaluating students during a lesson, the teacher can gain  an understanding of what the students know or can do, based on  instruction to that point in the lesson Personal Consequences of Reflection: Valli 1993 states that  personal consequences of reflection are "the effects of one's  teaching on pupil self-concepts" p. 11. What one teaches  impacts student self-discovery. Rubrics: Rubrics are documents that explicitly state the crite ria for student work. They are developed through gradations of  criteria that are specific and detailed. They generally appear in  chart form. Self-Discovery: Self-discovery is the act or process of achieving  understanding or knowledge of oneself through reflection. SocioPolitical Consequences of Reflection: Valli 1993 states  that sociopolitical consequences of reflection are "the projected  efforts of one's teaching on the life changes of various students"  p. 11. Bibliography Angelo, T.,  Cross, K. 1993. Classroom assessment tech niques: A handbook for college teachers. San Franscisco:  Jossey Bass. Billings, D.,  Kowalski, K. 2006. Journaling: A strategy for  developing reflective practitioners. Journal of Continuing  Education in Nursing, 37, 104-105. Retrieved December  14, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database Education  Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.asp x?directtruedbehhAN24945288siteehost-live Boud, D. 2001. Using journal writing to enhance reflective  process. New Directions: Adult Continuing Education, 90,  9-17. Retrieved December 13, 2007 from EBSCO Online  Database Academic Search Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedba9hAN9178941 siteehost-live Boud, D.,  Walker, D. 1998. Promoting reflection in pro fessional courses: The challenge of context. Studies in  Higher Education, 23 2, 191-206. Retrieved December  13, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database Academic Search  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedba9hAN823484siteehost-live Brookfield, S. 1995. Becoming a critically reflective teacher.  San Francisco: Jossey Bass. Chih-ling, T. 2013. Teaching with Heart. Bized, 125, 41-43.  Retrieved December 19, 2013, from EBSCO Online  Database Education Source Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN90262493 siteehost-live Dewey, J. 1983. Experience and education. New York:  Simon and Schuster. Dewey, J. 1983. How we think: A restatement of the relation  of reflective thing in the educative process. New York,  NY: D.C. Heath. Easley, D. 2006. Mirror, mirror on the wall. Techniques:  Connecting Education and Careers, 81 4, 36-38.  Retrieved December 14, 2007 from EBSCO Online  Database Academic Search Premier. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbaphAN20372303 siteehost-live Eryaman, M. 2007. From reflective practice to practical  wisdom: Towards a post-foundational teacher education.  International Journal of Progressive Education, 3 1,  1-36. Retrieved December 14, 2007 from EBSCO Online  Database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN243 39774siteehost-live Genor, M. 2005. A social reconstructionist framework for  reflection: The "problematizing" of teaching. Issues in  Teacher Education, 14 2, 45-62. Retrieved December 14,  2007 from EBSCO Online Database Education Research 

Reflective Teaching 100 Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN18535513siteehost-live Ghaye, T. 2005. Reflection as a catalyst for change.  Reflective Practice, 6 2, 177-187. Retrieved December  14, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database Academic Search  Premier. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtru edbaphAN17485315siteehost-live Hubball, H., Collins, J.,  Pratt, D. 2005. Enhancing reflec tive teaching practices: Implications for faculty develop mental programs. Canadian Journal of Higher Education,  35 3, 57-81. Retrieved December 14, 2007 from EBSCO  Online Database Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhA N20815234siteehost-live Hubbs, C.,  Brand, C. 2005. The paper mirror:  Understanding reflective journaling. Journal of  Experiential Education, 28 1, 60-71. Retrieved  December 14, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database  Academic Search Premier. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbaphAN18144468siteeh ost-live Kerka, S. 1996. Journal writing and adult learning  Report No. EDO-CE-96-174.  Washington, DC: Office  of Educational Research and Improvement. ERIC  Document Reproduction Service No. ED399413. Kolb, D. 1984. Experiential learning: Experience as the  source of learning and development.  Englewood Cliffs,  NJ: Prentice Hall. Lyons, N. 2006 April. Reflective engagement as professional  development in the lives of university teachers. Teachers  and Teaching: Theory and Practice, 12,  151-168. McAlpine, L.,  Weston, C. 2000. Reflection: Issues related  to improving professors' teaching and students' learn ing. Instructional Science, 28 56, 363-385. Retrieved  December 13, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN16980101sit eehost-live McAlpine, L., Weston, C., Berthiaume, D.,  Fairbank-Roch,  G. 2004. Reflection on teaching: Types and goals of  reflection. Educational Research and Evaluation, 10 46, 337-363. Retrieved December 14, 2007 from EBSCO  Online Database Academic Search Premier. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbaphAN158 89574siteehost-live Mezerow, J. 1990. Fostering critical reflection in adulthood.   Boston: Wiley, John and Sons. Moon, J. 1999. Reflection in learning and professional devel opment: Theory and practice.  London: Kogan. Ostorga, A. 2006. Developing teachers who are reflective  practitioners: A complete process. Issues in Teacher  Education, 15 2, 5-20. Retrieved December 14, 2007  from EBSCO Online Database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN23587359siteehost-live Parsons, M.,  Stephenson, M. 2005. Developing reflec tive practice in student teachers: Collaboration and criti cal partnerships. Teachers and Teaching, 11 1, 95-116.  Retrieved December 14, 2007 from EBSCO Online  Database Academic Search Premier. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN16295812 siteehost-live Raiman, A. 1999. The evolution of the social notetaking and  guided reflection framework in teacher education: Recent  theory and quantitative synthesis of research. Teachers  and Teacher Education, 16,  597-612. Rogers, C. 1982. Now I am only interested in learning. In R.  Gross Ed. Invitation to life-long learning  pp. 222-225.  Chicago, IL: Follett. Schon, D. 1983. The reflective practitioner.  New York:  Basic Books. Schraw, G. 1999. Promoting general metacognition aware ness. Instructional Science, 26, 113-125. Schraw, G.,  Olafson, L. 2002. Teachers' epistemo logical world views and educational practices. Issues  in Education, 8I 2, 99-148. Retrieved December 13,  2007 from EBSCO Online Database Academic Search  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedba9hAN9750375siteehost-live Taole, M. J. 2012. Reflective experiences of post graduate  certificate in education students during teaching practice.  Research in Higher Education Journal, 171-11. Retrieved  December 19, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database  Education Source Complete. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbehhAN90440173siteeh ost-live Thomas, S.,  Packer, D. S. 2013. A reflective teaching road  map for pre-service and novice early childhood educa tors. International Journal of Early Childhood Special  Education, 51, 1-14. Retrieved December 19, 2013, from  EBSCO Online Database Education Source Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN91515673siteehost-live

Reflective Teaching 101 Valli, L. 1993. Reflective teacher education programs:  An analysis of case studies. In J. Calderhead Ed.  Conceptualizing Reflection in Teacher Development  pp.  11-22. Albany, NJ: SUNY Press. Vygotsky, L. 1986. Thought and Language.  Cambridge,  MA: MIT Press. Yusko, B. 2004. Promoting reflective teaching conversation:  Framing and reframing the problem. Teacher Education,  15 4, 363-374. Retrieved December 14, 2007 from  EBSCO Online Database Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbe hhAN15493120siteehost-live Zeichner, K.,  Liston, D. 1996. Reflective teaching: An  introduction.  Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Suggested Reading Bouldin, A., Holmes, E.,  Fortenberry, M. 2006.  "Blogging" about course concepts: Using technology  for reflective journaling in a communications class.  American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education, 70 4,  1-8. Retrieved December 14, 2007 from EBSCO Online  Database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN231 85494siteehost-live Dearborn, J. 2006. Reflective teaching, reflective learning.  California English, 12 1, 22-24. Retrieved December 14,  2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete: http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directt ruedbehhAN22573621siteehost-live Ghaye, T. 2006. From private to public writing a reflec tive account? Reflective Practice, 7 1, 1-8. Retrieved  December 14, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database  Academic Search Premier. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbaphAN19651027siteeh ost-live LaBoskey, V. 1995. A conceptual framework for reflection  in preservice teacher education. In J. Calderhead and P.  Cates Eds. Conceptualizing reflection in teacher educa tion  pp. 23-38. Washington, DC: Falmer Press. Lyons, N. 2002. The personal self in a public story. In N.  Lyons and V. LaBoskey Eds. Narrative inquiry in prac tice: Advancing the knowledge of teaching.  pp. 87-100.  New York: Teachers College Press. Noffke, S.,  Brennan, M. 2005. The dimensions of reflec tion: A conceptual and contextual analysis. International  Journal of Progressive Education, 1 3, 16-19. Retrieved December 14, 2007 from EBSCO Online  Database Education Research Complete. http:search. ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN208 62110siteehost-live Singer, J. 2005. Finding and framing teacher research ques tions: Moving from reflective practice to teacher research.  Teaching and Learning, 19 3, 144-155. Retrieved  December 14, 2007 from EBSCO Online Database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN18086584sit eehost-live Essay by Tricia Smith, Ed.D. Dr. Tricia Smith is an assistant professor of English at Fitchburg State College in Fitchburg, Massachusetts and teaches theory and peda gogy courses in English education. She has written several articles on on-line instruction, advising, and collaborative learning. Her other  areas of interest include linguistics and young adult literature.
Lesson Planning Abstract This article presents an overview of lesson planning, an orga nizational tool that provides a strong foundation for novice  teachers and an outline for structuring classroom activities for  seasoned teachers. Basically, there are five major parts to any  lesson: goals or rationale generally connected to state andor  national standards in the content area of study; statement of cen tral content that will be addressed; list of materials to be used;  the sequence of procedures; and, the formative and summative  assessments. Resources for teachers in lesson planning are also  discussed. Overview Lesson planning is the teacher's instructional roadmap, a choreo graphing of a productive instructional plan that could encompass  a day, a week, a month, a semester, or yearlong. Through lesson  planning, teachers decide what content or skills need to be  taught, how they are taught, and how they are assessed. Planning  serves as an organizational tool that may provide a strong foun dation for new teachers. For seasoned teachers, planning acts as  an outline for structuring classroom activities. Long-range planning, intermediate planning and short-range  planning are incorporated into a school year. Long-range plan ning encompasses the yearlong or semester-long plans, which  are generally made up of multiple unit plans. All plans should  be up-to-date in content and reflect research-based strategies.  As with any lesson plan, long-term plans should reflect what a  teacher knows about his or her students and should be free from  bias. Intermediate plans or unit plans cover a larger topic and outline  a series of individual lessons that are carried out in relation to  that topic. Unit plans are more detailed and can be made up of  many lessons. There are many types of unit plans that are used  in today's classroom, including resource units, those plans that  are packaged units prepared by the state education department,  special interest groups, government agencies, or book publish ers. Teaching units are those units that are prepared for a specific  student body. Teachers are flexible in developing and modifying  teaching units, and allow for "teachable moments," those spon taneous teaching moments when a classroom event happens and  immediate follow-up and discussion is necessary. Subject matter  units are linear in nature, as students must master one piece of the  content before moving on to the next. Experience units include  the evolution of one lesson to the next, as teachers decide the  next lesson based on the experience of what happens in a lesson  in progress. Integrated units are often used in elementary schools  and combine study across the curriculum. Abstract Overview Applications Assessment Differentiating Lessons Developing Objectives Motivating Students Sequence of Procedures  Activities Further Insights Backwards Design Children Develop at Own Pace DAP Direct Instruction Informal Presentations, or Mini-Lessons Structure Discovery Model Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Lesson Planning 103 Short-range lesson plans are those plans that are prepared for  one or more class periods and focus on specific content or skills.  Lessons can be planned using curriculum guides, or frameworks,  that prescribe to teachers what the state or school district wants  students to know at different times in their educational lives.  Resource units can be helpful in developing lesson plans; text books and non-print material also are useful sources in planning  lessons. Many teachers work in teams to develop plans, sharing  objectives, materials and instructional ideas. There are many benefits to lesson planning. Planning provides  a sequence to the classroom activities and directs classroom  experiences in a positive way. Pupils are motivated by proper  planning, and they learn best from planning practices that include  the formulation of clear plans and examples that move from the  simple to the complex. Thorough lesson plans include provisions  for individual student differences. Historically, an earliest form of lesson planning was evident in  the 1820's as monitors served as instructors in small classrooms  across the United States. Teachers taught their lesson plans to  bright students who then taught these lessons to their peers. The  lessons were structured and included rote memory of reading,  writing and arithmetic. Lesson planning further evolved when  the monitorial system shifted to a recitation model in the latter  part of the 19th century. To enhance the recitation model, teach ers focused on their lesson planning and organization of the  classroom. Teachers focused on personal contact between the  teacher and the student, with a greater emphasis on teacher train ing. The lesson plan became structured, becoming one of the  most important activities in teacher practice Linne, 2001. At the beginning of the 20th century, lesson planning further  evolved to include the study of literature, mathematics, biol ogy, and psychology. Lesson planning took on a more prominent  role in directing teacher practice, as mass education developed  during the industrial revolution. Most recently, there have been  societal factors that have influenced lesson planning in Ameri can classrooms. International and national events have brought  curriculum changes involving lesson planning. With the Soviet  launching of Sputnik, the first satellite into space, in 1957, cur ricula changed as government officials noted that American  students were lagging behind others in science and mathematics.  As a result, science instruction shifted from mere rote memory of  facts to a problem-solving model. Rapid growth in the teaching  of technology has also affected lesson planning. Political and economic changes in social science also impacted  lesson planning, as teachers rushed to include knowledge about  the changing venues in Eastern Europe, Asia, and Africa. Scores  on standardized tests began to decline as students grasped for  new knowledge. As a result, teacher education standardized pro ficiency tests appeared in states across America. Teachers also  began focusing on individual learners and their instructional  needs in daily lesson planning to accommodate the No Child  Left Behind Act 2001. In the late 1990's, Wiggins and McTighe  1998 developed the "Backwards Design" model. Backwards  Design is a standards-based format for developing lesson plans  and units that are driven by outcomes rather than activities. Lesson plans can be influenced by many elements. Different  teachers may focus on select elements that they deem important  in planning lessons for their students. For instance, elementary  school teachers may focus on the context of teaching, choosing  activities that will interest and involve their students. Secondary  education teachers may focus on content, presenting knowledge  in interesting ways. Special education teachers may focus on  their students' individual goals written in an Individual Edu cational Plan IEP. Plans can also be affected by a teacher's  educational beliefs or philosophy or the classroom's diversity  Cooper, 2006. There are basically two typical models of planning. In one model,  a teacher decides what knowledge is important to teach, based on  standards; selects the activities or strategies by which students  will learn; and designs the assessments that will determine if stu dents are learning. In the second model, a teacher decides what  knowledge is important to teach, based on standards; designs the  assessments; and selects the strategies. Lesson planning can include any one of three common teach ing approaches: direct instruction, informal presentation often  called mini-lessons, and structured discovery Price  Nelson,  1999. These approaches are guides that teach students in specific  ways in order to attain the specific learning objectives developed  for the lesson. Teachers select among these approaches, based on  their objectives, choosing the model that they determine is the  best way to present material to students. Duplass 2006 suggests that lessons can be planned effectively  by asking certain questions that will aid teachers in developing  challenging lessons: 1.	 What goals and standards are important? 2.	 What background knowledge do students have? 3.	 How long will it take to teach the lesson and what materi als are needed? 4.	 What big ideas are important? 5.	 What processes will enhance learning of basic skills of  the lesson? 6.	 How is the lesson relevant to students' lives? 7.	 What tasks will the students complete? 8.	 How will the lesson be differentiated to meet the needs of  all the students? 9.	 How will the students change in their thinking because of  this lesson plan? Duplass, 2006.

Lesson Planning 104 Lesson planning continues even after the lesson is completed.  Teachers reflect upon their lesson and what worked best. Duplass  2006 states that the next time most lessons are taught, 20 of  the lesson will have been redeveloped based on changes from  reflection. Student achievement and enthusiasm indicates what  parts of the lesson will remain in the next implementation. Lesson planning takes many forms. Basically, there are five major  parts to any lesson. These include: 	 Goals or rationale, generally connected to state andor  national standards in the content area of study 	 Statement of central content that will be addressed 	 List of materials to be used 	 The sequence of procedures; and, 	 The formative and summative assessments Lesson planning can also be sequenced to include other aspects  of information to provide thorough instructional guidelines for  teachers: goals; objectives; state frameworks or professional  standards; connections across the curriculum; materials and time  needed for each section of the lesson; outline of classroom activ ities and choice of strategies; source for motivating students;  key questions; teaching of terms and vocabulary; adaptations for  diverse learners; organization of the classroom; both formative  and summative assessment; and reflection. Other models include  defining the objectives in terms of the cognitive domain, the  affective domain and the psychomotor domain. There are many resources for teachers in the planning of les sons. Colleagues share ideas about what worked well. The  internet offers many resource materials for developing lessons.  The teacher's edition of a textbook offers suggestions for lesson  planning and related ancillary materials offered with textbooks  all offer suggestions for developing strong lessons. Teachers can  also look to their national and state standards for aid in devel oping effective lessons. The Interstate New Teacher Assessment  and Support Consortium INTASC 1992 exhibits the process  of lesson planning in their core standard Principle 7: "The  teacher plans instruction based on knowledge of subject matter,  students, the community and curriculum goals." Applications Assessment An important element of lesson planning is providing for assess ment of the objectives that are outlined as important content and  skills that students must learn. There are two types of assessment:  formative and summative. Formative assessment is the continual  assessment of students during the course of the lesson. These  informal assessments are given throughout the lesson so that  teachers can modify activities and check for understanding. Here,  teachers are interested in determining whether students are grasp ing the lesson while the actual lesson is taking place. Formative  assessment includes observations of performance tasks, skills  checklists, portfolio assessment, conferencing, peer reviews,  writing to learn activities such as journaling, and self-assessment.  Summative assessment is the culminating evaluation of a student.  This form of assessment is that final paper, project or activity that  shows if students have learned the material presented. Differentiating Lessons Differentiating means providing appropriately challenging learn ing experiences for all the students. Teachers should plan lessons  with all students in mind. There are basically three groups of  learners that require differentiating of lessons: those of diverse  cultural or linguistic backgrounds; those who are at-risk, having  problems that could interfere with successful learning; and stu dents with disabilities. However, teachers also can differentiate  lessons based on differences in readiness and interest Tomlin son, 2001. Developing Objectives Objectives are descriptions of learning outcomes. Outcomes  refer to both the anticipated results of the lesson as well as the  general kinds of student outcomes desired in the mode of lesson  planning Uhrmacher, Conrad,  Moroye, 2013. These objec tives clarify exactly what teachers want their students to learn,  providing focus and direction to any lesson. Through use of welldeveloped objectives, teachers are signaling what is important  in the lesson. Bloom's 1956 'Taxonomy of Educational Objec tives' breaks down objectives into three domains: the cognitive,  the affective, and the psychomotor. The cognitive domain of objectives focuses on intellectual  outcomes, specifically understanding of knowledge and devel oping thinking. Generally, this domain encourages objectives that  include elements of: knowledge, comprehension, application,  analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. The affective domain empha sizes feelings and emotions and encompasses students' interests,  attitudes, appreciation, and methods of adjusting. The psychomo tor domain emphasizes motor skills. Another model by Gagne, Briggs and Wager 1992 outlines  different forms of objectives and includes: verbal information,  intellectual skills, cognitive strategies, problem solving, motor  skills, and attitudes objectives. Motivating Students Lesson plans must include strategies for motivating students.  While teachers don't have to do as much to motivate students  who already possess intrinsic motivation an inner need for  interest in learning, teachers do need to provide incentives or  reinforcers to those students who need to be extrinsically moti vated. Orenstein, Lesley, and Mindes 2005 suggest several  ways to motivate all students. They suggest that teachers must: 	 Encourage student interest at the beginning of a lesson 	 Maintain student curiosity and involvement throughout a  lesson

Lesson Planning 105 	 Provide interesting and varied methods to activities 	 Provide active learning experiences 	 Permit student autonomy in organizing their time and  effort, and, 	 Provide choice and alternatives in meeting lesson require ments Sequence of Procedures  Activities Lesson plans include activity planning, or the written description  of exactly what the teacher will do or say to help students learn  content or develop a skill or strategy Price  Nelson, 1999.  There are certain elements that are incorporated into any activity  or procedure sequence. Teachers pre-plan their activities, outlin ing those that will bring about the outcomes that have previously  been outlined in a lesson plan. Part of the pre-planning includes  determining how to motivate students. The next part of the activity sequence is the activity begin ning, where students are prepared for the start of the lesson and  expectations are set up. The activity middle provides a specific  description of what the teacher and students will do. The activity  closing ties up all the elements discussed in the lesson, reviews  major ideas, and discusses future lessons or activities Price   Nelson, 1999. Orenstein  Hunkins 1993 outline criteria for selecting and  organizing appropriate content and activities in lesson plans.  Content should be valid or truthful and carry some significance  by meeting state andor national standards. There must be a bal ance to the content and activities, as students learn general and  specific depth to a lesson. The content and activities must pos sess learnability; in other words, the content and activities must  be in the capacity of students to learn. The lesson must also be  feasible to complete during a certain time frame and materials  and other resources must be readily available. Cruickshank, Bainer-Jenkins, and Metcalf 2003 list over thirty  instructional activities that promote learning, such as academic  games and competition, brainstorming, case studies, classroom  centers of interest, debates, demonstrations, direct instruction,  discovery learning, discussions, drill and practice, field obser vation, field trips, independent study, individualized instruction,  learning modules, mastery learning, oral reports, presentations  and lectures, problem solving, programmed and computerassisted instruction, role playing, simulations, and tutoring. Further Insights Backwards Design Backwards Design is a standards-based format for develop ing lesson plans and units that are driven by outcomes rather  than activities. It is an inquiry-based process to help students  facilitate standards-based inquiry in their classrooms more  effectively. Teachers begin their lesson planning by identifying  specific learning objectives that are connected to state andor  national standards. They create detailed alignments of standards  to assessments and then plan learning experiences and instruc tion. Instead of moving linearly through a series of activities,  teachers make a conscious effort to emphasize particular skills  and knowledge needed to meet specific learning objectives  Hendrickson, 2006. There is a detailed correlation of academic standards to each  activity, with an alignment of an assessment that illustrates  and assesses that activity. Backwards Design stresses this rela tionship between objectives and assessments. Assessments are  critical for monitoring student learning Wiggins  McTighe,  1998. Children Develop at Own Pace DAP DAP is a model of lesson planning for younger children. Devel oped by Sue Bredekamp 1997, this model advocates the  planning of instruction by evaluating knowledge about younger  children to develop daily plans. This model promotes methods  and approaches that are good practice for younger children,  as teachers analyze milestones to develop lessons: physical,  intellectual, and socio-emotional milestones. Steps to planning  lessons within DAP include checking the calendar to see what  impacts the classroom on a daily basis; reviewing program goals  and frameworks; reviewing the developmental milestones of the  age group; choosing sequenced skilled activities that are devel opmentally appropriate; developing a theme for instruction;  checking anecdotal notes and IEPs for special needs students;  and, gathering the materials needed for the activities Petersen,  1996. Direct Instruction Direct instruction is a teaching model or approach for imple menting standards-based instruction. In this model, the teacher  demonstrates the lesson, the teacher works together with the  students to practice the lesson, and then the students practice  the skills by themselves. The students are assessed to deter mine if they have mastered the content or skill. The teacher  is involved in explicit teaching, with the teacher directing the  lesson. Information is presented in small steps, with mastery of  that step before students can move on to the next part of the  lesson. Content that is appropriate for this approach to teach ing includes: basic knowledge, basic skills, strategies, concepts,  class rules, procedures, and social skills Price  Nelson, 1999.  This convergence of important factors includes the right kind  of comprehensible input, a supportive context, large amounts of  time and conducive psychological characteristics e.g., patience,  tolerance of ambiguity, and integrative motivation Morrow,  2013. Informal Presentations, or Mini-Lessons Mini-lessons are those short 15 to 20 minute focused presen tations, whereby teachers deliver information in a clear and  concise way to small or large groups. Teachers need to have  strong knowledge of the topic and often present the material 

Lesson Planning 106 through use of graphic organizers. Mini-lessons are generally  focused on topics that students need to know in order to com plete the activity required in the lesson plan. Structure Discovery Model In this model or approach to teaching, students discover content  or skills rather than having the teacher present it to them. The  teacher pre-determines lesson objectives in their lesson plans  and students satisfy the objectives by working to learn the aca demic content. This approach to teaching promotes higher-level  thinking skills and enhances retention. Terms  Concepts Advanced Organizers: Advanced organizers are graphic orga nizers or statements that are presented to students so that they  have a better understanding of a concept or new material. Extrinsic Motivation: Students who do not possess the ability  to motivate themselves into action must be extrinsically moti vated through use of tangile rewards or intangible rewards such  as praise. Formative Assessment: Formative assessment is a form of assess ment that provides for immediate evidence of student learning in  a particular course or at a particular point in a program. For mative assessment improves the quality of student learning and  should not be evaluative or involve grading students. By infor mally evaluating students during a lesson, the teacher can gain  an understanding of what the students know or can do, based on  instruction to that point in the lesson. Individual Educational Plan IEP: An Individual Educational  Plan IEP is a written plan for the special education of a child  with a disability. The IEP describes what the student can already  do and what the student needs to learn in order to reach his or her  goals. A team of professionals writes the IEP. Intrinsic Motivation: Intrinsic motivation is apparent when stu dents engage in an activity for its own sake, without an external  incentive. Objective: An objective is a statement of a learning outcome. No Child Left Behind Act: The No Child Left Behind Act 2001  was passed by the federal government in 2002 to improve failing  schools, and to assure all students in the U.S. receive the education  needed to succeed. In 2012, the administration of President Barack  Obama distributed waivers to the act, which exempted states from  certain aspects of the educational standards Klein, 2013. Summative Assessment: Summative assessment is a form of  assessment used to check the level of learning at the end of  the program. This form of assessment gives the teacher a clear  understanding of what the students know or can do at the end of  a lesson, unit, or semester. Teachable Moments: Those spontaneous teaching times when a  classroom event happens and immediate follow-up and discus sion is necessary. Bibliography Angelo, T. A.,  Cross, K. P. 1993. Classroom assessment  techniques: A handbook for college teachers 2nd ed.  Retrieved May 1, 2007 from University of Hawaii Honolulu. http:honolulu.hawaii.eduintranetcommittees FacDevComguidebkteachtipassess-1.htm Bloom, B. Ed. 1956. Taxonomy of educational objectives.  London: Longman. Cooper, J. Ed. 2006. Classroom teaching skills 8th ed.  Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Cruickshank, D., Bainer-Jenkins, D.,  Metcalf, K. 2003.  The act of teaching, 3rd ed. Boston: McGraw Hill.  Duplass, J. 2006. Middle and high school teaching:  Methods, standards and best practices. Boston: Houghton  Mifflin. Gagne, R., Briggs, L.  Wager, W. 1992. Principles of  Instructional Design 4th ed. Fort Worth, TX: HBJ  College Publishers. Hendrickson, S. 2006, Jan. Backward approach to  inquiry. Science Scope, 29,  30 33. Retrieved May  1, 2007 from EBSCO Education Research Complete.  HL0:AN:19677392::http:search.ebscohostcomlogin. aspx?directtruedbehhAN19677392siteehostlivehl INTASC's Model Standards for Beginning Teacher Licensing,  Assessment and Development: A Resource for State  Dialogue 1992. Retrieved May 1, 2007 From CCSSO  Home Page. http:www.ccsso.orgprojectsInterstatex0 05F;Newx005F;Teacherx005F;Assessmentx005F ;andx005F;Supportx005F;ConsortiumProjectsStan dardsx005F;Developmentcore Klein, A. 2013. As NCLB waivers take hold, revision of law  remains up in air. Education Week, 3221, 25. Retrieved  December 14, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database  Education Source Complete. http:search.ebscohost.com login.aspx?directtruedbehhAN85766993siteeh ost-live

Lesson Planning 107 Linne, A. 2001 MarchApril. The lesson as a pedagogic text:  A case study of lesson designs. Journal of Curriculum  Studies, 33, 129-156. Retrieved May 1, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. HL0:AN:4140487::http:search.ebscohost comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN4140487site ehost-livehl Morrow, C. 2013. Caught or taught: Indirect and direct  instruction. Perspectives TESOL Arabia, 202, 6-12.  Retrieved December 12, 2013, from EBSCO Online  Database Education Source Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN88260845 siteehost-live No Child Left Behind NCLB. Act of 2001. Section 1001  Public Law print of PL 107110. Orenstein, A.,  Hunkins, F. 1993. Curriculum:  Foundations, principles and issues 2nd ed. Boston:  Allyn and Bacon. Orenstein, A., Lesley, T.,  Mindes, G. 2005. Secondary and  middle school methods. Boston: Pearson. Petersen, E. 1996. Early childhood planning: Methods and  materials. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. Price, K.,  Nelson, K. 1999. Daily planning for today's  classroom: A guide for writing lesson and activity plans.  Boston: Wadsworth. Tomlinson, C. 2001. How to differentiate in mixed abilities  classrooms 2nd ed. Alexandria, VA: ASCD. Uhrmacher, P., Conrad, B. M.,  Moroye, C. M. 2013.  Finding the balance between process and product through  perceptual lesson planning. Retrieved December 14,  2013, from EBSCO Online Database Education Source  Complete. Teachers College Record, 1157, 1-27. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhA N88950289siteehost-live Wiggins, G.,  McTighe, J. 1998. Understanding by design.  Alexandria, VA: ASCD. Suggested Reading Arends, R. 1997. Classroom instruction and management.  New York: McGraw Hill. Dick, W.,  Carey, L. 1978. The systematic design of  instruction. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman  Co. Dimino, J. 2007 MarchApril. Bridging the gap between  research and practice. Journal of Learning Disabilities,  40, 183-189.Retrieved May 1, 2007 from EBSCO  online database Education Research Complete.  HL0:AN:24186430::http:search.ebscohostcomlogin. aspx?directtruedbehhAN24186430siteehostlivehl Frey, N., Douglas, F.,  Moore, K. 2005. Designing respon sive curriculum: Planning lessons that work. Lanham,  MD: Rowman and Littlefield. Gronlund, N. 2000. How to write and use instructional  objectives, 6th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill. Howell, K., Fox, S.,  Morehead, M. 1993. Curriculumbased evaluation: Teaching and decision making, 2nd  ed. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks and Cole. Shumway, S.,  Berrett, J. 2004 November. Standards-based  curriculum development For pre-service and in-service:  A "partnering" approach using modified Backwards  Design. Technology Teacher, 64, 26 29. Retrieved May  1, 2007 from EBSCO online database Education Research  Complete. HL0:AN:15247564::http:search.ebscohost comlogin.aspx?directtruedbaphAN15247564sit eehost-livehl Essay by Tricia Smith, Ed.D. Dr. Tricia Smith is an Assistant Professor of English at Fitchburg State College in Fitchburg, Massachusetts and teaches theory and  pedagogy courses in English Education. She has written several articles on on-line instruction, advising, and collaborative learning. Her  other areas of interest include linguistics and young adult literature.
Addressing Plagiarism Abstract Studies have shown that cheating is on the rise, specifically  cut-and-paste plagiarism from Internet sources. This article  provides an overview on the subject of plagiarism in the public  schools, a general definition of the subject, and various statis tics on the rise of plagiarism over the past several years. The  Internet is cited as a major factor in the increase in plagiarism.  The article also covers the options that are available to schools  and teachers to help identify plagiarized work as well as to help  students understand the difference between legitimate research  and plagiarism. Overview What is Plagiarism? Plagiarism is defined as presenting someone elses work or ideas  as your own Badke, 2007. Often this involves students copy ing homework, wandering eyes during an exam and, in more  serious cases, it can mean entire report plagiarizing Berger,  2007. Plagiarism essentially constitutes misrepresentation and  fraud Badke, 2007. In all cases, plagiarism is cheating. Studies have shown that cheating is on the rise, specifically cutand-paste plagiarism from Internet sources. According to various  studies and reports, over two-thirds of college students admit to  cheating on a written assignment or test during college Glazer,  2013. A 2005 study from The Center for Academic Integrity  showed that 40 percent of the 50,000 undergraduates interviewed  admitted to having plagiarized from the Internet, compared to  10 percent in 1999 Badke, 2007, p. 58. The Center, which  researched more than 50,000 students since 1990, cited that in a  1999 survey of college students, 75 percent said they had plagia rized during the past year and 10 percent of the students admitted  they had plagiarized off the Internet Embleton  Helfer, 2007.  By 2001, 4 percent of survey participants said they had copied  off of the Internet Embleton  Helfer, 2007. However, a 2013  study by the Josephson Institute Glazer, 2013, p. 4 showed that  the percentage of students who reported plagiarizing on a test  or homework dropped slightly from 2008when 82 percent of  students admitted to copying homework, 64 percent admitted to  cheating on a test, and 36 percent admitted to plagiarizing content  from the Internetto 2013 when 74 percent admitted to copying  homework, 51 percent admitted to cheating on a test, and 32 per cent plagiarized content from the Internet. While some experts  attributed this to tougher anti-cheating policies, others claim that  students are becoming more adept at avoiding detection. The International Institute for Educational Planning has con ducted a research that looked into the extent of poor ethics  and corruption in education since 2001. Their report, Corrupt  Schools, Corrupt Universities: What Can Be Done? presents  their findings from 20012006 and determined that there is an  overall weakening of ethical norms in the United States and  internationally cited in Labi, 2007. The problem of academic  fraud in the United States is so pervasive that it is beginning  to dilute the quality of educational degrees, whether Bache lors, Masters, or Doctorates. The United States is particularly  Abstract Overview What is Plagiarism? Why do Students Cheat? Further Insights What Can be Done to Address Plagiarism? Education as the Best Prevention Strategies  Tools to Curb Web-Based  Plagiarism Image Protection Student Response to Plagiarism Treatments Viewpoints Critics of Digital Monitoring Tools Cheating or Collaborating? Terms  Concepts Bibliography Suggested Reading Table of Contents

Addressing Plagiarism 109 susceptible because it is so advanced in terms of technological  offerings, such as distance learning. Alarmingly, 77 percent of the 50,000 students polled by the  Center for Academic Integrity did not view plagiarism as a  serious offense Badke, 2007. The International Institute for  Educational Planning report noted that in India, cheating is now  so prevalent that when some universities tried to fight back, stu dents protested their right to cheat Labi, 2007. Some blame  technology, from text messaging to iPods and their nearly invisi ble earphones. There are also websites that advertise term papers  for sale to students. Yet the problem isnt technological; it is  human Berger, 2007. Why do Students Cheat? There are many reasons why students continue to plagiarize  work. Some students complain about the types of assessments  teachers give, others blame the pace and demands brought on  by the No Child Left Behind Act NCLB Dye, 2007. Students  certainly are under a lot of academic pressure and are expected  to know more with regards to technology and information than  they did twenty years ago. According to a 2011 ethics survey of  over 20,000 Los Angeles, California, high schoolers, one-third  of those polled believed they needed to cheat in order to be suc cessful Glazer, 2013, p. 4. Other students simply are unaware that the information they  take from one source and use in their own work constitutes pla giarism. Tom Holt, CEO of the technology company Surf Wax,  clarified that every individual has a different idea of what pla giarism is and this creates confusion for both the teacher and  the student cited in Dye, 2007. Yet none of these reasons fully  explains or justifies the outbreak of cheating that is taking place. Aside from the students who are ignorant of the fraud they are  committing, there are plenty of other students who are fully  aware of their deception Badke, 2007. These students have  decided that the risk is worth taking. Often these students are  desperate, because they lack time or the necessary skills to com plete an assignment Badke, 2007. Other times, they simply  have not done their own work and are confident that they will  not get caught. Another breed of plagiarism is the most worrisome. This is the  group of people who argue that nobody owns words and thus  published information is free for the taking Badke, 2007.  Todays hyper-technological generation has repeatedly chal lenged the concept of intellectual property by lobbying for free  access to, well, pretty much everything Badke, 2007. Further Insights What Can be Done to Address Plagiarism? Print plagiarism used to be considered a nuisance that only  affected scholars and writers, but with the upsurge of the Inter net, copying someone elses work is easier than ever Dye,  2007. Some obvious signs of plagiarism are a writing style that  differs from other work the person has submitted, uneven lan guage and ideas or diction that seem more sophisticated than  the writers previous work Badke, 2007. One warning sign is  when a student who does not speak well in class or never seems  prepared, submits an articulate and detailed paper Embleton   Helfer, 2007. In the past, it was difficult to prove a student had plagiarized  unless a teacher knew exactly what source was copied. Now,  there is such a massive amount of information online that a  teacher or expert can no longer be familiar with every source  that exists on a topic making it even more difficult to identify  plagiarized work. Many teachers and schools utilize plagiarism  software that compares a students submitted work to online  documents. Many teachers have similar consequences for cheating includ ing giving a zero to the offending students. Sometimes parents  are contacted and detentions or suspensions are given Berger,  2007. And always, there is the loss of trust. Unfortunately, some  teachers and parents hold contrary views so students can get  mixed messages. Education as the Best Prevention The real challenge is to help students recognize plagiarism as  a problem and to correct it Badke, 2007, p. 58. Many people  do not realize when they are committing plagiarism. They cite  sources carelessly, or they falsely believe that information that  is available for free on the Internet is fair game Badke, 2007,  p. 58. Some students believe that what they are doing is simply  research. Better education on the subject of plagiarism is cer tainly an essential aspect to the reduction of this widespread  problem. Research is an interactive process in which the researcher  reviews sources, evaluates them, challenges and then forms  hisher own opinions about the topics Dye, 2007. Education  in avoiding plagiarism should include detailed information  regarding how to cite sources explaining specifically what  information requires citation Badke, 2007. Teaching students  how to evaluate the reliability of sources, especially websites  and the accuracy of their information will also help students  appreciate the value of conducting quality research Embleton   Helfer, 2007. A lesson in paraphrasing would also help minimize confusion  for students who honestly are not intending to plagiarize Badke,  2007. To help students avoid unintentional plagiarism and to  verify that they actually do their own work, teachers can require  students to begin the process in class or ask students to turn in a  paper outline and early drafts to see the paper in process Emble ton  Helfer, 2007. Teachers could also have students attach  printouts of the sources they have used to their paper Embleton   Helfer, 2007.

Addressing Plagiarism 110 Trying to stop plagiarism requires that teachers help students  understand why it is wrong. Teachers need to explain that intel lectual property rights are valuable because everyone should get  credit for the work they produce Dye, 2007. Teachers must  explain the difference between access and appropriation, and stu dents need to understand that while conducting research, access  to information does not equal permission to use the information  as your own Badke, 2007. Also important is the idea that infor mation is only as reliable as the source from which it came Dye,  2007. If that source is not credited, then the information is not  valuable Dye, 2007. Crediting sources gives strength to both  the students paper and the source itself. It is also important for teachers to remember that a students  reasons for committing an act of plagiarism have nothing to do  with the teacher Lang, 2007. It is not personal; it is academic  dishonesty and should be dealt with accordingly. The proper  response is to document the offense and follow the standards  that have been established Lang, 2007. Students should be provided with a written contract that outlines  the expectations of each specific course including plagiarism pol icies Carter  Punyanunt-Carter, 2007. The generic warning in  a class syllabus may not be enough for students to understand  exactly what constitutes plagiarism Embleton  Helfer, 2007.  Many schools have academic honor codes, but students probably  get this information with a lot of other details and its seriousness  is not often emphasized Embleton  Helfer, 2007. Strategies  Tools to Curb Web-Based Plagiarism Fortunately, computer programs that alert teachers and other  professionals when someone is taking credit for work that is not  his or her own are becoming more common Dye, 2007. These  anti-plagiarism tools are being used from grade schools to col leges and universities. Certain digital programs allow teachers to conduct an automated  search of digital content databases to make it easier to identify if  work has been published or submitted before Dye, 2007. The  basic idea behind these tools is similar to what teachers used to  do by hand; but it operates much faster and covers much more  territory. The teacher uploads the document in question, where upon the program checks each word pattern against billions of  original sources and then creates a report pointing out passages  that match too closely with existing information from books,  articles and Internet websites Dye, 2007. Image Protection Digital tools to address the theft of text-free intellectual property  like video, graphics, and pictures, do exist, but they are often  very expensive and unaffordable for many. A lot of online con tent utilizes a process called digital fingerprinting, which is an  online watermark that can be monitored on major search engines  in the event the watermark appears anywhere the user did not  authorize Dye, 2007. The makers of anti-plagiarism programs claim their purpose is to  deter plagiarism. If teachers inform students that they use these  programs, many students that might have considered cheating  may decide against it Paterson, 2007. Google has also taken action to combat plagiarism with the roll out of the AdWords program, which places certain companies in  Googles forbidden advertising zone Fischman, 2007. Adver tisements for essay writing services will no longer be allowed to  display on Googles pop up ad space Fischman, 2007. These  paper mills are legal because they advertise under the stipula tion that they are to be used for assistance only, but it is clear that  students are buying these customized papers and placing their  own names on them. Student Response to Plagiarism Treatments All colleges and universities have written procedures that outline  the specific guidelines regarding academic plagiarism and how  their institution decides to take action in the event of student  dishonesty Carter  Punyanunt-Carter, 2007. The response by  college instructors to students cheating varies greatly depend ing on the individual teacher. Social validity research focuses  mainly on the appropriateness of treatment procedures, an area  of research also referred to as treatment acceptability Carter   Punyanunt-Carter, 2007,  3. The term treatment acceptability is  a term used to describe the judgments in response to treatments  by actual or potential consumers of treatments. For example, in  the college classroom, the consumers of treatment are the col lege students Carter  Punyanunt-Carter, 2007,  3. One study focused on various treatments employed in response  to incidents of plagiarism by college students Carter  Pun yanunt-Carter, 2007. Participating college students rated the  acceptability of different treatments by college faculty in response  to a hypothetical student who plagiarizes a research paper Carter   Punyanunt-Carter, 2007. 267 students participated in the  study at a large public university Carter  Punyanunt-Carter,  2007. The subjects first looked at a description of a student who  had plagiarized and then read five treatments used by instructors  to handle the incident: 	 The student who plagiarized received a failing grade on  the assignment 	 The student failed the course 	 The student was required to go before a university review  board 	 The student was required to redo the assignment 	 The student was not penalized by the instructor Carter   Punyanunt-Carter, 2007. The participants then rated each action on their extent of accept ability.

Addressing Plagiarism 111 The results of the study revealed that students favored the  choices of giving the student a failing grade and allowing the  student to redo the assignment as the most acceptable treatments  Carter  Punyanunt-Carter, 2007,  4. Students determined that  students going before the review board and not getting punished  at all were equally undesirable treatments. The study also sug gested consequences should be delivered immediately in order  to be effective. Delayed action was found to be less effective  and may even imply condoning dishonest behavior Carter   Punyanunt-Carter, 2007. Viewpoints Critics of Digital Monitoring Tools Many institutions believe these tools remove a layer of trust  between teachers and students Dye, 2007. In fact, some Ivy  League colleges such as Harvard and Yale initially decided not  to institute anti-plagiarism programs Dye, 2007. Charlie Lowe,  a writing professor at Grand Valley State University, MI is the  spokesperson for the Conference on College Composition and  Communication, a 6,000-member group that has published a  paper criticizing anti-plagiarism tools Paterson, 2007. Lowe  states that these programs create a negative environment for stu dent writers because it indicates a lack of trust cited in Paterson,  2007. The CCCC also believes these programs infringe on stu dents rights by putting their work into databases to be inspected  and compared Paterson, 2007. Lowe and the CCCC also have  a problem with the fact that student work is being handed over  to these software companies, who then turn a profit cited in Pat erson, 2007. Students at Virginias McLean High School started a petition to  protest the use of Turnitin because they felt students were con sidered guilty until proven innocent; 1,200 individuals signed the  petition Paterson, 2007. Likewise, Rebecca Moore Howard,  associate professor of writing and rhetoric at Syracuse Univer sity, worries that anti-plagiarism programs focus too much on  pointing out flaws and failures rather than teaching students how  to write well cited in Paterson, 2007. Another complaint of plagiarism detection services is that they  can give false positives or even miss a paper that has been entirely  plagiarized. Plagiarism of ideas is still something that technol ogy cannot detect as well Paterson, 2007. Others critics believe  that teachers should not rely on the technology because eventu ally students will find a way to bypass the system or create a  counter-program to overcome detection Paterson, 2007. This is  already happening with the advent of essay writing services that  will custom create an original paper at the right price Embleton   Helfer, 2007. Since the paper has never been written before,  it will not be in a database for detection, even though it is still  plagiarism. The founder of the anti-plagiarism tool Turnitin, John Barrie,  defends his product saying that it is just an instrument to help  teachers address the existing problem. He compares it to a test  proctor at a test or a referee, who is there to assist in keeping  a level playing field Paterson, 2007. It was never intended to  replace instruction. Barrie estimates that Turnitin, which is used  by about 6,000 schools, has reduced plagiarism rates in those  locations by more than 80 percent cited in Paterson, 2007. A  separate study printed in the journal PS: Political Science and  Politics proved that when teachers inform students that they plan  to use plagiarism detection software, plagiarism was reduced  significantly, compared with warning them not to plagiarize,  which had no effect on students cited in Paterson, 2007. Cheating or Collaborating? Some critics even believe that plagiarism is not that big a con cern. Advocates of cooperative learning suggest collaborating on  tests and papers is more like the real world, where people work  in teams Berger, 2007. Berger 2007 argues that school is not  the real world and if it were, a multitude of students would have  to be fired because they do not contribute enough. It is impor tant that students understand what they are taught rather than  just work with others who understand Berger, 2007. Tests and  essays serve to show teachers what students have to offer so that  when the time comes they will be able to collaborate effectively.  Adults do students a disservice when they justify and condone  deceit. If incidents of plagiarism are going to decrease, students  need clear rules and ethical standards Berger, 2007. Terms  Concepts Access:  Access refers to having permission to view information. Appropriation:  Appropriation refers to taking and using infor mation as ones own Cut-and-paste Plagiarism:  This term applies to the type of  plagiarism that is performed when a person simply copies text  verbatim off the internet and pastes into their own work. Distance Learning:  The term distance learning is applied to  instruction that occurs remotely rather than in person. Teachers  and students may communicate via mail, telephone, email or  online programs. Intellectual Property:  Intellectual property refers to the specific  legal rights which authors have regarding ownership of their  work. Internet:  The Internet is the electronic communications net work that delivers information and connects computers around  the world No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 NCLB:  The No Child Left  Behind Act is a United States federal law that aims to streamline  education and narrow the achievement gap across the nations  schools.

Addressing Plagiarism 112 Plagiarism:  Plagiarism refers to presenting someone elses work  or ideas as ones own. Treatment Acceptability:  The term treatment acceptability is  defined as the judgments in response to treatments by actual or  potential consumers of treatments. For example, in the college  classroom, the consumers of treatment are the college students  Carter  Punyanunt-Carter, 2007,  3. Bibliography Badke, W. 2007. Give plagiarism the weight it deserves.  Online, 31 , 58-60. Retrieved December 11, 2007, from  EBSCO online database, Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedb ehhAN26378977siteehost-live Berger, P. 2007. Our sacred honor. Education Week, 27 , 25.  Retrieved December 11, 2007, from EBSCO online database, Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?direct truedbehhAN27394656siteehost-live Carter, S.,  Punyanunt-Carter, N. 2007. Acceptability of  treatments for plagiarism. College Student Journal, 41  , 336-341. Retrieved December 11, 2007, from EBSCO  online database, Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehh AN25093207siteehost-live Dye, J. 2007. To catch a thief. EContent, 30 , 32-37.  Retrieved December 11, 2007, from EBSCO online data base, Education Research Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN26378720 siteehost-live Embleton, K.,  Helfer, D. 2007. The Plague of plagiarism  and academic dishonesty. Searcher, 15 , 23-26. Retrieved  December 11, 2007, from EBSCO online database,  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN25525127 siteehost-live Fischman, J. 2007. Online. Chronicle of Higher Education,  53 , A29-A29. Retrieved December 11, 2007, from  EBSCO online database, Education Research Complete.  http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedb ehhAN25426926siteehost-live Glazer, Sarah. 2013, January 4. Plagiarism and cheating: Are  they becoming more acceptable in the Internet age? CQ  Researcher, 23. Retrieved December 20, 2013, from http: www.academicintegrity.orgicaiassetsCQ.pdf Halupa, C.,  Bolliger, D. U. 2013. Faculty perceptions of  student self plagiarism: An exploratory multi-university  study. Journal of Academic Ethics, 11, 297310. Retrieved  December 13, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN91859166 Labi, A. 2007. Corruption in education is growing world wide, Unesco reports. Chronicle of Higher Education, 53,  A42-A42. Retrieved December 11, 2007, from EBSCO  online database, Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehh AN25479996siteehost-live Meuschke, N.,  Gipp, B. 2013. State-of-the-art in detect ing academic plagiarism. International Journal for  Educational Integrity, 9, 5071. Retrieved December 13,  2013, from EBSCO Online Database Education Research  Complete. http:search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?direct truedbehhAN91103918 Paterson, J. 2007. A war of words. T H E Journal, 34 , 18-20.  Retrieved December 11, 2007, from EBSCO online data base, Education Research Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN26761424 siteehost-live Walker, C.,  White, M. 2014. Police, design, plan and man age: developing a framework for integrating staff roles  and institutional policies into a plagiarism prevention strat egy. Journal of Higher Education Policy  Management,  366, 674687. Retrieved January 7, 2016, from EBSCO  Online Database Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehh AN99090509siteehost-livescopesite Youmans, R. J. 2011. Does the adoption of plagiarismdetection software in higher education reduce plagiarism?.  Studies in Higher Education, 36, 749761. Retrieved  December 13, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN67457522 Suggested Reading Collins, M.,  Amodeo, M. 2005. Responding to plagiarism  in schools of social work: considerations and recommen dations. Heckler, N. C., Rice, M.,  Bryan, C. 2013. Turnitin sys tems: A deterrent to plagiarism in college classrooms.  Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 45,  229248. Retrieved December 13, 2013, from EBSCO  Online Database Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedb

Addressing Plagiarism 113 ehhAN89525589 Journal of Social Work Education,  41 , 527-543. Retrieved December 11, 2007, from EBSCO  online database, Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehh AN18897929siteehost-live Lang, J. 2007. Its not you. Chronicle of Higher Education,  54 , 78-78. Retrieved December 11, 2007, from EBSCO  online database, Education Research Complete. http: search.ebscohost.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehh AN27542098siteehost-live Pecorari, D. 2015. Academic writing and plagiarism: A  linguistic analysis. London, England: Bloomsbury  Academic. Rawe, J. 2007. A question of honor. Time, 169 , 59-60.  Retrieved December 17, 2007, from EBSCO online data base, Education Research Complete. http:search.ebsco host.comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN25127526 siteehost-live Vieyra, M., Strickland, D.,  Timmerman, B. 2013. Patterns  in plagiarism and patchwriting in science and engineer ing graduate students research proposals. International  Journal for Educational Integrity, 9, 3549. Retrieved  December 13, 2013, from EBSCO Online Database  Education Research Complete. http:search.ebscohost. comlogin.aspx?directtruedbehhAN91103917 Essay by Jennifer Bouchard, M.Ed. Jennifer Bouchard is a high school English teacher and writer living in Connecticut. She received her Masters of Education degree in  English from Framingham State College in Massachusetts. She currently is pursuing a Master of Fine Arts degree in professional writing  at Western Connecticut State University.