ebook THE GUILFORD PRESS

EVIDENCE-BASED STRATEGIES   FOR EFFECTIVE CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT

The Guilford Practical Intervention in the Schools Series Kenneth W. Merrell, Founding Editor  T. Chris Riley-Tillman, Series Editor www.guilford.compractical This series presents the most reader-friendly resources available in key areas of evidence-based practice in  school settings. Practitioners will find trustworthy guides on effective behavioral, mental health, and academic  interventions, and assessment and measurement approaches. Covering all aspects of planning, implementing,  and evaluating high-quality services for students, books in the series are carefully crafted for everyday utility.  Features include ready-to-use reproducibles, lay-flat binding to facilitate photocopying, appealing visual elements, and an oversized format. Recent titles have Web pages where purchasers can download and print the  reproducible materials. Recent Volumes Integrated Multi-Tiered Systems of Support:   Blending RTI and PBIS Kent McIntosh and Steve Goodman The ABCs of CBM, Second Edition:  A Practical Guide to Curriculum-Based Measurement Michelle K. Hosp, John L. Hosp, and Kenneth W. Howell DBT Skills in Schools:   Skills Training for Emotional Problem Solving for Adolescents DBT STEPS-A James J. Mazza, Elizabeth T. Dexter-Mazza, Alec L. Miller,   Jill H. Rathus, and Heather E. Murphy Interventions for Disruptive Behaviors:   Reducing Problems and Building Skills Gregory A. Fabiano Promoting Student Happiness:   Positive Psychology Interventions in Schools Shannon M. Suldo Effective Math Interventions:   A Guide to Improving Whole-Number Knowledge Robin S. Codding, Robert J. Volpe, and Brian C. Poncy Emotional and Behavioral Problems of Young Children, Second Edition:   Effective Interventions in the Preschool and Kindergarten Years Melissa L. Holland, Jessica Malmberg, and Gretchen Gimpel Peacock Group Interventions in Schools: A Guide for Practitioners Jennifer P. Keperling, Wendy M. Reinke, Dana Marchese, and Nicholas Ialongo Transforming Schools:  A Problem-Solving Approach to School Change Rachel Cohen Losoff and Kelly Broxterman Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch

Evidence-Based   Strategies for   Effective Classroom  Management DAVID M. HULAC  AMY M. BRIESCH THE GUILFORD PRESS  New York    London

Copyright  2017 The Guilford Press A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc. 370 Seventh Avenue, Suite 1200, New York, NY 10001 www.guilford.com All rights reserved Except as indicated, no part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a retrieval  system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,  microfilming, recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher. Printed in Canada This book is printed on acid-free paper. Last digit is print number:  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1 LIMITED DUPLICATION LICENSE 

These materials are intended for use only by qualified professionals. 

The publisher grants to individual purchasers of this book nonassignable permission to  reproduce all materials for which photocopying permission is specifically granted in a  footnote. This license is limited to you, the individual purchaser, for personal use or use  with students. This license does not grant the right to reproduce these materials for resale,  redistribution, electronic display, or any other purposes including but not limited to books,  pamphlets, articles, videoor audiotapes, blogs, file-sharing sites, Internet or intranet sites,  and handouts or slides for lectures, workshops, or webinars, whether or not a fee is charged.  Permission to reproduce these materials for these and any other purposes must be obtained  in writing from the Permissions Department of Guilford Publications. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available from the publisher. ISBN 978-1-4625-3175-2

To the kids whove taught me what questions to ask,   and to my wife, Mary, the source of my best ideas D. M. H. To my husband, Chris,   whose daily classroom adventures   have both made for many great stories   and sparked an abundance of research ideas A. M. B.

vii	 David M. Hulac, PhD, NCSP, is Assistant Professor of School Psychology at the University of Northern Colorado. He is President of the independent organization Trainers of  School Psychologists and served as Program Chair for Division 16 School Psychology at  the 2016 American Psychological Association APA conference. Dr. Hulac is a recipient of  the BelbasLarson Award for Excellence in Teaching from the University of South Dakota.  He has multiple publications in the area of response to intervention for behavior and academics and is coauthor of Behavioral Interventions in Schools: A Response-to-Intervention  Guidebook. Amy M. Briesch, PhD, is Associate Professor in the Department of Applied Psychology at  Northeastern University. Her primary research interests include the role of student involvement in intervention design and implementation, and the development of feasible and psychometrically sound measures for the assessment of student behavior in multi-tiered systems of support. Dr. Briesch is Associate Editor of the Journal of School Psychology and  a recipient of the Lightner Witmer Award for early-career scholarship in school psychology from Division 16 of the APA. She has authored over 50 peer-reviewed journal articles,  books, and book chapters. About the Authors

ix	 PART I.  OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT   1.	Why Classroom Management Matters	 3 What Is Classroom Management?  4 What Is EvidenceBased Classroom Management?  6 What Is to Come  9 Conclusions  11   2.	Understanding Behavioral Theories Relevant to Supporting	 12  a WellManaged Classroom Teacher Attribution Theory  13 Foundations of Behavioral Science  16 Principle 1: We Are More Likely to Engage in Behaviors That Generate   Pleasurable Consequences or, Ill eat my broccoli for Skittles, but wont eat   my Skittles for broccoli.  18 Principle 2: We Can Promote Behavior through Reinforcement   or, Ill do anything for Skittles!.  19 Types of Reinforcement  19 Schedules of Reinforcement  20 Principle 3: We Can Reduce or Eliminate Behavior through Extinction and Punishment   or, If you stop giving me Skittles, Ill stop doing what you ask.  23 Principle 4: We Tend to Engage in Those Behaviors That Bring the Greatest Reinforcement  or, Lots of Skittles! Right now? Little effort? Yes, please!.  24 Principle 5: What We Find Rewarding Once May Not Always Be So   or, Im tired of Skittles! I want MMs!.  25 Principle 6: We Look for Cues to Tell Us Whether Reinforcement Is Likely   or, I can see that you bought more Skittles and Im ready to work!.  26 Putting It All Together  27 The Law of Effect  27 Reinforcement  27 Punishment  28 The Matching Law  28 Contents

x	 Contents	 Motivating Operations  28 Developing an Intervention  29 Conclusions  29 APPENDIX 2.1.  Frequently Asked Questions  29 PART II.  PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES   3.	Structuring the Classroom for Success:	 33  Preventing Problems before They Happen Why Are Preventative Strategies Important?  34 What Are EvidenceBased Preventative Strategies?  35 Creating Physical Structures  35 Teaching Students Expected Behaviors  36 Teaching Rules and Routines  44 Engaging in Effective Teaching Behaviors  45 Conclusions  51   4.	Providing Students with Behavioral Feedback	 57 Anatomy of Feedback  58 What Behavior Is Expected?  59 When Must the Behavior Occur?  60 When Will the Behavior Be Evaluated?  60 What Does the Child Receive?  61 Negative Verbal Feedback  61 Delivering Effective Reprimands  63 Positive Verbal Feedback  65 How to Provide Praise  66 Empirical Examples  68 Strategies for Increasing Rates of Praise  71 Comparing Positive and Negative Feedback  72 Planned Ignoring  72 Noncontingent Attention  74 Conclusions  75 PART III.  STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE            BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS   5.	Implementing Token Economies	 81 Implementing a Token Economy System  83 At What Level Should the Token Economy Be Implemented?  83 What Behaviors Can Be Targeted?  84 How Should Tokens Be Delivered?  86 How Should Rewards Be Incorporated?  88 Introducing the Intervention  89 Variations on the Token Economy  90 Response Cost  90 Level Systems  93 Final Considerations: Fixing Problems and Fading the Intervention  95 Troubleshooting: When Token Economy Systems Go Wrong  95 Fading the Intervention  97 Conclusions  98

Contents	 xi   6.	Group Contingencies	 102 Types of Contingencies  103 Independent Group Contingency: To Each His or Her Own  104 Dependent Group Contingency: One for All  106 Interdependent Group Contingency: All for One  109 Variations on Group Contingencies  111 The Good Behavior Game  111 Randomizing Intervention Components  113 The Timely Transitions Game  114 Final Considerations: Fixing Problems and Fading the Intervention  115 Troubleshooting  115 Fading the Intervention  117 Conclusions  118   7.	SelfManagement	 126 Implementing SelfManagement to Support Student Behavior  127 Is SelfManagement Right for Everyone?  128 What Behaviors Can Students SelfMonitor?  130 What Should SelfRecording Look Like?  131 Should Student Ratings Be Externally Evaluated?  136 Should Rewards Be Incorporated?  137 Introducing the Intervention  138 Enhancing the Feasibility of Classwide Implementation  139 Modifications to Recording Procedures  139 Modifications to Evaluation Procedures  140 Final Considerations: Fixing Problems and Fading the Intervention  142 Troubleshooting  142 Fading the Intervention  144 Conclusions  145 PART IV.  STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION           AND EFFECTIVENESS   8.	Collecting Classwide Data	 155 Identifying the Target of Measurement  155 Identifying the Problem  156 Determining the Dimension of Interest  158 Event Recording  159 State Recording  163 RatingBased Tools for Assessing Event and State Behaviors  166 Permanent Product Data  169 Collecting and Evaluating Data to Determine Intervention Effectiveness  173 Collecting Data  173 Evaluating Data  175 Conclusions  180   9.	Assessing Intervention Integrity	 186 Assessing Treatment Integrity  187 How to Assess Treatment Integrity  187 Methods of Treatment Integrity Measurement  189 What Degree of Integrity Is Enough?  192

xii	 Contents	 Strategies for Promoting Treatment Integrity  193 Prior to Implementation  194 During Implementation  196 After Implementation  198 Conclusions  198 10.	Individualizing Intervention	 200 Strategies for Intensifying Classwide Interventions  201 Strategy 1: Increase Dosage  201 Strategy 2: Alter Intervention Delivery  202 Strategy 3: Change Aspects of the Environment  205 Incorporating Additional Intervention Components to Intensify Classwide Supports  206 Option 1: Add a SelfMonitoring Component  208 Option 2: Introduce an External Interventionist  209 Option 3: Incorporate a HomeBased Component  214 Matching the Rigor of Assessment to the Rigor of Intervention  216 Conclusions  216

References	 221

Index	 241 Purchasers of this book can download and print   all coach cards and the forms in Chapters 7 and 8   at www.guilford.comhulac-forms for personal use   or use with students see copyright page for details.

PART I OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS  OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT
We are going to be bold and put it out there: being able to effectively manage a classroom  is the most essential aspect of teaching. Classroom management should be the first class  taught to all teachers and should be the first consideration anytime that someone is teaching a new class. Certainly having a thorough understanding of the subject matter and being  able to make difficult topics easy to understand are critical to effective teaching; however, if  the classroom is not under control, no teaching can occur and no curriculum can be taught.  Students will probably learnbut chances are they wont learn the lessons we intended for  them to learn. Rather than learning reading, social skills, history, or science, they will learn  how to survive in chaos. If you are reading this book, chances are that classroom management concerns you.  Some of you may be experienced teachers who are looking for ways to increase student  engagement and decrease disruption and aggression. Others may be just learning how to  teach and find the prospect of working with large groups of students daunting. Still others  may be administrators or school-based consultants who see teachers struggling with student  behavior in the classroom and want to find a way to help. No matter what your background  or current situation, you have arrived at this place because you are looking for some answers  to a challenge that extends beyond individual classrooms, schools, states, and even countries. Classroom management is not just an individual struggle, but is arguably the top  concern in education today Melnick  Meister, 2008. There is no question that student  behavior in schools presents a major challenge. Within a survey of early childhood and  elementary schoolteachers, more than 90 of respondents reported that they had dealt  with problem behaviors that interfered with classroom instruction e.g., disruptive behavior, defiant behavior within the past year Reinke, Stormont, Herman, Puri,  Goel, 2011.  These behavior problems are not all minor in nature either. According to a report from the  National Center on Educational Statistics, one in every 14 students in public school in the  United States in 2009 was suspended from school at least once and one in every 476 stuCHAPTER 1 Why Classroom Management Matters
OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT	 dents was expelled Planty et al., 2009. Epidemics have been declared based on much more  conservative estimates of prevalence. To fight an epidemic, it is necessary to have a sufficient number of well-trained professionals who can put into place effective strategies to reduce the number of existing cases  and prevent further spread of the problem. A quick Google search for the phrase classroom  management, however, swiftly brings nearly 30 million results before you can bat an eye.  If you begin to scroll through the pages upon pages of results, you will find that just about  everyone seems to be writing about classroom management. There are articles written by  national teaching organizations e.g., the National Education Association and the National  Council on Teacher Quality, national periodicals e.g., Education Week, and institutions  of higher education e.g., New York University, Vanderbilt University. You can also find  numerous tips, secrets, and strategies on websites with promising names like Education Oasis and Teacher Toolkit, and popular social networking sites such as Pinterest and  Edmodo. The sheer amount of information at your fingertips can become overwhelming.  Where do you start? Who do you trust? How do you know that any of these self-proclaimed  quick fixes will have any effect on the problems you are having? Despite the abundance of information that we have available to us in the Information  Age, practicing teachers still report that classroom management is the number one problem  that they struggle with New Teacher Project, 2013. Unfortunately, this constant struggle,  combined with a seeming lack of solutions, can be a main contributor to teacher burnout  Aloe, Amo,  Shanahan, 2014; ONeill  Stephenson, 2011. In fact, many teachers have  even reported leaving the field due to frustrations with student behavior problems U.S.  Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 20002001. Although  we can never know the individual circumstances of these teachers, it is possible that this  unfortunate end to their stories might have been avoided had these teachers been armed  with effective strategies for better managing their classrooms. WHAT IS CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT? Before we go any further, it is important to make sure that we are all talking about the same  thing when we use the phrase classroom management. Classroom management refers to  practices that a teacher follows to ensure that 1 students behave in ways that are not disruptive to the learning of others and 2 teachers are able to focus on academically relevant  material. Some criticize behavioral management techniques by claiming that the changes  in student behavior do not generalize to other environments. We agree. The purpose of  classroom management is not to teach life lessons; rather, classroom management allows life  lessons to be taught. Academic instruction is effective only when instruction occurs without interruption and  students can practice new skills without distraction. A teacher can individualize instruction when other students are on task and quiet, social skills improve because social skills  instruction can take place without incident, and fewer problematic social skills are modeled.  Student mental health also improves because students are bullied less and socialemotional 

Why Classroom Management Matters	 5 learning such as self-relaxation and impulse control training can take place more effectively. As displayed in Figure 1.1, classroom management is the bedrock on which learning  occurs. Classroom management isnt the teaching, but without it, students wont learn what  we want them to learn. Our goal in this book is to provide you with strategies that will help  to minimize the amount of time teachers spend transitioning from one activity to another,  addressing problem behavior, and engaging in other noninstructional activities that detract  from classroom learning. Effective classroom management is also the foundation of a multi-tiered system of support MTSS. MTSS refers to the coordinated system of instruction, assessment, and intervention that allows schools to meet the needs of a variety of students Lane, Menzies, Ennis,   Bezdek, 2013. An MTSS typically consists of three levels of service delivery, wherein  the intensity of both assessment and intervention increases as one moves from one level to  the next. Whereas Tier 1 focuses on providing universal supports to all students in a school,  Tier 2 and Tier 3 direct increasingly focused and intensive supports at those students at  risk for or demonstrating academic or behavioral problems. When student performance is  judged to be nonresponsive to the supports provided at one level, the decision is made to  move the student to the next tier of service delivery. One of the fundamental assumptions  in judging nonresponse, however, is that the student has received high-quality, evidencebased instruction. This is where classroom management comes in. On the academic side,  the effectiveness of classroom instruction will likely diminish without classroom management, meaning that many students without learning problems will begin to look like they  have learning problems. In addition, on the behavioral side, a poorly managed classroom in  which behavioral expectations are unclear will increase the likelihood of students displaying poor social skills, exhibiting behavioral problems, and struggling with mental health  problems. Although having a well-managed classroom may be important in the immediate place  and time, you may wonder just how much of a difference it will really make in the long  run. The simple answer is that well-managed classrooms can make a huge difference and  FIGURE 1.1.  Classroom management is the foundation upon which quality learning and development occur. 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 Academic Mental Health Social Skills 3 3 Classroom Behavior Management
OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT	 these differences may be long lasting. Oliver, Wehby, and Reschly 2011 conducted a metaanalysis of those studies in which teachers implemented universal classroom management  practices in typical public school settings e.g., generalspecial education. Across 12 studies,  the authors found that classroom management practices had a large and significant effect  d  0.80 on student behavior. If you are not sure what an effect size refers to, imagine that  you were able to increase somebodys IQ from 100 to 112. That is what an effect of 0.8 looks  like. In social science research, this effect is considered large. Positive classroom management has also been shown to be significantly related to lower levels of bullying behavior  Ttofi  Farrington, 2012 and higher levels of school connectedness McNeely, Nonnemaker,  Blum, 2002. Furthermore, it has the potential to not only reduce existing problem  behavior but also to prevent the development of new problems and disorders Hester et al.,  2004; Myers, Simonsen,  Sugai, 2011. To provide one specific example of the potential power of classroom management, let us  take a moment to describe a longitudinal study conducted with a large number of students  in inner-city Baltimore Dolan et al., 1993; Kellam, Rebok, Ialongo,  Mayer, 1994; Kellam  et al., 2014. The researchers randomly assigned students to different first-grade classrooms,  and then ensured that each classroom had a similar number of students who had displayed  problem behaviors in kindergarten. Half of these classrooms were then randomly assigned  to receive an evidence-based classwide behavioral intervention called the Good Behavior  Game GBG; see Chapter 6 for a complete description of this intervention and the other  half served as control classrooms. By the end of the spring semester of first grade, teachers  reported significant decreases in aggressive behavior for those children receiving the GBG  intervention. The most notable effects were found, however, for those students who began  the year with the highest levels of aggressive behavior Dolan et al., 1993. The students  who displayed the most aggression in kindergarten were then tracked into sixth grade.  Those aggressive kindergarten boys who had received the GBG were twice as likely to display aggressive behaviors in sixth grade than the nonaggressive students. However, those  boys with high initial levels of aggression who did not receive the intervention were 25  times more likely to be aggressive in sixth grade than nonaggressive students Kellam et al.,  1994. Kellam and colleagues 2014 also followed up with those students when they were  1921 years of age. Again, they found that those students who received the GBG in first  and second grade were less likely to display sexual violence, be diagnosed with antisocial  personality disorders, and have suffered from drug abuse Kellam et al., 2014. This research  shows that not only do teachers make a difference each and every day but that they make a  difference that lasts. WHAT IS EVIDENCEBASED CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT? Believe it or not, there are lots of things that we do in schools to try and improve student behavior that the research tells us are ineffective. Counseling, for example, is effective  in treating disorders such as depression and anxiety; however, its effect is negligible on 

Why Classroom Management Matters	 7 classroom behavior and student performance Baskin, Slaten, Sorenson, Glover-Russell   Merson, 2010; Prout  Prout, 1998; Stage  Quiroz, 1997. Many individuals have argued  that adopting school uniforms decreases problem behaviors and improves student learning; however, analysis of data from the National Education Longitudinal Study found that  uniforms appear to have little effect on student behavior Brunsma  Rockquemore, 1998.  Even most disciplinary practices, such as suspensions, are frequently accompanied by high  degrees of recidivism, arrest rates, and anger directed toward school staff members Blankenship  Bender, 2007; Skiba  Nesting, 2001. Although many strategies can fall under the umbrella of classroom management, the  specific focus of this book is on evidence-based practicesthat is, we have deliberately  chosen to present you with only those strategies that we see as evidence based. Evidencebased practice means that an educator uses knowledge and research-based interventions to  inform his or her practice PACER Center, 2011. The Every Student Succeeds Act 2015  requires that schools utilize practices that have a research base behind them. There are,  however, many different ways in which the term evidence based has been defined and  interpreted. The Council for Exceptional Children 2014, for example, outlines that studies  must have been conducted using either group comparison or single-subject experimental  designs. The U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Services 2003, on the  other hand, has noted that strong evidence comes from two or more randomized controlled  trials conducted in typical school settings. Within this book, we take a less conservative  approach, considering evidence-based practices to be those interventions and strategies that  have been shown to be effective across multiple controlled research studies. Although these  studies may have been conducted using either group comparison or single-case designs, the  majority of research we review has come from the single-case literature. With all the talk about evidence-based practice nowadays, some readers may find  themselves asking Whats the big deal? The reason why evidence-based practice is so  important is because it gives us some confidence that what we choose to try will actually  work. Even when some interventions are used frequently in practice, there is no guarantee  that these interventions will have positive resultsand they may perhaps even be harmful  in some cases. Although evidence-based practices are not guaranteed to work in every situation, there is a much higher likelihood given prior successes. There is also an important distinction that should be made between what has been  termed effective classroom management and evidence-based classroom management.  Much of what has been written about classroom management is based on observational  studies that were conducted in the 1970s of effective teachers. The goal of this line of  research was to identify teachers who were believed to be effective and then observe them  in the classroom in order to better understand the practices in which they engaged. In the  seminal study published in 1970, Jacob Kounin looked at the practices of teachers who  were believed to be effective classroom managers as well as the practices of those teachers  who were believed to be ineffective. What he found was that both groups of teachers used  similar practices to address problem behaviors when they arose. There was, however, one  main difference between the two groups that Kounin identified. Rather than waiting until 
OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT	 problems arose, those teachers with well-managed classrooms used preventative strategies  that made problem behaviors less likely and on-task behaviors more likely to occur. In particular, Kounin 1970 focused on the way in which an effective teacher would move through  a lesson: ensuring the active participation of students, managing smooth transitions, and  remaining aware of what was going on in all corners of the classroom at all times. These  findings were further supported by later researchers utilizing observational approaches  to understanding those teacher behaviors most associated with student performance e.g.,  Emmer, Evertson,  Anderson, 1980; Sanford  Evertson, 1981. Although studies such as the one by Kounin 1970 certainly contributed to the dialogue around classroom management practices, it is important to highlight the correlational  nature of this workthat is, although use of proactive strategies was related to higher levels of both teacher and student performance, it is impossible to say whether one actually  caused the other. In the 1980s, however, researchers began to conduct the first experimental studies focused on classroom management. Emmer and colleagues, for example, found  that those teachers who received specific training in classroom management strategies had  higher levels of appropriate student behavior in their classrooms than those teachers in a  control condition Emmer, 1984. Since this time, numerous experimental studies have been  conducted in order to better delineate both what effective classroom management should  look like and how necessary strategies should be taught. Although the research base is quite dense, findings from the experimental literature  fortunately suggest that the recipe for effective classroom management is both understood  and straightforward. Interestingly, three major reviews of the experimental and quasiexperimental research on effective classroom management practices Epstein, Atkins, Cullinan, Kutash,  Weaver, 2008; Oliver et al., 2011; Simonsen, Fairbanks, Briesch, Myers,   Sugai, 2008 have all come to similar conclusions. As highlighted by Greenberg, Putman, and Walsh 2014, there are the Big Five classroom management strategies that  have emerged from over 60 years of research in this area. First, positively stated expectations must be made clear by establishing, teaching, and practicing a small set of classroom  rules. Second, predictable routines for navigating different settings and situations within  the school day must be developed and taught. Third, teachers should use positive and specific praise to reinforce students for appropriate behavior. Fourth, inappropriate behavior  should be responded to consistently with an appropriate level of consequence. Fifth, student engagement should be kept high by facilitating opportunities for active engagement  and ensuring that the instructional content is interesting and meaningful. Most importantly,  all of these practices are things that must be planned before students enter the classroom.  Without deliberate, systematic lesson planning and preparation, classrooms may be chaotic  where no learning can occur. So if we know what works, we should assume that everybody is doing this, right?  Unfortunately, what we know is that most teacher education programs are not equipping  their graduates with the classroom management tools that they need. The National Council  on Teacher Quality Greenberg et al., 2014 published a report that investigated whether  teacher education programs were training teachers in classroom management. They made  three key findings:

Why Classroom Management Matters	 9 1.	 Most teacher education programs are not deliberately teaching the science of classroom management in class and clinical settings. 2.	 Most programs function under the belief that instructional virtuosity will render  the need for classroom management moot because all students will be enthralled  with the flawlessly executed lesson that they will be unable to act out. 3.	 Teachers are encouraged to come up with a philosophy for classroom management  based upon their own beliefs about child development. The findings of this report raise a number of serious concerns. Imagine going to a physician complaining of a chronic heart problem. Rather than following a standard procedure  that is based upon years of science, the doctor has instead been trained to come up with his  or her own philosophy for solving heart problems based upon his or her own beliefs about  how a heart works. Or, imagine if the physician merely believed that following a healthy  diet and regular exercise would remove the need for any treatment. A practice that would  be intolerable in medicine unfortunately continues to be standard practice in education,  which boasts a substantial research-to-practice gap Burns  Ysseldyke, 2008; Carnine,  1997; Cook  Odom, 2013. Just as we would not want a doctor to enter surgery without the right instruments, we  do not want teachers entering classrooms without the proper management tools. However,  when it comes to student behavior, over 40 of teachers participating in the Schools and  Staffing Survey Epstein et al., 2008 indicated that they felt not at all prepared or only  somewhat prepared to handle behavioral issues in the classroom. It should therefore come  as no surprise that teachers find the job stressful, or even sometimes decide to leave the  field. Intervention is sorely needed in order to change this trajectory. We do not fool ourselves into thinking that this book is the only answer, but we do hope that it will serve as a  critical important tool in an educators toolbox. WHAT IS TO COME Now that we have explained what we mean by evidence-based classroom management and hopefully convinced you of just how important it isyou are probably eager to hear  more about the concrete strategies that are available to you. Before we jump to this, however, we want to say a few words about what our goals for this book are and what you can  expect as a reader. This book seeks to avoid long and theoretical discussions about classroom theory, but  to instead focus on tangible strategies that can immediately be put into place. We aim to  equip beginning teachers with concrete strategies that have been proven effective through  rigorous research. In addition, we see the information presented within this book as being  valuable to experienced teachers and educators who may be looking to ensure that their  practices are up-to-date, research based, and most importantly, effective. In the chapters to  come, we present you with those classwide strategies that have shown the greatest promise  in promoting and supporting appropriate student behavior. All of these strategies have been 
OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT	 repeatedly subjected to empirical testing and therefore can be classified as evidence based.  Although prior research suggests that these strategies are likely to be successful in your setting, there are a few important caveats to keep in mind as we move forward into the book. First, behavior is not something that is ever totally fixed. One of the most important  things to keep in mind about classroom management practices is that they never eliminate  problems. There are very few things that we as educators do that work perfectly. Human  beings are extraordinarily complex, and when large groups of complex beings come together  in places like schools, unexpected things may happen. When teachers implement evidencebased classroom management procedures with fidelity, there is a good likelihood that problems will be reduced. Although we would like to see a situation go from complete chaos to  calm in 5 seconds, it is important to keep realistic goals in mind and to celebrate each small  victory. After all, if we can reduce the number of acting-out behaviors from 10 per day to  four per day, we have made a huge improvement. Second, nothing lasts forever. As you will read in this book, having clear expectations  that are taught and consistently reinforced reduces problem behaviors. Sometimes, however, these problem behaviors start to return after time has passed. For example, there may  be times when our practices work for a month and then unexpectedly just stop working.  When something like this happens, we first need to rejoice in the fact that we had a better  month. After that, we either need to perform a series of reminders booster sessions, or we  may need to try something else entirely new intervention. Imagine, for example, a middle  school in which the students received extensive opportunities to learn and practice specific  social skills at the start of the school year; however, come November, they have stopped  using good eye contact and seem to be unable to accept No as an answer. In such a case,  the team may either reteach the expectations, or they may change the way expectations are  reinforced. Third, this book is not specifically meant to address the needs of students with serious behavioral difficulties. Those students on the autism spectrum, or those who display  impulsive behaviors, tend to perform much better in classrooms that are well managed;  however, the strategies discussed herein are designed to address the needs of the general  population. Although we recommend working with a school-based mental health consultant  to support the needs of these students, the behavior plans that you implement will be more  effective when procedures are clear, expectations are taught and reinforced consistently,  and problematic behaviors are addressed fluently and immediately Witt, VanDerHeyden,   Gilbertson, 2004. This book may therefore be considered a critical base to prevent many  more serious problem behaviors. The book is divided into several broad sections. In the remainder of the first section,  Chapter 2 provides you with the theoretical underpinnings for the book and a brief overview of the principles of applied behavior analysis. We believe that understanding these  principles is essential to the effective implementation of the strategies that are described in  subsequent chapters. The second section, Promotion and Prevention Strategies, describes  the basic interventions that all teachers should use to prevent classroom behavior problems and to reinforce desired behaviors in an effective manner. Within the third section  Strategies for Addressing Classwide Behavioral Concerns, we outline additional, more 

Why Classroom Management Matters	 11 structured interventions that can be used if the strategies described in Chapters 3 and  4 are insufficient. Chapter 5 introduces classwide token economies, Chapter 6 addresses  group contingencies, and Chapter 7 provides methods for helping students manage their  own behavior. The final section outlines strategies that teachers can use to evaluate classroom behavior Chapter 8, to determine whether the interventions are being implemented  correctly Chapter 9, and to individualize interventions for those students who need more  structure or feedback than others in the class Chapter 10. Finally, it is important to mention that many of these chapters include coach cards.  These coach cards break the interventions down into steps and offer checklists that may  be helpful in planning as well as during implementation. These checklists can be used by  teachers to make sure they dont miss something when putting a new procedure into practice. In addition, these coach cards can be used by coaches who are interested in helping  a teacher with a new practice and providing integrity checks. We encourage you to make  copies and use them within your own classroom or for your own practice. CONCLUSIONS We know that teaching children is a high calling. The fields of psychology and education  know a tremendous amount about learning and behavior, though our practices in schools  tend to fall behind our knowledge base. This book seeks to close that gap by providing  teachers with the best science to date on managing classroom behaviors. We want to provide you with the best tools and information so you can provide your students with the best  supports possible. Before we can equip you with specific tools, however, we do believe that  a basic understanding of behavioral principles is necessary to successful implementation.  We therefore spend Chapter 2 providing the reader with much of the theoretical basis for  the rest of the text.
As educators, there are some things that we have control over and others that we simply do  not. Come the beginning of the school year, most of us do not get to select the students who  will join our classrooms. Rather, we are provided with a roster and then cross our fingers  that this group of students will get along wellboth with one another and ourselves. We  also have no control over biological factors within each student, such as ones DNA, brain  functioning, or nervous system functioning. Students are born with different levels of ability  and operate at different levels of functioning. We can certainly put in place strategies and  accommodations to improve student learning and functioning in the classroom, but there  is no way that we can directly change a childs neural structures through surgery! Furthermore, we do not get to select the parents and families that we work with, or the structure  of the homes that these children come from. We might wish, for example, that all students  would have someone watching over them at home to make sure that homework is completed  correctly and the student is in bed at a reasonable hour; however, we know that this is not  always going to happen. What is true is that more than half of public school students in the  United States live in poverty Suitts, Barba,  Dunn, 2015, and many of our students come  from food-insecure households in which homework completion is a relatively insignificant  problem. National statistics also tell us that many students are victims of abuse and neglect,  with as many as 12 out of every 1,000 children estimated to be victims of maltreatment U.S.  Department of Health and Human Services, Administration on Children, Youth, and Families, 2007. These are problems that are inarguably very concerning, but largely outside of  our control as educators. CHAPTER 2 Understanding Behavioral  Theories Relevant to Supporting  a WellManaged Classroom

Understanding Relevant Behavioral Theories	 13 We also cannot directly control childrens behavior in the classroom. Yes, you read that  last sentence correctly. As educators, we have no control over the choices that a child makes  in a particular moment. We are not puppet masters with strings that can control the motor  and vocal behaviors of students. Rather, each child is free to make his or her own individual  choices. Although we may like to believe that we can control behavior, the truth is that it is  impossible. In presenting you with these realities, we do not mean to paint a bleak picture. The  truth is that although teachers cannot directly control students behavior, they have an  incredibly important role to play in promoting student outcomes. In order to gain a better understanding of the major influences on student academic achievement, John Hattie  2008 reviewed over 50,000 studies that had been conducted with over 80 million students. Hattie classified the factors that influence achievement into six overarching categories: student, teacher, parent, principal, schools, and peers. The factors that predicted the  largest amount of variance in student performance were student factors such as intelligence  and personality, which accounted for almost half of the variance. However, the second  largest predictor of student performance was teacher variables. In fact, teacher variables  had as much of an influence on student achievement as parent, home, school, and principal  variables combined! So if we cant control students behaviors, how is it that teachers have such a large influence on student achievement? This chapter provides an overview of behavioral science. As  the name implies, behavioral science is concerned with understanding why humans and  animals behave in the ways that they do. A chief assumption of behavioral science is that  although we cannot directly control others behaviors, we can control the environments  in which those behaviors occur. Where our control lies as behavior change agents is in  how we proactively structure the environment e.g., physical layout of the classroom, our  expectations and rules as well as how we respond to students behaviors both appropriate  and inappropriate. These sources of control are the focus of this book over the next several  chapters. TEACHER ATTRIBUTION THEORY Before we begin to talk about what teachers can do, we first wish to stop and talk a bit  about what teachers think. This is because the way that we respond to behavior is based  upon our beliefs as to why a student is exhibiting a particular behavior. We all know that  siblings will frequently get involved in fights in which one of them hits the other. The fight  is rarely about whether the actual blow took place. Instead, it devolves into a You did it on  purpose! versus No, I didnt, it was an accident! What is important to note here is that  the child who was on the receiving end of the blow will usually be much angrier when he or  she believes that the other sibling meant to do itthat is, if he or she believes that the strike  was under the control of the offending sibling. This refers to a psychological concept known  as attribution theory. Attribution theory deals with how we use information to come up with 
OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT	 an explanation for why someone acted a certain way or why something occurred e.g., what  caused a student to behave in a particular way. Weiner 1993 described three dimensions of attribution see Table 2.1: 1.	 Locus of control: Is the behavior due to internal or external causes? 2.	 Controllability: Are the causes under someones control? 3.	 Stability: Are the causes fixed or do they change? Typically, if a person believes the causes of a behavior are internal, controllable, and  stable, those causes are seen as being dispositional, whereas causes that are external, uncontrollable, and unstable are considered situational. Understanding the attributions that an  individual makes is important because these attributions often influence the degree to  which the individual believes he or she can effect change i.e., self-efficacy. For example, if  a teacher believes that the causes of a students behavior are both stable and uncontrollable,  that teacher is much less likely to intervene Mavropoulou  Padeliadu, 2002. Attributions can also more generally influence what strategies we select to address a problem. For  example, Soodak and Podell 1994 found that teachers were more likely to suggest parental  involvement as a strategy when they believed a students problems were attributable to  home factors and more likely to suggest classroom intervention when they believed a students problems were attributable to school factors. Research has found that many teachers tend to view student problem behaviors as  dispositional Wiley, Tankersley,  Simms, 2012. This suggests that teachers believe that  TABLE 2.1.  Understanding the Dimensions of Attribution Theory Situation Student failing an exam Student getting sent to the office Locus of control Internal He just doesnt have the smarts. Hes just a bad seed. External The test was probably just too  hard. Some of the teachers are just too  hard on him. Controllability Controllable He just didnt study hard enough. He just didnt think before he  acted. Uncontrollable Hes just unlucky. Hes just not in control of his own  actions. Stability Stable Hes just not good at math. Trouble just always finds him. Unstable Maybe he was just having a bad  day. Maybe something happened before  school.

Understanding Relevant Behavioral Theories	 15 student problem behaviors are due to stable factors that are unique to the child and within  the childs control. In fact, in a survey of teachers conducted by Stage et al. 2008, 65 of  teachers attributed the students problem behaviors to their thoughts or feelings, whereas  only 25 attributed them to classroom variables. Furthermore, a majority of teachers 57  indicated that the most helpful intervention would be individual counseling, whereas only  14 indicated a more structured and detailed classroom management plan would be useful  Stage et al., 2008. It is common for teachers to attribute student behaviors to a childs home environment.  Across several studies, teachers have been provided with a vignette describing a student  who struggled behaviorally in the classroom. When asked to identify the most likely causes  of these problems, the two most frequently endorsed explanations have been either internal  factors or home factors Mavropoulou  Padeliadu, 2002; Soodak  Podell, 1994. Across  these studies, teachers attributed student misbehavior to various home variables, including  parental attitudes, poor modeling, and the parents level of education. Much less research has been conducted on the attributions that students make for their  own behavior or the behavior of their peers. In a study by Cothran, Kulinna, and Garrahy  2009, secondary school students were asked about their beliefs regarding the causes of  student misbehavior within a physical education class. Among the more common explanations provided by students were that students misbehaved because they were uninterested  in the subject matter or were trying to get attention and thereby achieve a higher social status. These findings suggested that students perceived misbehavior as under the individuals  control. In contrast, however, studies by Guttmann 1982 and Sargeant 2012 suggested  that student misbehavior may instead be explained by relational variables. Problems in the  teacherstudent relationship were noted across both studies, including the student being  misunderstood and the teacher simply not liking the student. One of the few studies to directly compare the attributions of teachers and students  was conducted by Guttmann 1982. Results of this study highlighted several important  differences in the nature of the attributions made regarding student misbehavior. Whereas  students were more likely to see problem behavior as the result of classmates behavior or  being punished too much by the teacher, teachers were more likely to identify the students  psychological problems or need for attention as possible causes. Together, these findings  present an interesting conflictthat is, it seems that both students and teachers attribute  problematic behaviors to factors outside of themselves. This may not be surprising given the  frequency with which we are bound to hear comments such as He just needs to put in more  effort or That teacher just has it out for me! over the course of a school day. However,  adopting such an external attribution serves to create two emotions that are counterproductive to effective classroom management: anger and helplessness. When you see a student displaying inappropriate behavior, what attributions do you  make about the reason for the behavior? Do you assume that the student is deliberately  causing problems because it is in his or her nature? That the behavior was instigated by one  of his or her classmates? That the misbehavior stems from unmet needs as a child? That the  behavior is the result of a skill deficit? The attributions that we make to explain problem 
OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT	 behavior provide insight into our theoretical beliefs about human behavior and why we act  the way that we do. You may not necessarily have thought about yourself as ascribing to a  particular theory of human behavior; however, your answer to the question above may say  something about which theory your beliefs align with. For example, a psychodynamic perspective views behavior as being determined by the unconscious mind and the experiences  that we had in childhood. Cognitive psychologists, on the other hand, believe that behavior  can be explained by understanding what is going on in the human mind e.g., how we process, store, and use information. Within this book, however, we take a decidedly behavioral approach. Behaviorism  views individual behavior as being determined by factors in the environment. Have you  ever noticed that students behave differently in different settings? We have all worked with  the student who cant sit still during a reading lesson, but is incredibly focused during physical education class. Other students behave well in art, but not in mathematics. In fact, very  few students behave the same in all environments. If we approach student misbehavior from  a behavioral perspective, we are interested in understanding how the events in ones environment affect behaviorand how we can best harness this knowledge to support student  functioning. We spend the rest of this chapter outlining a number of key theories and principles that  are essential for understanding behavioral science. We hope that this chapter will therefore  lay the conceptual foundation for understanding the interventions that we discuss in this  book. FOUNDATIONS OF BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE A long time ago in a school district far, far away, David was working with a middle school  teacher who did not know what to do about a student who repeatedly called his classmates  racially offensive names. Each time this boywe will call him Joecalled his classmate  a name, the other students would yell at Joe and tell him to stop. This created a hectic  classroom scenario, in which none of the students were able to complete work, and the  teacher was completely frustrated. In order to try and curb the behavior, the teacher had  tried many things. She asked Joe to stop. She asked him to please stop. She yelled at Joe  to stop. She moved his seat to the front of the room. She sent him to the principals office.  She offered Joe a reward if he stopped. After each intervention or attempt to control the  behavior, Joe continued calling others racist names. No matter what she seemed to try, the  behavior persisted. The teacher knew that Joe had been diagnosed with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder ADHD and oppositional defiant disorder ODD, and began to  wonder whether her own efforts to curb the behavior were simply wasted. This scenario  may sound hopeless, but fortunately especially for the teacher! there is a satisfactory ending to the story. Before we get there, however, we want to highlight a few critical principles  that may explain this students behavior see Table 2.2 for a summary of these six principles.

Understanding Relevant Behavioral Theories	 17 TABLE 2.2.  Principles of Behavior Principle What is it  called? In other words . . . Classroom example Principle 1: We are  more likely to engage  in behaviors that  generate pleasurable  consequences. Law of effect Ill eat my broccoli  for Skittles, but  wont eat my  Skittles for broccoli. A student is more likely to  complete his or her assignment  quickly if it means he or she can  go to recess early, than if it results  in being assigned more work. Principle 2: We can  promote behavior  through reinforcement. Reinforcement Ill do anything for  Skittles! A student who desires attention  will be more likely to follow  directions if doing so results in  teacher praise. Principle 3: We can  reduce or eliminate  behavior through  extinction. Extinction If you stop giving  me Skittles, Ill stop  doing what you ask. That same attention-seeking  student will stop following  directions if it no longer results in  teacher praise. Principle 3a. We can  reduce or eliminate  behavior through  punishment. Punishment If you give me  lemons, I wont do  something anymore. A student who does not want  to stay after school will stop  calling out in class if it results in  detention. Principle 4: We tend to  engage in those behaviors  that bring the greatest  reinforcement. Matching law Lots of Skittles!  Right now? Little  effort? Yes, please! If a student who desires attention  can get it immediately from peers  by making jokes as opposed to  having to wait until recess if he or  she sits in class quietly, he or she  is more likely to make jokes. Principle 5: What we find  rewarding once may not  always be so. Motivating  operations My wants are  always changing! Principle 5a: When  we have had too much  of something, it is no  longer reinforcing. Satiation Im tired of Skittles!  I want MMs! A student who receives constant  praise for everything that he or  she does may come to no longer  desire it. Principle 5b: When  we have too little of  something, it is more  reinforcing. Deprivation I havent had  Skittles for a while.  I want them now! A student who has not received  any attention from the teacher  may find the smallest compliment  highly reinforcing. Principle 6: We look for  cues to tell us whether  reinforcement is likely. Discriminative  stimulus Look,  reinforcement  is available! I can see that  you bought more  Skittles and Im  ready to work! A typically reserved student might  begin to act out after seeing a  classmate act out and get attention  from the teacher as a result.
OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT	 PRINCIPLE 1: We Are More Likely to Engage in Behaviors  That Generate Pleasurable Consequences or, Ill eat   my broccoli for Skittles, but wont eat my Skittles for broccoli. In 1898, Edward Thorndike first described the law of effect, which now serves as the basis  for the science of behaviorism. A student of animal learning, he was interested in how cats  behaved when placed in a puzzle box. Thorndike would place a cat inside the box and lay a  piece of fish outside. The cat could open the box and access the fish! by pressing down on  a lever; however, the cat obviously did not know this. Thorndike was interested in seeing  what strategies cats would use to try and get out of the box and how long it would ultimately  take for them to escape. The cats would often make several unsuccessful attempts to get out  before unintentionally pressing the leverand opening the door. What Thorndike found  was that after pressing the lever and releasing the door, the cats became faster and faster at  getting out during subsequent trials. These puzzle box experiments ultimately led him to  propose the law of effect. The law of effect states that a behavior that is followed by a pleasurable occurrence is  more likely to occur in that situation, whereas a behavior that is followed by an unpleasurable occurrence is less likely to occur in a similar situation. In other words, we will keep  engaging in a behavior if something good comes of it and stop doing it if it results in something bad. When the cats found that pressing the lever released the door and got them fed!,  they were more likely to press the lever the next time. Other strategies that did not result in  the opening of the door, however, were less likely to be used again. This law was profound  for its time because it focused not on the internal psychical structures of the individual  remember Sigmund Freuds id, ego, and superego?, but instead looked at the relationship  between behaviors and events in the environment in which those behaviors occurred. In  other words, Thorndike suggested that most behavior is situational. The idea that behavior is largely situational probably does not shock most of us today.  Indeed, if an adult were to strip off all of his or her clothes and sing Kisss Rock and Roll  All Night Stanley  Simmons, 1975 at the top of his or her lungs, this behavior would  be responded to very differently depending on the context. If performed downtown on a  Friday night, this behavior would likely be followed by an arrest, which would hopefully!  reduce the likelihood that the behavior occurred again in the future. On the other hand,  there would likely be no response at all if the individual was home alone in the shower, such  that the behavior would be much more likely to repeat in the future! Same behavior but different contexts, and thereby very different outcomes. The other part of the law of effect that is worth noting has to do with the vague definition of something pleasurable versus unpleasurable. We may think of something that is  pleasurable as being universally so; however, this is in fact not true. The first reality is that  what is pleasurable for one person is not necessarily pleasurable for another person. For  example, David does not like chocolate, whereas Amy absolutely loves it. Therefore, offering  David a box of chocolates to assist with an accreditation report is likely to be seen as much  less motivating than it would be to Amy. The second reality is that our own perception of 

Understanding Relevant Behavioral Theories	 19 pleasurability may vary across time, or we might find something pleasurable in one context  but not in another. For example, having friends and family sing Happy Birthday in the  comfort of ones own home may be enjoyable, whereas having it sung by a rowdy group of  restaurant waiters when surrounded by strangers can feel more awkward than comforting. PRINCIPLE 2: We Can Promote Behavior through Reinforcement  or, Ill do anything for Skittles!. Roughly 60 years after Thorndike 1898 introduced the law of effect, B. F. Skinner 1966  expanded upon this idea by introducing the principle of reinforcement. You may remember  hearing about the Skinner box in Introduction to Psychology. Similar to Thorndikes experiments, Skinner placed a hungry rat in a box that contained a lever. When the lever was  pressed, food pellets would be dispensed into the box. Although it sometimes took a while  for the rats to initially discover the lever, eventually they would go straight to the lever when  placed in the box. The rats continued to press the lever because they had learned that doing  so would result in a desired consequence. Skinner suggested that anything that strengthens the likelihood of a behavior occurring  in the future should be considered reinforcement. Thus, people are not reinforced, behavior  is reinforced. In general, most behaviors are reinforced by something in the environment some sort of an outside action. We suspect that this outside action is serving to reinforce a  particular behavior if and only if! the behavior continues to occur when it is followed by  that outside action. Types of Reinforcement Skinner 1966 also distinguished between two types of reinforcement: positive and negative. Because we often think of positive as being associated with something good and  negative as being associated with something bad, the definitions of positive and negative  reinforcement are a bit counterintuitive. Here, the positive and negative refer instead to  whether something is given or taken away. Positive reinforcement refers to something that  an individual receives that leads to an increase in the behavior occurring in the future. This  may look similar to a reward e.g., receiving a gold star or a prize, but does not necessarily  look so in every situation. For example, being yelled at by a teacher could be a form of positive reinforcement if the problem behavior continues occurring after the student receives  this attention from the teacher. Negative reinforcement refers to something aversive that  is taken away from or avoided that leads to an increase in the behavior occurring in the  future. Perhaps the most common example of negative reinforcement is the familiar nagging  buzzer that sounds as soon as you start up your cars ignition. The annoying buzzing noise  goes away as soon as you fasten your seat belt, which for the majority of us increases the  likelihood and swiftness with which we fasten our seat belt the next time that we get in the  car.
OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT	 Lets consider some examples:  Your colleague has a jar of candy in his or her office. When you walk into the office,  you take some candy from the jar, and so you walk into the office more frequently.  The candy reinforces your entering the office.  When you log into Facebook, you get a notification that somebody has commented  on one of your posts. As a result, you check your posts more frequently. The comments from friends reinforce your Facebook-checking behavior.  A student is given a difficult assignment that she does not want to complete. The  student knows that if she swears at the teacher, she will be sent to the principals  office and will get to chat with the principals secretary instead of doing her work.  The student therefore continues to swear. Getting to hang out in the principals office  reinforces the swearing behavior. Notice that all of these examples involve an increase in behavior. Even the last example which is intended to decrease a problem behavior! actually functions to increase the  problem behavior. Sending the student to the principals office was reinforcing because the  student was able to avoid having to do a difficult assignment. Additional examples of both  positive and negative reinforcement are provided in Table 2.3. Schedules of Reinforcement As Skinner 1966 continued his study of animal behavior, he discovered something interesting by accident. His supply of food pellets was drawing thin and he didnt have enough  time to make the new pellets that were needed. He decided to try and extend his remaining  supply of food by providing the rat with food once every minute instead of once every time  TABLE 2.3.  Types of Reinforcement Positive reinforcement gainingaccessing Negative reinforcement losingescaping Attention  Getting attention from adults  Getting attention from peers  Avoiding attention from adults  Avoiding attention from peers Activities  Getting to do a preferred activity  Avoiding a boring activity e.g.,  doing difficult math assignments Objects  Getting to play with a particular  toy, book, or use an instrument  Avoiding a frightening animal  such as a dog, snake, or spider

Understanding Relevant Behavioral Theories	 21 that it pressed the lever. What he found was that the rats lever-pressing behavior actually  became stronger when reinforcement was presented intermittently. Through subsequent  trials, Skinner developed the concept of schedules of reinforcement. If you think about what is going on in a classroom, there are multiple behaviors that  a child can choose to engage in. As described in the first chapter, a child can yell in class,  throw spit wads, work on assignments, or stare out of the window. In a classroom setting,  each of these behaviors is reinforced on a different reinforcement schedule. Some behaviors may be reinforced continuously, meaning something in the environment occurs every  single time the student performs a behavior. Other behaviors are reinforced periodically on  an intermittent reinforcement schedule. We provide a few concrete examples of what these  reinforcement schedules look like next, highlighting the strengths and limitations of each  approach see Table 2.4. Continuous Reinforcement Schedules Within a continuous reinforcement schedule behavior is reinforced each and every time that  it occurs. Imagine, for example, what would happen if you had a job making paper airplanes.  Each time you finished a paper airplane, a person gave you one quarter. What would you  likely do? You would likely continue making paper airplanes and start saving up for a night  out on the town! But what would happen if you suddenly stopped getting quarters? You might  continue to make one or two more airplanes, but chances are that you would stop once it  became clear that the funds had dried up. Continuous reinforcement systems can be incredibly useful when you are looking to establish a new behavior because the learner comes to  quickly realize that engaging in the desired behavior will reliably lead to something good. At  the same time, however, these types of systems are both time and resource intensive and may  create a situation in which a students behavior is entirely dependent on receiving a reward. TABLE 2.4.  Schedules of Reinforcement Fixed Variable Continuous Not applicable Not applicable Interval Fixed period of time  After working for 5 minutes  After playing appropriately for 10 minutes Random period of time  After working for between 3 and 7 minutes  After playing appropriately for 812 minutes Ratio Fixed number of responses  After completing 10 problems  After raising hand three times Random number of responses  After completing 810 problems  After raising hand two to four times
OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT	 Intermittent Reinforcement Systems The alternative to providing continuous reinforcement of behavior is providing reinforcement intermittently. Returning to the example above, rather than paying you after each airplane is completed, someone might choose to instead pay you for working a certain period of  time or after completing a certain number of airplanes. Intermittent reinforcement systems  can further be classified into either interval or ratio systems. INTERVAL REINFORCEMENT SYSTEMS Within an interval reinforcement system, behavior is reinforced after a certain period of  time i.e., interval. This period of time may be constant i.e., fixed or it may vary across  time i.e., variable. Fixed interval systems are probably the most familiar to us, as this is the  system often used by employers. Typically, people either get paid a set amount for each hour  worked i.e., hourly wage or one larger sum in exchange for many hours worked i.e., salaried  income. Applied to our paper airplane example, we might get paid 10 an hour for making  paper airplanes. As a worker on the origami assembly line, a fixed interval reinforcement  system is desirable because we know that we will reliably get paid for each hour worked.  The potential disadvantage for the employer, however, is that this system does not necessarily encourage high levels of productivitythat is, because an individual gets paid the same  amount regardless of whether he or she makes three airplanes or 30, there may not be sufficient external motivation to produce. In a random interval system, on the other hand, we  would not necessary know how long we would need to work before we got paid. Sometimes  we might get paid 10 after a half hour of work and other times we may need to work for 90  minutes to earn the same amount. Such a system often results in a steady rate of behavior  over a long period of time; however, behavior occurs at a modest rate. This is because the  reinforcement that the individual receives is independent of the behavioral response rate. RATIO REINFORCEMENT SYSTEMS Within a ratio reinforcement system, behavior is reinforced based on the number of times it  occurs. As with interval systems, the number of necessary occurrences may be constant i.e.,  fixed or it may vary across time i.e., variable. Within a fixed ratio system, you might get  paid 5 every time you made 20 paper airplanes. In this case, most of us would work very  quickly to finish the 20 paper airplanes so we could get paid. A ratio reinforcement system  therefore typically results in fast responding; however, producing in terms of quantity may  come at the cost of quality. In our daily lives, far more behaviors are reinforced according  to variable ratio schedules. The most common example of a variable ratio system is a slot  machine, for which the odds may be known 1 in 20 is a winner! but for which the payoff  during any particular play is uncertain. What would happen if you were making paper airplanes and you received 5 after making one airplane, and then another 5 after making  seven airplanes, and another 5 after three airplanes, such that you couldnt quite predict  when you might get paid next? Behaviors that are reinforced on a variable ratio schedule 

Understanding Relevant Behavioral Theories	 23 tend to persist and continue because the individual cannot predict when the payout will  come. As such, this has been shown to be the most powerful schedule of reinforcement. PRINCIPLE 3: We Can Reduce or Eliminate Behavior  through Extinction and Punishment   or, If you stop giving me Skittles, Ill stop doing what you ask. Reinforcement can be used to strengthen desired behaviors; however, B. F. Skinner 1966  also discussed ways in which to weaken or eliminate undesired behaviors see Figure 2.1.  The first is through the use of punishment. Whereas reinforcement was seen as strengthening the likelihood of a behavior occurring in the future, punishment was seen as weakening  the likelihood of a behavior occurring in the future. Similar to reinforcement, punishment  can be of two forms: either positive or negative see Table 2.5. If something is received for  engaging in a problem behavior and this decreases the likelihood that the problem behavior  will occur again, it is called positive punishment. Common examples of positive punishment  include being yelled at or getting a speeding ticket for driving too fast on the highway. Negative punishment, however, occurs when something is taken away and this decreases the likelihood of the problem behavior occurring in the future. For example, a student might have to  stay inside during recess for engaging in problematic behavior or have his or her phone taken  away for playing with it during class. Sending a student to time-out may also serve as a form  of negative punishment if doing so removes the student from desired attention from peers. The second strategy for weakening behavior is through the process of extinction.  Extinction occurs when a behavior that was previously reinforced is no longer reinforced.  Imagine, for example, that one of your students thrives on attention from peers. In order to  get that attention from peers, the student begins to tell jokes during whole-class instruction.  Each time that the student tells a joke, he or she reliably gets a laugh from classmates. If,  however, you provide the class with explicit instructions regarding how to ignore the behavFIGURE 2.1.  Distinguishing reinforcement from punishment. Behavior occurs Behavior  followed by   outside action Behavior continues  or increases in  frequency Behavior occurs Behavior  followed by   outside action Behavior stops or  decreases in  frequency Reinforcement Punishment
OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT	 ior e.g., turn away from the student and remain silent, the student will eventually find that  his or her comedic efforts are ineffective, and will stop making jokes. Although the process  sounds so simple, teachers who implement extinction procedures are often bedeviled by  what is called an extinction burst. An extinction burst refers to an increase in a behavior that  occurs when reinforcement stops. Because the student knows that telling jokes was so effective in gaining peer attention in the past, he or she may try hardermaking jokes louder or  more dramaticin order to try and regain that lost attention. Usually, the extinction burst  is short-lived and the behavior does eventually stop; however, unfortunately, the behavior  can often get much worse before it begins to get better. It is important to also keep in mind that extinction can occur with desired behaviors.  For example, you might know that one of your students is likely to complete more assignments if the student knows that doing so will allow him or her to receive a salty snack. You  therefore decide that every time the student turns in five assignments, he or she will receive  a small snack. This fixed ratio reinforcement strategy proves very effective; however, eventually you come to realize that you can no longer afford to give out salty snacks so often.  What is likely to happen if you suddenly stop doing so? Probably the same thing that would  happen if you stopped receiving a paycheck: The work will stop. PRINCIPLE 4: We Tend to Engage in Those Behaviors   That Bring the Greatest Reinforcement   or, Lots of Skittles! Right now? Little effort? Yes, please!. After Skinner had laid the foundation for understanding how reinforcement and punishment  operate, R. J. Herrnstein 1961 began to explore the role that choice plays in determining  behavior. Like Skinners ratsand Thorndikes cats before himHerrnstein was studying  learning behavior in his laboratory with pigeons. Within an experimental chamber, he this  time placed two different keys. Pressing either key would result in the release of food; howTABLE 2.5. Types of Punishment Positive punishment  gainingaccessing Negative punishment  losingescaping Attention  Being reprimanded  Being given an office referral  Being sent to time-out  Having seat moved away  from friends Activities  Having to serve detention  Having to stay in from recess Objects  Having to wear an ugly shirt  Having a toy taken away

Understanding Relevant Behavioral Theories	 25 ever, each key was set to a different variable interval schedule of reinforcement. For example,  the pigeon might receive food on average every 2 minutes if it pressed the first key but only  every 5 minutes if it pressed the second key. What Herrnstein found was a strong relationship between the rate of responding i.e., how often the pigeon pressed the key and the  relative rate of reinforcement i.e., how often the pigeon received food for pressing one key as  opposed to the other. This quantitative relationship came to be known as the matching law. Extended to the understanding of human behavior, we know that there are often multiple behaviors that we can choose to exhibit in a given situation. However, most of us will  choose to exhibit those behaviors that will result in the best outcomes. In general, we are  most likely to choose those behaviors that get us the greatest amount of reinforcement, with  the least amount of effort, and as quickly as possible. This is why although most of us like  to think that we would choose the salad when approaching a buffet line, we all know that  the broccoli and garbanzo bean containers stay full while the cheesecake goes very quickly! There are a couple of important implications of the matching law to consider when we  think about student behavior. The first is that in any situation there are likely to be competing sources of reinforcement. If your own efforts to change student behavior through  reinforcement or punishment have been largely unsuccessful, it is important to consider  whether the problem behavior is being reinforced by something or someone other than  yourself. If a student is receiving higher rates of reinforcement for engaging in the problem behavior than exhibiting what is desired, the problem behavior will likely continue to  persist. We therefore need to set up our classrooms so that earning reinforcement through  problem behaviors is unlikely, whereas receiving reinforcement through desirable behavior  is more likely. Of the multiple behaviors that are possible, we want to make the undesirable  behavior difficult and the desirable behaviors easy. The second thing to keep in mind is  that the conditions that are reinforcing a behavior may vary over time and across settings.  Because there are always multiple things going on in a classroom, it can sometimes be difficult to understand the multiple competing contingencies at play. For example, a student  may find teacher attention reinforcing when his or her peers are busy, but may find teacher  attention embarrassing if peers are with him or her. Assuming that the value of a particular  form of reinforcement is a constant for an individual would therefore be problematic. PRINCIPLE 5: What We Find Rewarding Once   May Not Always Be So or, Im tired of Skittles! I want MMs!. One of the interesting things to note is that the value of a particular type of reinforcement or punishment is not necessarily a constant over time. Rather, a reinforcer may have  a very strong influence on our behavior in one situation and a much more weak influence  in another. Imagine attending a reception where you have just eaten cake. If someone were  to bring back the leftover cake and place it in the break room, you would not be especially  motivated to get up and get a piece because your sweet tooth had already been satisfied.  However, had you decided to skip the reception and found yourself in need of a sugar boost  to make it to the end of the day, you would likely be much more motivated to venture down 
OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT	 the hallway to grab a slice. In this example, cake became less desirable when it was preceded by another event i.e., attending the reception. An event that changes the value of the  reinforcer is called a motivating operation. To draw another example using student behavior, imagine if you will that a middle  school student has just returned to third period after spending all of first and second periods sitting alone quietly in the principals office. The student is typically fairly attentive,  but today cannot seem to sit facing forward and is constantly turning to talk with classmates. Despite prompts to pay attention, the student continues to talk at inappropriate  times throughout the entire period. Under typical circumstances, the student is not someone whom you would consider a chatterboxthis inappropriate talking is therefore seen an  unusual behavior for him or her. However, in this particular situation, there was an event  that made the attention from the students peers more powerfulnamely, the fact that he  or she had been deprived of any attention during first and second periods. This situation is  depicted in Figure 2.2. In this example, being deprived of attention in the office was the  motivating operation that made talking to classmates more desirable. In the first example, the fact that you were already satiated by cake meant that the  opportunity to eat more cake was not reinforcing. In the second example, the fact that the  student was deprived of attention at the start of the day meant that attention from peers  became even more reinforcing. Together, these examples illustrate the two most common  types of motivating operations: satiation and deprivation. We are less likely to engage in a  behavior if we have already been in frequent contact with the reinforcer and more likely to  engage in a behavior if we have not received that form of reinforcement in quite some time.  The implications of this for the classroom are as such. If a previously effective reinforcer  appears to lose its value, this may possibly be explained by satiation. When possible, one  might switch out reinforcement to another form e.g., providing the student with free time  instead of stickers; however, alternatively, it may be necessary to limit access to the reinforcer until it regains its former value. PRINCIPLE 6: We Look for Cues to Tell Us   Whether Reinforcement Is Likely or, I can see   that you bought more Skittles and Im ready to work!. The last important concept to understand when looking at an individuals behavior is the  idea of a discriminative stimulus. A discriminative stimulus is something that signals to an  FIGURE 2.2.  Example of a motivating operation. Motivating Operation Alone in office  attention  deprivation Behavior Inappropriate talking  to peers Reinforcement Attention from peers

Understanding Relevant Behavioral Theories	 27 individual that reinforcement is available. When I am driving home from work and come  to an intersection with a stoplight, I stop. I stop even though I want to get home and driving through the stoplight might get me home a bit sooner. In this case, the red traffic light  signals to me that it is not a good idea to cross the street because it is unsafe or I may get a  traffic ticket. In this case, the red light signals that reinforcement is not available, whereas a  green light signals that reinforcement is available and that it is safe to drive. As another example, think of a middle school boy who has a crush on a girl in his class.  He finds her attention extremely reinforcing and is therefore routinely willing to sing in  class, call her name, or talk about the clothes she is wearing so that she will say something  to him. Although she has not paid attention to him all day and he is starved for her attention,  he does not act out as your class begins today. Why? Because the girl is tardy and has not  yet arrived. When she finally walks into the class, however, the student begins his normal  routine of verbally wooing the girl. It is the act of walking into the classroom that signals to  the boy that reinforcement i.e., attention is now available. PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER Now that we have laid out the basic behavioral principles upon which the strategies presented in this book will build, let us return to the case of the middle school student we presented earlier in order to provide further illustration. To refresh your memory, the middle  school teacher was frustrated to put it mildly with one of her students, who continually  called other students racially offensive names. Although his teacher had tried several strategies to curb this behavior e.g., sending to the office, administering rewards, the most typical response was for both the teacher and the other students to yell at him to stop. We next reexamine the principles that we have described throughout this chapter with  regard to the students use of offensive language. The Law of Effect The law of effect essentially says that we will keep engaging in a behavior if something  good comes of it and stop doing it if it results in something bad. Each time that Joe called  his classmates offensive names, they would yell at him to stop. The fact that Joe continued  to engage in the behaviordespite seat changes and reprimands and trips to the principals officesuggests that he took great pleasure in the attention that he was getting from  his teacher and classmates. Although most of us would not find having others yelling at us  pleasurable, we must keep in mind that what is pleasurable for one person is not necessarily  pleasurable for another. Reinforcement As we noted above, each time that Joe made negative comments, he received peer and  teacher attention. The fact that the problem behavior continued to persist when followed by 
OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT	 negative attention suggests that attention was reinforcing the behavior. Because the reinforcement was something that Joe received i.e., attention, this suggests an example of positive reinforcement. When we stop to think about the schedule of reinforcement, we realize  that Joe was being reinforced on a continuous scheduleevery time he insulted a classmate, the rest of the class told him to stop. This meant that the behavior was being strongly  reinforced. However, this also meant that the behavior may have had low resistance to  extinction. In other words, if the class had simply ignored the behavior, it may have gone  away. Punishment When we think about the word punishment, we often think about some penalty that is  imposed for doing something wrong. When Joes teacher yelled at him, moved his seat to  the front of the room, and sent him to the principals office, she was attempting to punish  him for his inappropriate behaviorthat is, she thought that applying these consequences  would stop the behavior from occurring in the future. Unfortunately, however, what we  sometimes expect to be negative consequences dont end up being quite as aversive as  we hoped. In Joes case, the fact that the behavior persistedrather than abatingafter  these consequences were applied suggests that none effectively served as forms of punishment. The Matching Law The matching law suggests that although there are multiple behaviors that we may engage  in, we tend to choose those behaviors that result in the greatest level of reinforcement. At  one point, Joes teacher moved away from relying solely on punitive strategies and offered  Joe a reward if he stopped making inappropriate remarks. She was well-intentioned and  hoped that perhaps Joe would be so motivated to earn extra recess time that he would  clean up his verbal act. The fact that the reinforcement strategy did not work, however, suggests that the recess time reward was not powerful enough. This is likely because Joe was  receiving higher rates of reinforcement for engaging in the problem behavior than he was  for speaking kindly to his peersthat is, whereas he could only receive extra recess time  once a day, he was receiving attention from peers every time that he made an inappropriate  remark. Motivating Operations A motivating operation is an event that changes the value of a reinforcer. In this case, the  fact that Joe was calling his classmates inappropriate names day in and day out suggests that  there was not a motivating operation at work. However, if Joes day was structured so that he  was able to access a lot of peer attention at the start of the daythereby satiating the need  for attentionhe may be less likely to call his classmates names in order to obtain attention  as the day went on.

Understanding Relevant Behavioral Theories	 29 Developing an Intervention Given what we now know about Joes problem behavior, designing an appropriate intervention plan becomes a much more straightforward task. At the foundation of this plan,  our goal should be to ensure two things: 1 that Joe does not continue to receive attention  for calling his classmates inappropriate names and 2 that the reinforcement Joe receives  for using kind words in the classroom is sufficiently powerful to maintain the behavior.  David therefore worked with the teacher to implement a program known as a group ignore.  Through this process, the other students in the class were rewarded for ignoring Joes inappropriate behavior. Every time Joe yelled a racially inappropriate name, the teacher would  look at the rest of the class. If they said nothing, they earned a point that could be exchanged  for 15 seconds of free time at the end of the class. After eight shouts with no response, Joe  stopped calling out. In addition, procedures were put into place to reinforce him for using  kind words in the classroom. Given that Joe seemed to find peer attention reinforcing albeit  the negative kind!, his classmates were taught to provide Joe with positive attention each  time that he used appropriate language or otherwise interacted appropriately with them. In  addition, a contingency was put into place whereby Joe could earn 5 minutes of free time  each hour to chat with a friend if he said at least five kind things to his classmates and had  no instances of inappropriate language. CONCLUSIONS Much as it would be difficult to understand a chemistry lesson if you did not have a handle on  the necessary terminology e.g., compounds, electrons, elements, fully understanding  the interventions described in this book would be challenging without a basic understanding of behavioral principles. Our goal in this chapter was therefore to provide the reader  with much of the theoretical basis for the rest of this text. Some people have objections to  a behavioral approach to managing classes. These concerns are addressed in Appendix 2.1  at the end of this chapter. As we move to discuss specific intervention techniques in future  chapters, we return to these basic principles to provide a rationale for why it is important to  carry out procedures in a certain way. Chapter 3 addresses methods for both promoting positive behaviors and making sure that problem behaviors are not unintentionally rewarded.  Chapters 47 focus on different strategies for utilizing the principles of reinforcement to  reward the behaviors we want to see and to extinguish problematic behaviors. APPENDIX 2.1.  FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS Q: Are you suggesting that we treat our kids like laboratory animals? A: Not at all. Even though many of these theories were tested and developed using animal models, an entire field of study called applied behavior analysis has been created that applies these  theories to humans. Humans are certainly much more complex than animals, but these same  principles apply.
OVERVIEW AND FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT	 Q: Are you saying that we need to give students something every time they do what they are supposed to do? A: No, not at all. In this chapter, we are not making recommendations. Instead, we are making  observations about the ways that behaviors increase and decrease. Q: Dont behavioral techniques kill a students intrinsic motivation? A: This is a question that we frequently get. We have both worked with a number of teachers who  believed that rewards kill students intrinsic motivation or their willingness to do something just  because they think it is important. There are a few things to consider: 1.	 For a student to be intrinsically motivated to do something, he or she must already be able  to do it, and do it well. Most of the behaviors that we teach in school are things that students  have not mastered and have no intrinsic motivation for. For most of these situations, extrinsic  motivators are needed if the students do not find the skills motivating. Once a behavior is  under stimulus control, or we know how to motivate it, intrinsic motivation may be facilitated  by fading the intervention using self-monitoring techniques see Chapter 7 and by the students mastery of the skills. 2.	 If students are given rewards for a behavior that they already find intrinsically motivating,  they may or may not lose intrinsic motivation. However, using reductive strategies such as  overt punishment to control a student may actually serve to decrease intrinsic motivation. Q: Dont students already know how to behave when they come to school? A: Human beings learn to adapt to a variety of environments. Some students come from environments that are similar to school, and some do not. Students know how to behave in the environments in which they have experience. Q: Wont students have learned proper behavior from their previous teachers? A: This does not always happen. Different teachers have differing amounts of expertise in classroom  management. However, one should never assume that students know how to behave in your  classroom. Q: Isnt this just another education fad? A: We are all used to seeing educational fads come and go. Most of the time, the fads are based on  weak evidence e.g., learning styles, whole-language reading instruction or there are inadequate  supports put into place to allow those ideas to take shape. Classroom management practices have  some of the strongest theoretical and empirical support, but are frequently not implemented with  integrity. Chapter 9 of this book addresses the issue of intervention integrity. Classroom management practices require practice and feedback.

PART II PROMOTION AND PREVENTION  STRATEGIES
Have you ever observed that your behavior changes in different situations? For example,  most people are far more likely to exercise if the air temperature is 70 degrees than if it is  0 or 105 degrees. We are more likely to check our Facebook page if weve been receiving  notifications frequently than when we have not. We tend to eat healthier food when we are  at home where there are apples on the counter than when we are traveling and it is easiest  to pick up snacks at a convenience store. We talk louder at parties with a lot of background  noise than we do when we are sitting in a church, synagogue, or mosque. We are more likely  to get work done if the setting is quiet and has minimal distractions than if someone is playing a video game in the same room. Walmart even recently changed the way it laid out the  items in its stores because it found that consumers tend to buy more when shelves are higher  and more items are stacked in the middle of the aisles! Although there are certainly always exceptions, our behavior is somewhat predictable.  Given a specific situation, adults are more likely to engage in a particular response. The  same is true for kids. Have you ever noticed how high schoolers behave differently in gym  and art class than they do in English? How an entire class performs well for their classroom  teacher but displays abhorrent behavior for a substitute? The point is that environments  matter and have a profound effect on behavior long before a student even thinks about acting up. Teachers who recognize that environments affect behavior are more likely to look for  environmental solutions to classwide behavior problems that are preventative. This chapter  addresses the preventative methods that teachers may employ to foster environments that  CHAPTER 3 Structuring the Classroom for Success Preventing Problems before They Happen What distinguishes our intellect from animals is not that we can go against  our environmentmost of us cant, not in the long runbut rather that we can  purposefully alter our environment to shape our behavior in ways we choose. Freedman 2012
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 minimize disruption and maximize learning. In other words, we focus on those things that  teachers can do proactively in order to make problem behaviors less likely to occur. WHY ARE PREVENTATIVE STRATEGIES IMPORTANT? Prevention is about getting in early to stop something before it occurs. Although most of the  time there is widespread consensus as to the importance of preventing something undesirable e.g., bullying, crime, violence, this is not necessarily always so. For example, currently  in the United States there is disagreement regarding whether vaccines are necessary in  order to stay healthy and prevent disease, or whether they make children more susceptible  to illness by weakening the immune system. This same type of debate extends to preventative classroom management practices. Although some teachers believe that preventative  classroom management strategies are necessary in order to prevent problem behavior, we  have heard many other teachers express concern that classrooms that are too highly structured will prevent kids from being able to think critically. In other words, they fear that  these students will not receive sufficient opportunities to make mistakes, learn from natural  consequences, and figure out how to navigate social hierarchies. By the time these students  grow up, these teachers worry that students will not be able to function independently as  adults. We want to address this concern by acknowledging two realities. The first reality is that many students come to school with some type of disadvantage.  In 2013, roughly 20 of school-age children in the United States were living in poverty  Kena et al., 2015. Children living in poverty have a higher likelihood of risk factors including lead exposure, limited access to mental and physical health care, and increased exposure to substance abuse. These home factors may make it more difficult to attend to instruction when students enter the classroom. Furthermore, the National Survey of Childrens  Exposure to Violence found that one in 10 youth in the United States had personally experienced maltreatment and more than one in four youth had witnessed victimization at home  or in their communities Finkelhor, Turner, Ormrod,  Hamby, 2009. Students who have  experienced violence may come to school with some degree of anxiety or may alternatively  imitate the aggression that they have witnessed elsewhere. For many of these students who  have experienced disorder or uncertainty outside of school, a highly structured classroom  setting is the best way to keep them safe and to remove distractions from learning. The second reality is that if a classroom is poorly structured, all students are likely to  miss out on learning opportunities because instructional time is lost to managing behavior  problems. As a result, instructional periods are likely to be much less efficient. For example,  even a student who is generally very attentive and engaged in classroom lessons may find  himor herself having to use mental energy to ignore distractions in a classroom characterized by high levels of disruptive behavior. Because energy has to be directed toward  purposefully ignoring distractions, the student ultimately has fewer immediate cognitive  resources to allot to mastering complicated academic material. On the other hand, if a classroom is well structured and disruptions are minimized, it is easier not only to teach the 

Structuring the Classroom for Success	 35 intended curriculum but also to teach independent living skills such as social and emotional  regulation. WHAT ARE EVIDENCEBASED PREVENTATIVE STRATEGIES? Throughout the remainder of this chapter, we present evidence-based strategies for managing student behavior that are proactive in nature. Many of the decisions regarding preventative strategy usage can be made before the first student even enters the classroom. In  fact, research has shown that those teachers who are most effective spend a great deal of  time teaching and planning for the management of student behaviors at the start of the year  Everston  Emmer, 1982. Although the specific execution of each of these strategies may  differ depending on the age of the student, the underlying principles do not. Broadly speaking, preventing classroom problems requires addressing three areas: 1.	 Creating physical structures in the classroom that reduce the likelihood of behavior  problems. 2.	 Teaching students expected behaviors. 3.	 Engaging in effective teaching behaviors that elicit desired behaviors. Creating Physical Structures One of the first things that most classroom management textbooks talk about is how structuring the classroom setting is key to promoting appropriate behavior and maximizing  learning. This is likely because changing seating arrangements is an easy and inexpensive  method for managing student behavior. Like much of the classroom management literature, early studies examining classroom layout were largely correlational e.g., Kritchevsky   Prescott, 1969; Zifferblatt, 1972that is, researchers entered different classrooms and  tried to account for the behavioral differences observed by highlighting variations with  regard to the physical space. Although the authors of these studies made recommendations  with regard to classroom layout e.g., limit number of desks in a cluster, the correlational  nature of these investigations meant that definitive conclusions regarding the effect of classroom configuration could not be made. Beginning in the late 1970s, however, researchers began to conduct experimental studies in order to better understand the influence of seating arrangement on student behavior.  Wannarka and Ruhl 2008 conducted a review of those empirical studies in which desk  arrangement was directly manipulated. Several of the identified studies examined the differential effect of arranging desks in rows versus clusters or circles on off-task behavior see  Table 3.1. Results suggested that structuring desks in rows resulted in lower levels of offtask behavior during independent seatwork than other configurations e.g., clusters, circles.  These results held across elementary e.g., Hastings  Schweiso, 1995 and secondary e.g.,  Axelrod, Hall,  Tams, 1979 settings, but were found to be most pronounced when exam36	 PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 ining the behavior of students with behavior problems Wheldall, Morris, Vaughan,  Ng,  1981. Teaching Students Expected Behaviors We know that there is wide variation from one school to the next with regard to philosophies of learning and the ways of doing business. There are some schools that eschew traditional teacher-led instruction and instead encourage students to initiate their own learning  opportunities. At the same time, other schools are characterized by a high level of structure,  order, and discipline. However, the one thing that all schools have in common is that there  are agreed-upon expectations for student behavior. Such expectations are necessary given  that a large number of students have to manage the limited resources of space, materials,  and teacher attention in any one given classroom. Therefore, once the physical environment  has been structured, classroom management next involves identifying the behaviors that  students need to exhibitor should avoid exhibitingin order to maximize learning in the  classroom. These behaviors that we wish to see students exhibit or suppress! are not necessarily ones that students need in order to be successful later in life. As adults, we rarely need  to get hall passes, line up for lunch, or sit on a specific square on a carpet. Yet, these may  be behaviors that are necessary for students to move safely through a school or to be able  TABLE 3.1.  Studies Examining the Effects of Classroom Configuration Study Setting Comparison Design Outcome Axelrod, Hall,   Tams 1979,  Study 1 Second-grade  classroom during  independent seatwork Desks in rows  versus clusters BCBC design within  one classroom Higher levels of  on-task behavior in  rows Axelrod et al.  1979, Study 2 Seventh-grade life  sciences class Desks in rows  versus clusters BCB design within  one classroom Greater number of  talk-outs in clusters Bennett   Blundell 1983 Fourth-grade  inclusive classrooms  during independent  seatwork Desks in rows  versus groups BCB design across  two classrooms Higher levels of  work production in  rows Hastings   Schweiso 1995 9to 11-year-old  students during  independent seatwork Desks in rows  versus groups BCB design across  two classrooms Higher levels of  on-task behavior in  rows Wheldall   Lam 1987 Two classrooms  of 12to 15-yearold students in  a special school  for behaviorally  troublesome students Desks in rows  versus clusters ABAB across three  classrooms Higher levels of  on-task behavior in  rows

Structuring the Classroom for Success	 37 to meaningfully participate in a group activity. One way of classifying these behaviors is as  either being instructionally relevant or instructionally irrelevant. All of the following student behaviors are ones that we generally wish to increase and  could be considered instructionally relevant: answering teacher questions, individually  completing a worksheet, mixing chemicals together in a laboratory, playing an instructional  game, helping another student with classwork, and collaborating on a group project. We  could probably brainstorm a list of 100 behaviors that are of potential relevance in school  settings; however, identifying all possibilities is probably of limited utility for two reasons.  First, we know that there are probably very few behaviors that each and every teacher  finds to be instructionally relevant. For example, one classroom teacher may require students to stay seated and facing forward throughout instruction, whereas another teacher  may encourage students to get out of their seats to release energy intermittently. Neither is  necessarily right or wrong; they are simply two different ways of structuring the classroom  that result in different interpretations of instructionally relevant behavior. Second, we  know that what is relevant in one setting is not necessarily relevant in another. For example,  bouncing a ball off of the floor may be instructionally relevant in physical education, but  would likely be looked upon with discouragement during literacy instruction. It is therefore  important to consider context when determining instructional relevance. We would like to think that students spend the majority of their school days engaged  in instructionally relevant behaviors; however, we know in reality that this is not necessarily true. Instructionally irrelevant behaviors are those that do not directly pertain to  instruction. Most of the time when we think of instructionally irrelevant behaviors we think  of problem behaviors that teachers aim to decrease: talking or getting out of a seat without permission, playing with a smartphone, fighting, calling other students names, engaging in horseplay, writing graffiti on walls, cheating . . . the list goes on. However, not all  instructionally irrelevant behaviors are necessarily considered problem behaviors. In any  classroom, there are times when students may be doing tasks that do not directly relate to  math or reading or science but are necessary to ensure that everybody is prepared to learn  and that instruction moves forward. Examples include putting materials away, getting snow  gear on and off, lining up, sharpening pencils, turning in assignments, and finding another  activity when classwork is finished. These transitional activities are critical to classroom  success because they allow students to stay safe while being in the right place with the right  tools. Although the nature of these instructionally irrelevant and transitional behaviors is  certainly very different, too much of either can be problematic. After all, the more either of  these types of behaviors occurs, students spend less time participating inand benefiting  fromthe class curriculum. Maximizing learning time requires that a teacher establish and  teach rules, expectations, and routines to make sure that the classroom functions smoothly. Establishing Rules and Expectations One way to help ensure that students engage in higher rates of instructionally relevant  behaviors is to establish clear rules and expectations for student behavior. We have yet to  see a classroom management book that does not recommend having clear expectations for 
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 student behavior, and there are very few classrooms in which rules are not in place. In fact,  when you think back to your own elementary school experience, you can probably picture  the list of boldly written reminders not to eat, cheat, or fight hung on the wall! The terms  rules and expectations are often used interchangeably to refer to guidelines for student  behavior; however, these concepts can be differentiated by their scope, both in terms of  how they are framed and where they apply. Merriam-Webster 2017 defines an expectation as a belief that something will happen or is likely to happen, whereas a rule is defined as a statement that tells you what is  or is not allowed in a particular game, situation, etc. Expectations are therefore broader  in scope, in that they are generally stated and apply across settings. The expectation that  students be kind to one other, for example, is a general expectation for how we would like  students to behave that is not typically limited to the lunchroom or the hallways. Rules, on  the other hand, tend to be narrower in scope. Rules describe specific behaviors that we  would like to see students demonstrate and that apply to specific settings. Just as the rules  in a game of Go Fish are not the same as those in Capture the Flag, the rules for student  behavior on the playground are not necessarily the same as those in the classroom. Within the positive behavioral interventions and supports PBIS literature, recommendations have been made for establishing both rules and expectations. In general, both rules  and expectations should be realistic, age appropriate, and understandable for the students.  This means setting ambitious but not unrealistic expectations and wording these rules or  expectations in a way that makes sense to the target population. Rules and expectations should  also be positively stated, describing what students should do rather than what they should  not. Finally, both lists of rules and expectations should be limited in number so that it is easy  for students to remember them. Although there are no clear research-based criteria for how  many rules are too many, one recommendation that has been made is that classes should have  approximately four to six rules Gable, Hester, Rock,  Hughes, 2009; see Coach Card 3.1. CLARIFYING CHANGING EXPECTATIONS One of the challenges with rules is that they are often context specific and vary depending  on the time of day. It has therefore been suggested that a visual signal may be useful for  students to understand when different expectations are in place Skinner  Skinner, 2007.  One strategy for clarifying expectations involves the use of a color wheel system Skinner,  Scala, Dendas,  Lentz, 2007. Within this system, a different set of expectations is developed to correspond with the colors red, yellow, and green. Typically, red is the most restrictive in terms of expectations for student behavior and reflects what students should be doing  when the teacher is giving directions. For example, students may be expected to sit quietly  in their seats with their eyes on the teacher. Green, on the other hand, is the least restrictive  in terms of expectations and reflects what students should be doing during free-time activities. For example, students should keep their hands and feet to themselves, respect others,  and use inside voices. Yellow lies between red and green and reflects expectations during   All coach cards appear at the ends of chapters.

Structuring the Classroom for Success	 39 typical instructional periods e.g., independent seatwork, lecture. During these times, students are expected to sit quietly in their seats with their eyes on their work and raise their  hands if they have a question or need to leave their seats. In one study utilizing the Color  Wheel intervention within an urban fourth-grade classroom, a fourth segment was added  in order to signify expectations during cooperative learning activities Blondin, Skinner,  Parkhurst, Wood,  Snyder, 2012. Specifically, during these times students were expected  to use quiet voices, talk only when it was about assigned work, ask three students a question  before asking the teacher, keep their hands and feet to themselves, and follow directions. Once the expectations have been operationalized, a tricolored wheel i.e., equal parts  green, yellow, and red is constructed and placed at the front of the classroom. The teacher  then explains that appropriate behavior looks different depending on what is going on in  the classroom. The three sets of expectations are explicitly taught to the students and practiced using role plays Skinner et al., 2007. Each day, the teacher reviews the three sets  of expectations with the class and then cues the students each time that the color wheel is  turned. In one variation, a stoplight was used rather than a color wheel to signal changes in  expectations Choate, Skinner, Fearrington, Kohler,  Skolits, 2007. Both improvements in  on-task behavior and decreases in disruptive e.g., out of seat, inappropriate vocalizations  behavior have been observed in empirical studies of the Color Wheel intervention within  elementary classrooms see Table 3.2. TABLE 3.2.  Empirical Studies Examining the Color Wheel Intervention Study Setting Intervention Design Outcome Blondin, Skinner,  Parkhurst, Wood,   Snyder 2012 Fourth-grade  general education  classroom Color Wheel ABAB design  across seven  students Large increases in  on-task behavior Choate, Skinner,  Fearrington, Kohler,   Skolits 2007 First-grade  general education  classroom Color Wheel AB design  within one  classroom Large decreases in  out-of-seat behavior Fudge et al. 2008 Second-grade  general education  classroom Color Wheel BCBC design  within one  classroom Large increases in  on-task behavior Kirk et al. 2010,  Study 1 Third-grade  general education  classroom Color Wheel   IGC ABCDC  design within  one classroom Fewer inappropriate  vocalizations during  Color Wheel  IGC  than IGC alone Kirk et al. 2010,  Study 2 First-grade  general education  classroom Color Wheel   SCM BCDC design  within one  classroom Fewer callouts during  Color Wheel  SCM  than SCM alone Note. IGC, interdependent group contingency; SCM, standard classroom management procedure.
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 SAMPLE RULES AND EXPECTATIONS Because rules and expectations provide a clear set of boundaries that serve as cues for  students and teachers alike, they should be both observable and enforceable. When David  began teaching, he found that he would accuse his students of breaking rules that he had  never established. If two students were talking to each other, he would tell them that they  were violating the classroom rules even though he had never told them ahead of time that  talking was not allowed. Rightfully, the students complained. Eventually, it was the act  of sitting down to establish rules for the class that crystalized what his expectations actually were. Although rules can be established for a wide range of contexts and situations,  our goal here is to provide you with a few diverse examples of situations in which proactively establishing rules in advance may pay off in dividends see Box 3.1 for additional  examples.  What type of space should students give each other? One of the most consistent  problems that teachers have is students who violate each others space. For example, in a  residential treatment setting, it is important to establish boundaries because there are frequently problems with horseplay and physical interactions that border on bullying. In this  setting, students may not be allowed to touch each other while they are in school unless  it is a handshake or a fist bump. More commonly, however, students simply struggle with  understanding the concept of a personal bubble. Within preschool settings, for example,  children may be taught to put a Hula-Hoop around their waists in order to understand  how much space their classmates may need. Because guidelines for how much space students need will differ depending on the age and cultural context of the students and the  BOX 3.1.  Questions That May Be Used   to Establish Proactive RulesExpectations  How loud can students talk?  How should students line up?  What materials should students come to class with?  What should students do to show they are paying attention?  What should students do when they finish their assignments  early?  What should students do when they need help?  What should students do when they need to use the restroom or drinking fountain?  When can students leave their seats?  When can students work with classmates?  Where can students move in the classroom?

Structuring the Classroom for Success	 41 target setting, these expectations should be explicitly taught to students from the beginning.  What movement is allowed? The amount of movement that is tolerated in the classroom will inevitably vary based on the activity. During individual work time, students may  need to stay seated in order to complete their assignments and avoid disturbing other students. During a science lab, on the other hand, it may be perfectly acceptable to get up and  walk around the room. The rules regarding what type of movement is permissible and when  should be clearly outlined for students in order to avoid any confusion. When establishing  these rules, however, it is beneficial to keep in mind the importance of movement in promoting students emotional, cognitive, and academic health. Regular activity is needed in  order to maintain glucose and oxygen levels to the brain, which help to promote focus and  attention Reilly, Buskist,  Gross, 2012. One study found that incorporating just one brief  10-minute physical activity break into the daily classroom schedule led to improvements in  students on-task behavior Mahar et al., 2006.  What should students be doing during teacher-directed instruction? Research has  found that rates of disruptive or inappropriate classroom behavior tend to be much higher  during whole-class instruction e.g., Greenwood, Horton,  Utley, 2002; Hollo  Hirn,  2015. This may be explained by the fact that students tend to have fewer opportunities  to respond and actively engage in instruction. Establishing expectations for what students  should be doing during teacher-directed instruction clarifies what it means to be engaged  when one is not necessarily actively working on an assigned task. One popular expectation  for student behavior during classroom instruction involves the use of the acronym SLANT:  Sit up, Lean forward, Ask questions, Nod your head, and Track the speaker. Research has  shown that teaching students to observe and monitor their SLANT behaviors may help to  improve overall levels of on-task behavior e.g., Amato-Zech, Hoff,  Doepke, 2006; Briesch, Hemphill,  Daniels, 2013.  How should students respond to classmates misbehavior? When working in general education classrooms, we come to expect that there will be some students who will  exhibit impulsive behaviors, some who will act out when things are not going their way, and  still others who will display the inevitable behavioral meltdown. Unfortunately, however,  students who act out are often reinforced by the behavior of their classmates. A student who  makes inappropriate jokes in order to gain peer attention may get the laugh from his or her  neighbors that he or she was hoping for. Or a student who begins to cry during recess when  he or she isnt able to play with a toy that he or she wants may be given that item by an  empathetic peer. It can therefore be beneficial to teach students strategies for responding  up front. For example, one facility had a procedure called awareness, whereby students  had to turn their heads away from a student who was acting out and be silent. When problems are anticipated, proactively teaching students concrete strategies helps to avoid further  escalation of problems.
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 EMPIRICAL RESEARCH ON RULES AND EXPECTATIONS The National Council on Teacher Quality NCTQ describes the explicit teaching of rules  and expectations as a strategy with strong aggregated research support. Researchers have  even suggested that ensuring students have a clear understanding of the rules and expectations can do more for school safety than security cameras, security guards, and higher  levels of supervision Mayer  Leone, 1999. It is important to note, however, that there  is no research to show that clear rules and expectations, by themselves, have a significant  impact on student behavior Gable et al., 2009. Across two studies conducted in elementary  school classrooms, teacher-created rules that were only introduced to the class but not reinforced were shown to have no effect on problem behaviors Greenwood, Hops, Delquadri,   Guild, 1974; Madsen, Becker,  Thomas, 1968. However, when students received feedback and reinforcement for demonstrating expected behaviors, significant improvements  in classroom behavior were observed. We talk more about the reinforcement of student  behavior in Chapter 4. Establishing Routines In addition to rules and expectations, it is also important to establish routines. Whereas  rules describe what students should and should not do, routines describe specific step-bystep responses that students should exhibit during daily classroom activities in order to  ensure that materials, furniture, and bodies are in the right place for the activity. One of  the things we know about teachers who are identified as most effective is that they spend  most of their time during the beginning of the year establishing routines and teaching procedures Bohn, Roehrig,  Pressley, 2004; Rubie-Davies, 2007. There are many different routines that we may establish. Although some routines are  likely applicable to any classroom e.g., using the bathroom, others may be idiosyncratic  to a particular classroom context e.g., cleaning the class pets cage. Furthermore, we may  establish some routines from the outset of the school year, whereas others may arise during  the middle of the school year we present a case example to illustrate how the need for new  routines may be identified in Box 3.2. The best way to begin to think about which routines  should be taught in your classroom is to write down the different transitions that occur  throughout the day. For example, there are specific steps that students must follow when  they first enter the classroom that are distinct from those that they must follow when getting  ready to go home at the end of the day. In Table 3.3, we have provided several examples of  both academic and nonacademic routines to help get you started in thinking about which  routines you may wish to target. When developing a routine, there are several things that a teacher needs to consider.  First, how long should the routine take? If the routine involves transitioning from one activity to another, a 2-minute time frame may be appropriate. If a routine involves clearing the  classroom in case of a serious disruption, however, 20 seconds may be a more appropriate  time limit. Second, what is the end goal of the routinethat is, once the routine is completed, what should the classroom look like? Communicating clear expectations for what it 

Structuring the Classroom for Success	 43 BOX 3.2.  Illustration of Establishing Routines I David was once working with a sixth-grade class that typically sat at two-person tables.  For group activities, however, all students needed to sit in chairs in a circle in the middle of  the room. The first time that the students were asked to move their desks and chairs, there  were several problems. Some students dragged the tables across the tile floor, which made  a horrible noise. In order to get the best seat, several other students ran with their chairs,  narrowly missing hitting or running into their classmates. The students also placed a number  of tables directly in front of the classroom door, creating a fire hazard. When the chairs were  finally moved to the center of the room, they formed an oval, which meant that some students  sitting at the far ends would have difficulty participating in the conversation. To top it all off,  the transition took 5 minutes, which was much longer than the 2-minute target that I had in  mind. After bringing these concerns to the students, the class created the following checklist  for what transitioning to group activities should look like: 1.	 The classroom should have all desks placed to the side of the room while still ensuring easy access to the door. 2.	 All chairs should be carried by one person. All tables should be carried by two persons. 3.	 Students will walk at all times. 4.	 All of the chairs should be placed in a circle. 5.	 The transition will take no longer than 90 seconds. The class then practiced this transition five times until they met all of the criteria. Of  course, teaching the routine took nearly an entire class period; however, the next time that  the class met, the transition took only 90 seconds and they were able to begin the group  activity immediately. TABLE 3.3.  Examples of Academic and Nonacademic Classroom Routines Academic routines Nonacademic routines  Asking questions  Finishing an assignment early  Gettingputting away materials  Making up missed work  Turning in assignments  Getting help  Note taking  Discussing work in groups  Completing the starter assignment  Entering the classroom  Using the bathroomwater fountain  Evacuating the room in case of emergency  Lining up  Preparing for bus departure  Cleaning up at the end of the school day  Sharpening a pencil  Blowing ones nose  Taking off and putting on snow gear
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 means to have put all of your materials away, for example, will avoid some students having  cleared their desktops, whereas others have created tidy piles of books and papers. Third,  what level of scaffolding is needed for students to successfully carry out the routine? More  or fewer teacher-delivered prompts may be necessary depending on the students age, as  well as their familiarity with the routine. Consideration of each of these factors will assist in  developing the most effective routine procedures for a given situation. Teaching Rules and Routines Once rules and routines have been established, they must then be explicitly taught to students. Whether you are teaching rules or routines, arithmetic or writing, the same principles of effective instruction applythat is, teaching a new skill involves a four-step process of telling, showing, doing, and generalizing see Coach Card 3.2. The first two steps  represent indirect training, in which the students passively listen and learn. The second two  steps represent direct training, in which the students take a more active role in practicing  and rehearsing the skill. To illustrate these steps, imagine that you have never been on skis  before and the instructors task is to teach you to get down the bunny slope successfully.  Initially, the teacher explains what the skill involves and why it is important i.e., tell. A  novice skier might be told to form a wedge with his or her skis in order to control his or  her speed down the hill. Forming a V with ones skis helps to create resistance and thereby  slows you down. Next, the teacher demonstrates for the student how to perform the skill  i.e., show. The ski instructor might put on his or her skis and model the wedge technique  while the student watches. Providing examples of both good and bad e.g., legs too far apart,  leaning too far back, looking down at the ground form will help the student to better understand what creating a wedge should look like. Third, the student is provided with multiple  opportunities to perform the skill i.e., do and receives feedback from the teacher in order  to improve performance. This means that the novice skier actually puts on his or her boots  and skis and tries to slow himor herself down using the wedge method. If the instructor  sees ways in which the novice could improve, he or she provides the skier with concrete  suggestions. Finally, the student receives different opportunities to apply the skill in order  to build fluency i.e., generalize. This might first entail additional practice opportunities  e.g., repeatedly going up and down the bunny slope; however, eventually the novice should  apply the skill in different contexts e.g., on a different or more challenging hill in order to  promote skill generalization. When teaching rules and routines, there are a few things to keep in mind. First, never  assume that a student knows what a routine or an expectation is. To understand the degree  to which teachers expectations vary, all that you need to do is to walk down the hallway  during after-school dismissal. The student may have been taught an expectation or routine  previously; however, it may not look exactly like the one you wish to establish. Second, never  assume that simply telling a student how something should be done will result in behavior  change. No matter how many instructional videos you watch on YouTube, you are unlikely  to be able to do the Napoleon Dynamite dance until you actually practice. Just like us,  children dont learn by listeningthey learn by doing. Third, never assume that practicing 

Structuring the Classroom for Success	 45 a routine once is sufficient. We know that with most things repeated practice is necessary  in order to build fluency with a skill. Fourth, never assume that feedback is unnecessary.  When we practice a skill in the absence of feedback, we risk practicing that skill incorrectly.  Students need to receive performance feedback in order to ensure they fully understand  what is expected. Finally, never assume that your routines will be perfect the first time.  We may spend time developing a routine, teach it to our students, and then realize that we  have forgotten an important step. Or, particular steps may become less necessary over time.  Routines must be viewed flexibly and subject to modifications as needed. Engaging in Effective Teaching Behaviors In an educational utopia, we might simply teach students what we expect them to do, click  our heels three times, and they would magically follow every rule and routine that we had  laid out before them. In reality, we know that additional effort is needed in order to ensure  that classrooms continue to run smoothly. In this final section, we highlight those small  strategies that teachers can implement on a daily basis in order to elicit desired behavior from their students. These strategies fall into several broad categories: effectively communicating instructions, increasing opportunities to respond, and actively supervising the  classroom. Effectively Communicating Instructions There are many times in a given day when teachers need to give directions. Directions refer  to those expectations communicated by teachers that are unique to that particular activity  or period of time. Directions can be used to describe the behaviors necessary to complete  an assignment, or to communicate to students how to move from one place to another. If a  teacher does not give clear directions, however, a student may not know what the expectations are. Many beginning teachers struggle when giving directions and make one of several  common mistakes. First, they may fail to get the students attention before giving a direction  so that it falls on deaf ears. In such a situation, students do not even have the opportunity to  hear the direction in the first place. Second, some teachers give directions as requests e.g.,  Would you mind moving to another desk, please?. Although such requests come across  as very polite, they also communicate to the student that the direction is optional when, in  fact, it may not be. Third, teachers may give long directions e.g., Take out your science  books, turn to page 56, read the first full paragraph on that page, and then write down a  few key points from your reading, causing students to lose track of what they are supposed  to do. Fourth, teachers may ask students to do things that are not behaviorally measurable. Asking a student to Improve your attitude, Try harder, or Pay attention involves  changing some internal state that we cannot observe. As a result, it can be difficult to judge  whether the student actually achieved what was being asked of him or her. Fifth, teachers  may create a power struggle by standing immediately over a student and waiting for him or  her to comply. This may increase a students anxiety level as well as the likelihood that the  student may shut down or respond in a manner that is aggressive or attention seeking. For 
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 some students with challenging behaviors, this may actually reinforce the noncompliant  behavior by providing teacher attention. Finally, teachers may forget to check to make sure  that the student actually followed the direction. By failing to follow up, and thereby communicating the importance of following instructions to the student, the student may learn  that directions are only suggestions and not worth following. The empirically supported  strategies, which are described below, address these problems that teachers frequently  encounter when communicating with students. MAKING PRECISION REQUESTS A precision request is one that includes the students name as well as a description of the  required behavior, is delivered using a polite tone, and builds in wait time for the student to  comply. When delivering a precision request, it is important to use the childs name to make  sure he or she knows to whom you are speaking. For many children although this may vary  based on the childs cultural background, use of direct eye contact can help to ensure that  the student is paying attention. Care should also be taken to make the request in as few  words as possible using language that clearly states what you would like the student to do.  For example, Please bring that book to me communicates a much clearer request than  Can I have that book? After the initial request has been made using the word please,  you should then do something else i.e., not staring intensely at the student! for approximately 5 seconds before checking to make sure the student has followed the directive. The  5-second delay is particularly important given empirical evidence that compliance may be  thwarted if an insufficient wait time is employed Forehand, Gardner,  Roberts, 1978. If  the student follows the direction, he or she should receive some form of praise. If not, the  direction is given againthis time incorporating the word need e.g., You need to bring  that book to me. Again, if the student responds to the second request, praise is delivered;  however, failure to follow the directive may be followed by some form of reprimand see  Coach Card 3.3. Although precision requests can effectively be used to solicit desired behavior from  most students, they may prove particularly beneficial with those students demonstrating  problem behaviors see Table 3.4. For example, research has shown that the use of precision  requests may substantially increase student compliance De Martini-Scully, Bray,  Kehle,  2000; Neef, Shafer, Egel, Cataldo,  Parrish, 1983. De Martini-Scully and colleagues  2000 found a substantial reduction in noncompliance when teachers used precision commands, which even maintained after the teacher stopped using the technique. Musser, Bray,  Kehle, and Jenson 2001 also found that precision techniques increased compliance with  students who had been identified with serious emotional difficulties. MAKING HIGHPROBABILITY REQUESTS As we shared with you in Chapter 2, both of us have different perspectives on chocolate.  Given that Amy finds chocolate to be very enjoyable, she would be highly likely to say yes  if asked to eat some. This is what we call a high-probability request. Asking David to do so, 

Structuring the Classroom for Success	 47 however, would be followed by some resistance. Because David dislikes chocolate, asking  him to eat some would be considered a low-probability request. Sometimes we can increase  the chances of a student following a low-probability request e.g., Please write a paragraph  about your day by making a high-probability request first e.g., Please pick up your pencil. Once a student starts to do something, we then hope that the principle of behavioral  momentum will kick in. Behavioral momentum refers to the idea that once we start doing  something, it is difficult to stop. Filing our taxes is a difficult task to start, but once we do it,  it becomes easier. The same is true for exercise, doing chores, and grading student work. In  much the same way, we hope that once a student has complied with one request, he or she  will continue to comply with subsequent requests. Teachers can improve student compliance without students even knowing it by using a  combination of high-probability requests and behavioral momentum. The process is fairly  straightforward. Begin by asking students to do something they have no problem doing e.g.,  Give me a high five. Then, ask them to do something they may be less likely to do e.g.,  TABLE 3.4.  Empirical Studies Examining Effective Communication of Requests Study Setting Intervention Design Outcome Ardoin, Martens,   Wolfe 1999 Second-grade  students in general  education High-probability  requests Multi-element  design Notable increase  in compliance  for two-thirds of  students De Martini-Scully,  Bray,  Kehle  2000 Second-grade  students in general  education Precision  requests  token  economy with  response cost ABAB and  multiple  baseline across  two students Notable decreases  in disruptive  behavior Killu, Sainato,  Davis, Ospelt,   Paul 1998 Preschool students  with developmental  delays High-probability  requests Multiple  baseline across  three students Substantial  increases in  compliance Mackay,  McLaughlin, Weber,   Derby 2001 12-year-old female  with intellectual  disability Precision  requests ABAB design  across three  settings Substantial  decreases in  noncompliance Musser, Bray, Kehle,   Jenson 2001 8to 10-year-old  students in a special  education classroom  for students  with emotional behavioral disorders Precision  requests   mystery  motivator with  response cost Multiple  baseline across  three students Substantial  decreases in  disruptive behavior Wehby  Hollahan  2000 13-year-old student  in general education Compared  lowversus  high-probability  requests BCBCBDC  design Substantial  decrease in latency  to compliance
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 Now tell me what happened on the playground. Oliver and Skinner 2002 wrote about  a substitute teacher who used the Hokey Pokey when working with her students e.g.,  Put your right hand in, put your right hand out before asking them to do other things.  The song had the advantage of lots of high-probability tasks as well as a rapid sequence  of requests. High-probability tasks may also be interspersed within low-probability tasks  in order to improve student compliance Axelrod  Zank, 2012. Lee 2005 conducted a  meta-analysis of 28 studies examining the use of high-probability requests and found the  intervention to be effective in promoting compliance in preschool through high school-age  students see Table 3.4 for information regarding specific studies. Increasing Opportunities to Respond David spent some time working at a school that was attached to a residential treatment facility. During the 2 weeks of winter break, he and his coworkers worked in the students living  units and were responsible for organizing activities to keep the girls entertained. Most of  the activities were not very popular e.g., movies, games, discussions, sports; however, one  activity was consistently associated with high levels of enjoyment and exemplar behavior.  It was the Bingo group. No matter what group of students participated in Bingo, the event  went well. Why was that? One of the great things about Bingo is that it is high paced.  Because a new number is called out every 30 seconds, there isnt enough time for students  to tune out or get into any trouble. If they want to have a chance of winning the round, students have to sit quietly, listen carefully, and remain vigilant as the numbers are announced.  Providing students with lots of opportunities to participate ultimately served to reduce the  number of behavior problems exhibited. Teachers can also use this proactive strategy by increasing the number of opportunities  students have to respond during classroom instruction. Opportunities to respond OTRs  refer simply to the number of times a student has the opportunity to provide an answer.  Classroom teachers most typically ask students to raise their hands, and then call on individuals to provide correct answers. This approach has been used for decades; however, it  frequently oversamples the most enthusiastic and confident students while leaving out those  students who are struggling with the material. As a result, teachers may be given false optimism about the entire classs understanding of material. In order to promote the participation of all students in the classroom, two alternatives to individual hand raising have been  supported within the research literature: choral responding and response cards. Rather than having students respond individually when questions are posed, use of  both choral responding and response cards entails having the entire class provide an answer  simultaneously. One of the other key elements across both strategies is ensuring a sufficient  instructional pace, which allows students less time to act out and increases the amount of  time that students are on task Carnine, 1976; West  Sloan, 1986. The difference between  the two strategies, however, simply lies in how those answers are provided. With choral  responding, all students respond verbally in unison to a teacher-posed question. Although  some successful examples of choral responding can be found in both self-contained special  education e.g., Sindelar, Bursuck,  Halle, 1986 and general education e.g., Haydon et al., 

Structuring the Classroom for Success	 49 2010 settings, the number of studies that have examined behavioral outcomes is relatively  small. Furthermore, the challenge with choral responding is that it can be difficult to monitor individual responses, particularly the voices of those students who are less confident. The use of response cards involves providing students with whiteboards or other slates  so that they may write down answers and hold them up in the air. Responding may be  facilitated by cell phones or laptops using websites like polleverywhere.com for anonymous  responding or socrative.com which allows teachers to track individual responses. Students can also respond to their partners or the person sitting next to them. Over the past 30  years, the majority of studies have examined the use of response cards in order to improve  academic performance e.g., Cavanaugh, Heward,  Donelson, 1996; Maheady, MichielliPendl, Mallette,  Harper, 2002; Narayan, Heward, Gardner, Courson,  Omness, 1990;  however, positive effects have been seen for classroom engagement and disruptive behavior  as well. Successful examples of the use of response cards within general education settings  have been found in both elementary e.g., Lambert, Cartledge, Heward,  Lo, 2006; Wood,  Mabry, Kretlow, Lo,  Galloway, 2009 and secondary e.g., Cavanaugh et al., 1996; George,  2010 settings see Table 3.5. TABLE 3.5.  Empirical Studies Examining Opportunities to Respond Study Setting Strategy Design Outcome Armendariz   Umbreit 1999 Bilingual third-grade  general education  classroom during math  lecture Response cards ABA design  within one  classroom Decrease in  disruptive behavior Haydon et al.  2010 Second-grade general  education classrooms  during teacher-directed  whole-class instruction Choral  responding;  mixed individual  and choral  responding Alternating  treatments  design across  six students Disruptive and  off-task behavior  lowest during  mixed-responding  condition Lambert,  Cartledge,  Heward,  Lo  2006 Fourth-grade general  education classrooms  during math instruction Response cards ABAB design  across four  students Decrease in  disruptive behavior Sutherland,  Alder,  Gunter  2003 8to 12-year-old  students in a selfcontained classroom for  students with emotional behavioral disorders Teachers receive  daily feedback  regarding  opportunities to  respond ABAB design  within one  classroom Decrease in  disruptive behavior;  increase in on-task  behavior Wood, Mabry,  Kretlow, Lo,   Galloway 2009 Kindergarten classroom  during circle time Response cards ABAB design  across four  students Decrease in off-task  behavior
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 The relative effectiveness of a response card intervention was further demonstrated  in a study by Godfrey, Grisham-Brown, Schuster, and Hemmeter 2003. These authors  used an alternating treatments design that directly compared the effectiveness of individual hand raising, choral responding, and response cards. Each intervention condition  was implemented classwide during the morning calendar activity in a preschool classroom  e.g., What is the month? What is the day today?; however, data were collected only  for four target students who struggled with attention. Whereas the number of inappropriate behaviors exhibited during the calendar activity was roughly similar during the handraising range  814 and choral-responding range  617 conditions, much lower rates  of inappropriate behavior were observed when using response cards range  26. The  greatest improvements in on-task behavior were also noted within the response card condition. Actively Supervising the Classroom I David have a confession to share with the readers. Sometimes, I got into a little bit of  trouble in school. Not a lot of trouble, but I could be disruptiveespecially with friends  nearby. My favorite teachers were those who stayed in the front of the room, and would  never come by and bother me while I was working read: having a serious conversation  about after-school plans. However, when the teacher was standing near me, I was much less  likely to act out, make paper airplanes, or play Dungeons  Dragons. Teacher presence had  a significant influence on my behavior. Ironically, when I was a beginning teacher, it took me a while to learn this lesson. I sat  at my desk in the front of the classroom and rarely got up. My students could be fairly confident about where I would be at any one time. This meant that some students got away with  sneaky behaviors such as writing notes, stealing other students stuff, and making comments  under their breath. Rather than trying to head off problem behavior before it occurred, I  waited until I saw a transgression to publicly confront the student. On occasion, the student  would stop the behavior, but other times the confrontation led to arguing, threatening, or  simply ignoring. What I didnt realize was that these problems might have been prevented  from occurring in the first place had I simply gotten up from my desk, moved around the  room, and used active supervision. Active supervision consists of two important components see Coach Card 3.4. First,  the teacher needs to move around the classroom, scan the environment, and frequent those  parts of the classroom where behavior problems frequently occur. The less predictable the  teachers location, the less likely that students will be to engage in problem behaviors. Second, the teacher should have frequent interactions with students to make sure that they  know the teacher is around. These interactions can range from greeting students with a  friendly tap on the shoulder to providing praise De Pry  Sugai, 2002. Through these  actions, teachers are able to communicate with-it-ness to their students, or the sense that  they are aware of what is going on in the classroom at all times Kounin, 1970. Within the literature, active supervision has been successfully used with elementary  De Pry  Sugai, 2002; Colvin, Sugai, Good,  Lee, 1997, middle Schuldheisz  Mars, 

Structuring the Classroom for Success	 51 2001, and even high school students Johnson-Gros, Lyons,  Griffin, 2008. As displayed  in Table 3.6, active supervision is a vital component for managing a variety of schoolwide  behavior problems. Use of active supervision in classrooms, hallways, and playgrounds has  been shown to reduce problem behaviors ranging from playground accidents to tardies. Use  of active supervision can also help teachers to provide higher rates of behavioral feedback,  such as praise and reprimands. We talk more about using praise and reprimands effectively  in the classroom setting in Chapter 4. CONCLUSIONS Preventing behavior problems before they occur is critical to effective classroom management, whether it be at the preschool or high school level. Before the first student steps in  the classroom in the fall, we can already work to head off problem behavior by carefully  considering physical layout and structure. Next, explicitly teaching classroom rules and routines helps students to understand what behavior is expected and provides fewer triggers for  problem behaviors. Behavioral expectations can also be made clear through the use of preTABLE 3.6.  Empirical Studies Examining Active Supervision Study Setting Strategy Design Outcome Colvin, Sugai,  Good,  Lee  1997 Elementary  students during  before-school  transition Active supervision  versus typical  supervision Multiple baseline  across settings Decrease in problem  behaviors across  each setting when  active supervision  implemented Heck, Collins,   Peterson  2001 Students in  grades K3 on  playground Active supervision  with social skills  instruction versus  typical supervision Multiple baseline  across grades Reduction in the  misuse of playground  equipment Johnson-Gros,  Lyons,   Griffin 2008 High school  hallway Active supervision  versus typical  supervision Multiple baseline  AB across class  periods Reduction in office  discipline referrals  for tardies Kartub,  Taylor-Greene,  March,   Horner 2000 Middle school  hallway Precorrection and  social skills training   active supervision  versus typical  supervision AB design across  three grade  levels Reduction in noise  levels across all  grades Lewis, Colvin,   Sugai 2000 Elementary  school  playground Active supervision and  precorrection during  typical supervision AB design across  recess periods Decreased problem  behavior
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 cision commands and high-probability requests, which are structured to avoid ambiguity in  interpretation. Teachers can also work to curb disruptive behavior by making sure that students remain actively engaged in instruction. Increasing the number of opportunities that  students have to respond through techniques, such as choral responding or response cards,  minimizes the likelihood of problem behavior. Finally, active supervision signals to students  that the teacher is aware of everything that is going on in the classroom. This ultimately  makes the problem behavior more costly by increasing the likelihood that the teacher will  find out. Now that we have talked about what to do before problem behavior occurs, it is  time to answer the question What should I do after a behavior has already occurred?
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 3.1.    Establishing Rules and Expectations 1.	 Ensure rules and expectations are:

 Age appropriate.

 Easily understood by students.

 Enforceable.

 Limited in number e.g., four to six.

 Observable.

 Positively worded.

 Realistic. 2.	 When possible, use visual signals to clarify when different expectations are in  place.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 3.2.    Teaching Rules and Routines Teaching any new skill should involve a four-step process of:

 Telling the students what the rule or routine is.  Explain what following the rule looks like.  Explain the specific steps needed to follow a routine.

 Showing the students what following the rule or routine looks like.  Provide both examples and nonexamples.

 Having the students do what you have taught them.  Ask the students to practice the rule or routine.  Provide performance feedback.

 Having the students generalize the skill.  Have the students rehearse the rule or routine in different contexts.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright  2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy  this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material  see the box at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 3.3.  Delivering Effective Precision Requests Initial request made  using the word please Deliver praise Second request  made using the  word need Complies Does not  comply 5sec  wait Deliver praise Deliver  reprimand Complies Does not  comply 5sec  wait

Deliver the request in a calm, unemotional tone.

Ensure proximity  3 ft.

Make the request as detailed as possible.

Maintain eye contact with the student.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 3.4.  Active Supervision Actively supervising a classroom involves:

 Frequently interacting with students.

 Moving around the classroom.

 Providing feedback for both appropriate and inappropriate behavior.

 Scanning the environment to look for problem behavior.

 Spending more time in those parts of the classroom in which behavior  problems frequently occur.
As humans, we are well accustomed to both delivering and receiving feedback. We receive  feedback regarding how well we are performing our jobs when we meet with our boss at  the end of the year. We provide other motorists with feedback concerning how well they  are driving when we decide to honk our car horn. We receive feedback from our children  as to how much they enjoyed our cooking when they leave most of the food on their plate  uneaten. Feedback is important in our daily lives because it helps us to know whether our  efforts were correct and accurate, or whether they were wrong and off base. Feedback is  particularly important in the classroom, however, because it provides an opportunity to  overcome a discrepancy between the expectations that we as adults have for students, and  the behaviors that they are displaying Hattie  Timperley, 2007. In fact, feedback has  been identified as one of the most powerful instructional practices known to education  Hattie  Timperley, 2007. Although we know that feedback is incredibly important, it is the type of feedback that  we give a student that can dramatically affect the power the feedback has on student learning and behavior. Consider the example of a small child first learning to talk, who has heard  his or her parents speak with perfect grammar, syntax, and elocution, but still commits  grammatical mishaps. If the child says, I is going to the park, and the parent simply says,  Thats not how you say it, the childs speech is unlikely to improve. Simply telling a child  that he or she is wrong or right provides little help in closing the discrepancy gap between  your expectations and the childs behavior. By merely telling the child that he or she has  done something wrong, you have communicated implicitly two things: 1 you are not doing  what I expect you to do and 2 I want you to change your behavior. Instead, the best feedback answers the following questions for a child: 1 What are the goals?; 2 What kind of  progress am I making toward those goals?; and 3 What do I need to do to better meet those  goals? Hattie  Timperley, 2007. In the example above, the parent has not communicated  CHAPTER 4 Providing Students   with Behavioral Feedback
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 what appropriate syntax is, has not alerted the child to the exact error that he or she made,  and has not provided a way for the child to fix the error. Thus, the best feedback ensures  that the child understands what he or she has done incorrectly and what needs to be done  to correct it. Even when corrected, the child will likely make the same error again. It is  only after receiving clear and consistent feedback over repeated trials, however, that the  behavior will hopefully improve. If we did not receive this type of feedback as toddlers, our  collective grammar would be even worse than most English teachers lament that it is today! Within the previous chapter, we discussed the importance of explicitly teaching students behavioral expectations. However, just as toddlers need feedback regarding verb conjugation even after they have heard perfectly constructed sentences, students in school settings often require behavioral feedback even if they have been taught what to do. In other  words, Chapter 3 dealt with what to do before a behavior even occurs, whereas the current  chapter answers the question of what to do after a behavior occurs. Note that in making this  distinction we did not qualify the word behavior with desirable or problematic. Students need feedback on all behaviorswhether those behaviors are the ones that you want  to see or the ones you really hope not to. The type of feedback that we provide, however,  can either help to support appropriate behavior or it can have unintended results. Our aim  in this chapter is to provide guidance regarding how feedback can be used for good, as well  as to make clear how the wrong kind of feedback can create more problems than it solves.  We begin by looking more closely at the structure of feedback. ANATOMY OF FEEDBACK Feedback is part of a contingency. Think of a contingency as an ifthen statement. If  something happens, then something else will happen. Consider the following contingency:  If Beatrices desk is clean at the end of the day, Beatrice will receive a homework pass from  the teacher. The contingency has multiple components: 1.	 The behavior of interest: A desk is clean. 2.	 The person responsible for the behavior: Beatrice. 3.	 When the behavior is supposed to happen: At the end of the school day. 4.	 When the behavior will be evaluated: At the end of the school day. 5.	 Who will receive the reward or punishment: Beatrice. 6.	 What reward or punishment Beatrice will receive: A homework pass. 7.	 Who will give that reward or punishment to Beatrice: The teacher. When we think of contingencies in this way, we realize that they can be quite flexibly  constructed. Consider what would happen if we were to change some aspects of this contingency. Lets change each component one at a time and think about the effect the change  might have on a classroom. One easy modification might involve changing the person who  is responsible for the behavior and who will receive the reward:

Providing Students with Behavioral Feedback	 59 If Monicas desk is clean at the end of the day, Monica will receive a homework pass from  the teacher. However, what if we just changed the person who was responsible for the behavior but  not the one receiving the reward? If Monicas desk is clean at the end of the day, Beatrice will receive a homework pass from  the teacher. At first blush, this seems unfair and somewhat capricious. But imagine working with  a child who enjoys peer attention. One way to do this is to allow the child to give away a  reward to another student. This may even be a method for sharing gratitude. Note: When  using such an approach, it is usually wise not to inform the other students of this contingency beforehand, in case the behavior is not performed. After all, if we were to inform Beatrice that a homework pass was coming to her if Monica performed a particular behavior,  Beatrice may be angry that Monicas desk is not cleared. Although contingencies may be quite flexibly constructed, a few key questions must be  answered in order to ensure that the contingency will be effective. In addition to determining who will administer the contingency and to whom the contingency and rewardpunishment will apply, it is necessary to consider what behavior is expected, when the behavior  should occur, when the behavior will be evaluated, and what the student will receive. What Behavior Is Expected? We can provide a student with positive feedback for a variety of behaviors including keeping desks clean, turning work in accurately and on time, raising hands, walking down the  hallway, getting ready for class at the start of the day, or standing in line without fighting. Conversely, it may sometimes be necessary to provide negative feedback when a student turns work in late, calls out during instruction, runs in the hallway, comes to class  unprepared, or gets in fights in the lunch line. Before selecting a target behavior, however,  it is important to ensure that it is one that is within the students behavioral repertoire.  Behavioral repertoire refers to the behaviors that a child is capable of doing. The following behaviors are within both of our behavioral repertoires: typing, speaking in English,  and reading most educational and psychology textbooks that are written in English. In  contrast, the following behaviors are not in either of our repertoires: flying like Superman,  speaking Mandarin Chinese, and dunking a basketball. If somebody were to offer either of  us 10 million to fly ourselves to China, trash-talk Yao Ming during a game of one-on-one  basketball, and slam-dunk a ball, we would certainly be motivated to do so but would find  it impossible because we are incapable of actually performing any of those behaviors. There  are, of course, also some slightly more realistic, classroom-based examples that illustrate the  concept of a behavioral repertoire. Whereas some students may be unable to sit in a chair  for more than 25 minutes, others could theoretically stay seated all day long. There are also  some students who may not know how to line up or how they should get help if they are 
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 struggling during independent work time, whereas other students perform these behaviors  quite naturally. The first question we must ask ourselves when a student is not performing a  required behavior is whether that student actually has that behavior within his or her repertoire. If not, as educators we may need to teach a child a behavior so that it can be added  to his or her repertoire. As we explained in Chapter 3, however, it is important that both expected and prohibited behaviors are clear so that both the student and the teacher can agree on what appropriate and inappropriate behaviors are. In other words, if a clean desk is expected, the student  and teacher should have a shared sense of what a clean desk looks like. If the definition is  not made explicit and both individuals are instead left to come up with their own definitions  of what a clean desk looks like, problems are likely to arise. Whereas the classroom teacher  might expect all papers to be filed away in folders and writing implements to be stored in a  pencil case, an organizationally challenged student might consider a clean desk to be one  in which all items that were formerly on top of the desk are quickly stuffed inside! It is critical that this discrepancy gets resolved so that the student clearly understands the expectations for receiving positive feedback and is not frustrated if negative feedback is received. When Must the Behavior Occur? The time of the behavior is also important. Some behaviors have to occur immediately such  as following a direction, whereas other behaviors can occur at a later period of time such as  completing an assignment. In this context, however, we typically think of periods of the day  when certain behaviors are expected. For example, we may expect that students raise their  hands frequently during carpet time or during a classwide discussion, but rarely during a  test. The time period when the behavior occurs is therefore important to define. When Will the Behavior Be Evaluated? In the desk-cleaning example above, when the behavior must occur happens to be the same  time that the behavior is evaluated i.e., at the end of the day. However, sometimes the time  that the behavior must occur will be different from when the child will receive feedback on  the behavior. Following a direction, turning in an assignment, or raising a hand is a discrete  behavior that occurs once and can therefore be reinforced immediately. Other behaviors  may be more difficult to reinforce because they need to occur for a long period of time e.g.,  working on an assignment, staying quiet while a teacher is talking. There are several ways  that ongoing behaviors may be reinforced. If you think back to Chapter 2, you may recall  that behavior can be reinforced according to four different types of schedules. The most  predictable are the fixed interval and fixed ratio. According to these schedules, behavior  is either reinforced after a fixed amount of time e.g., every 5 minutes or a fixed number  of responses e.g., after every other correct answer. Fixed schedules of reinforcement are  rather easy and straightforward to employ, but also tend to be the least effective in terms of  promoting behavioral change. This is because students may quickly learn exactly how long  or frequently they have to perform a behavior in order to receive reinforcement . . . and 

Providing Students with Behavioral Feedback	 61 then stop performing it once they receive what they were after. Variable schedules of reinforcement, on the other hand, reinforce behavior after a variable amount of time e.g., every  37 minutes or number of responses e.g., after every third to fifth correct answer. Variable schedules of reinforcement tend to be more effective in producing behavioral change  because learners cannot reliably predict when reinforcement will occur. For example, variable interval reinforcement schedules have been shown to be effective in changing student  behavior Hulac, Benson, Nesmith,  Shervey, 2016 because the child does not know when  feedback will come. To implement a variable reinforcement schedule, teachers often have  timers that buzz at random intervals to remind themselves to praise the students who are  staying on task or listening quietly during story hour. What Does the Child Receive? The final question to answer concerns what reinforcement or punishment the child will  receive. There are many different ways to respond to student behavior. We can smile,  scream, lecture, encourage, reward . . . the list goes on. Generally, we assume that students  will find the same things to be rewarding or aversive as we do ourselves e.g., appreciating a  compliment while avoiding criticism. As explained in Chapter 2, however, what serves as a  reinforcer for one child may very well serve as a punisher for another child. The only way to  know whether something is serving as a reinforcer or a punisher is to watch what happens  with the behavior over time. If the behavior continues or gets stronger, this indicates that  the student found the adult response to be one that was desirable. If the behavior weakens  or stops, this indicates that the adult response was punishing. Feedback is something that can serve as either reinforcement or punishment. Over the  course of the next few chapters, we discuss strategies for providing students with more tangible forms of feedback e.g., stickers, privileges; however, within this chapter we first focus  on the administration of verbal feedback to students in the classroom. Verbal feedback can  be provided via three central routes: negative feedback e.g., reprimands, positive feedback  e.g., praise, and planned ignoring. We describe each, as well as the research available to  support them, next. NEGATIVE VERBAL FEEDBACK Negative verbal feedback is what we deliver in hopes of discouraging someone from exhibiting a particular behavior again. If you are scolded for arriving late to work or lectured for  not submitting your grades on time, the expectation is that you will find being talked to  aversive enough that you will work extra hard to ensure it does not happen again. When  we are dealing with problem behavior in the classroom, one of the more familiar forms of  negative verbal feedback unfortunately is yelling. In eighth grade, David had a wonderful  social studies teacher who had the capacity to generate excellent work from the most difficult students. Because she was funny, charismatic, and passionate, her students loved her.  One day, however, the class had a substitute teacher. This substitute teacher walked into 
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 class and saw two students sitting on a counter before the bell rang. With vehement anger in  her voice, she yelled, GET OFF OF THAT COUNTER RIGHT NOW!!! The whole class  heard her yell and responded not by sitting in their seats or quieting down, but by laughing.  The next 20 minutes of class were humiliating for this teacher, who was tormented by the  class until she eventually called down to the vice principals office. The problem behavior  stopped once the administrator walked into the classroom, but the class had clearly lost all  respect for the substitute see Box 4.1. What went wrong? Well, the substitute teacher made several mistakes that you might  choose to point out e.g., not making her expectations clear, not taking the time to build  relationships; however, the decision to yell at the students is what we want to focus on here.  There are times when yelling makes student behaviors seem better. If students are being  loud or disruptive but stop when the teacher yells, from the teachers perspective, the yelling worked i.e., the negative reinforcement trap; Maag, 2001. When you think about the  situation a bit more, however, it is not surprising that the misbehavior stopped. After all,  BOX 4.1.  Addressing Serious Problem Behaviors Many teachers want to know what they should do when a serious infraction occurs. For  example, what needs to happen if a student verbally abuses another student, makes a threat,  blatantly insults the teacher, or gets into a fistfight? The goals in these situations are to keep  other students safe and return the classroom to its normal functioning. Unfortunately, there  is little research that has experimentally examined different approaches used to manage  behavioral outbursts. However, there are a few things that we can do to make things better. 1.	 Stay calm. Teachers who use very loud voices or start screaming exacerbate these  types of situations. 2.	 Determine the threat level. a.	 If other students are in imminent danger of being hurt, use a classroom-clearing  routine to make sure the students are safe. At the same time, seek out extra adult  help to manage the situation. b.	 If the classroom is disrupted by the behavior, an office discipline referral may be  needed immediately. c.	 If the classroom is not disrupted, it may be useful to say something like I am  going to address this, but I need to take care of something first. This way, the lesson may continue, and when there is a natural break, it may be more appropriate  to either call the office or to talk to the student individually. 3.	 Determine if an individual behavior plan may be necessary. For this, we suggest consulting with a school psychologist or other professional with training in behavior management. 4.	 Determine a reentry plan. Once the student has left a classroom, a conversation  between the teacher and the student needs to occur. A restorative consequence that  allows the student to make amends for the transgression should be put into place. 5.	 As always, review classroom management systems to identify methods to prevent the  behavior from occurring again.

Providing Students with Behavioral Feedback	 63 the students were probably scared. When any of us are scared, our instinctive reaction is  often to freeze. If the fear is sufficient, students sometimes learn not to engage in a behavior  again just to avoid being yelled at. This is an example of positive punishment see Chapter 2.  Unfortunately, being scared changes the way we learn. Learning new, difficult, or abstract  concepts is difficult when we are feeling overly fearful. The cognitive resources that should  be spent learning are instead spent trying to avoid getting into trouble. It is also critical to keep in mind that many students have had traumatic experiences  that were precipitated by yelling. When students experience frequent traumatic events,  they develop habitual responses that may include violence, yelling, extreme anxiety, or dissociation. For some students, these responses become hardwired and automatic. Thus,  for some students, yelling may actually trigger a traumatic response. Sometimes, these  responses will be violent and loud, and at other times the responses will be subdued, as students may dissociate when faced with a trigger for trauma. Either way, however, the student  is less likely to benefit from a learning environment. Yet another problem is that not everyone finds yelling to be punishing. There are other  students in the classroom for whom yelling actually serves to trigger more problem behavior. Going back to the example of the eighth-grade substitute teacher, for many of the students in that class, they saw the teacher yell at the top of her lungs and realized she was out  of bulletsthat she had no other tools to manage their behavior. This served as a signal to  the students that they could act out and not get in trouble, or could act out, make the teacher  angry, and receive peer attention for being hilarious. Some of those students enjoyed seeing the teacher lose her temper and found the show enjoyable. Chaos reigned. Thus, as an everyday method of classroom management, yelling runs the risk of creating learning problems, promoting other behavior problems, and even triggering traumatic  reactions in some students who have been exposed to trauma. There are, however, some  situations in which yelling may be necessary. Obviously, we support yelling in those rare  situations in which a child is at immediate risk of being harmed. When used infrequently  by adults who have demonstrated care for their students, yelling may stop fights or prevent  students from doing something dangerous such as running into a street. In these circumstances, having a child freeze momentarily can prevent further action e.g., stopping them  from running into the street or stopping a fight. By and large, however, yelling should be  avoided. Delivering Effective Reprimands Although we would generally recommend against yelling, there are other more productive  ways to discourage behavior. Reprimands are a common form of behavior intervention and  are used after a student displays a behavior that is a violation of classroom rules or norms.  Some research has suggested that for students who display average levels of problem behavior, reprimands may serve to increase on-task behaviors, increase compliance to directions,  and reduce problematic behaviors Redd, Morris,  Martin, 1975. Over the years, a number of studies have manipulated different aspects of how reprimands are delivered in order  to determine what is most effective see Table 4.1. These studies found that reprimands 
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 were most effective when 1 brief Abramowitz, OLeary,  Futtersak, 1988; 2 delivered  immediately using a calm, firm, and unemotional tone Rosn, OLeary, Joyce, Conway,   Pfiffner, 1984; and 3 paired with eye contact and provided in close proximity to the student Van Houten, Nau, MacKenzie-Keating, Sameoto,  Colavecchia, 1982. Thus, reprimands should be delivered succinctly, individually, and quietly, and should include specific  feedback about what a student should be doing instead see Coach Card 4.1. An example  of an effectively delivered reprimand would be placing a hand on the back of the students  chair when he or she is talking to the student behind him or her and quietly stating, You  need to turn around in your seat and face the front of the classroom now. The message is  clear and to the pointit is unambiguous as to 1 what the student is doing wrong and 2  what the student needs to do to correct the problem. When administering a reprimand, there are a few things to consider. The first is that a  public reprimand can work against a teacher in two ways. Many students are embarrassed  when a teacher tells them that they are doing something wrong. This embarrassment may  TABLE 4.1.  Studies Examining the Use of Reprimands Study Sample Intervention Design Results Abramowitz,  OLeary,   Futtersak 1988 Students in grades  23 in a special  education program  for students with  hyperactivity Compared use  of short and long  reprimands Alternating  treatments  design No significant  differences in  off-task behavior  between short and  long reprimands OLeary, Kaufman,  Kass,  Drabman  1970 Students in grades  23 referred  for disruptive  behavior Compared use  of soft and loud  reprimands BCBC across  six students Lower rates of  disruptive behavior  when using soft  reprimands Rosn, OLeary,  Joyce, Conway,   Pfiffner 1984 Students in grades  23 in a special  education program  for students with  hyperactivity Loud, public,  emotional  reprimands  delivered for  problem behavior ABACDE  within one  classroom Decrease in on-task  behavior when  public reprimands  used Van Houten, Nau,  McKenzie-Keating,  Sameoto,   Colavecchia 1982 9to 12-year-old  boys referred  for behavioral  problems Compared verbal  reprimands  delivered in firm  tone and close  proximity to the  student with  verbal reprimands  paired with  eye contact and  physical touch ABAB across  two students  with alternating  treatments  within  intervention  phase Decrease in  disruptive behavior  when both types  of reprimands  introduced;  however, lower  rates of disruptive  behavior with  use of verbal  plus nonverbal  reprimands

Providing Students with Behavioral Feedback	 65 cause a student to become anxious, which means he or she is not focusing on his or her classwork. In other cases, students may enjoy the reprimand and use it as an opportunity to draw  attention to themselves. On these occasions, the student may actually start acting out more  when reprimands are given instead of less. Furthermore, those students who demonstrate  aggressive behaviors may have negative reactions to teacher reprimands and may therefore  be more likely to respond aggressively Van Acker, Grant,  Henry, 1996. In light of these  potential reactions, it is often more effective to provide reprimands quietly and individually  than publicly in front of other students. The second thing to consider is that vague reprimands may backfire. Telling a student to Stop that! often engenders the response, Stop what? In some cases, the student  is saying, Of the many things I was doing wrong, which one did you see? More often,  however, the student is probably simply unsure what infraction he or she is breaking. Reprimands therefore need to be specific if they are to actually change behavior. Only when  the teacher is specific can a student know which behavior he or she is supposed to change.  Furthermore, telling a student what not to do still leaves many options for ways to act out.  A reprimand should therefore include a redirection whereby students are told or reminded  what the specific expectation is. Finally, it is important to keep in mind that time spent delivering a reprimand is time  that students are not receiving academic instruction or supervision. If a reprimand takes 2  minutes to deliver, those are 2 minutes during which the student is receiving a high level of  teacher attention but no academically relevant instruction. In addition, because the teachers attention is focused on one particular student, this may be allowing other students to  act out while the teacher is not paying attention. Therefore, reprimands should be delivered  quickly before returning to instruction. POSITIVE VERBAL FEEDBACK Whereas reprimands may be used to discourage inappropriate behavior, one of the simplest  and potentially most effective forms of feedback that has received a great deal of attention  over the past decade is praise. Despite variations in the literature, definitions of praise  generally involve directing positive attention either verbal or nonverbal toward a behavior  being demonstrated by an individual Jenkins, Floress,  Reinke, 2015; see Box 4.2. The  fact that praise is delivered in response to specific student behaviors differentiates it from  teacher warmth more generally Brophy, 1981. Beginning in the 1960s, a number of studies  were conducted within the behavior analytic world to explore the effect of teacher praise on  student behavior. Studies documented changes in a range of school-based behaviors including academic performance Hughes, 1973; Witmer, Bornstein,  Dunham, 1971, social  behavior Becker, Madsen, Arnold,  Thomas, 1967; Madsen et al., 1968, and study behavior Hall, Lund,  Jackson, 1968. Praise has many advantagesthe most important being that it is inexpensive and easy  to deliver. It is therefore surprising that low levels of teacher praise have generally been  identified in actual classroom settings. One of the first studies to examine teachers rates of 
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 naturally occurring praise and criticism was conducted by White in 1975. Using an observational system called the Teacher Approval and Disapproval Observation Record TAD,  White examined teacher behavior across 104 classrooms from first through twelfth grade.  She found that there were relatively low rates of teacher approval across classrooms, with  levels of approval dropping off sharply at the higher grade levels e.g., 1.3 approval statements per minute in third grade vs. 1 approval statement per 510 minutes in the higher  grades as levels of disapproval increased. Since this time, many studies have been conducted in order to examine teachers rates of praise not only in the United States Fry, 1983;  Heller  White, 1975; Nafpaktitis, Mayer,  Butterworth, 1985 but in Australia Russell   Lin, 1977, Britain Merrett  Wheldall, 1987; Wheldall, Houghton,  Merrett, 1989,  Hong Kong Winter, 1990, and New Zealand Thomas, Presland, Grant,  Glynn, 1978 as  well. Across time and studies, general trends have been found in terms of increasing rates  of teacher approval; however, overall, teachers tend to respond more frequently with disapproval than approval when it comes to addressing social behavior Beaman  Wheldall,  2000. How to Provide Praise Before we move forward, it is important to keep in mind that when we talk about praise,  we are referring to a very specific type of praise that has been supported in the literature that is, just saying something nice to someone is not necessarily going to cut it. Imagine that  you are working at your desk and someone comes up to you and says, Youre really a great  person. Although you may appreciate the compliment, its really difficult to know what  spurred the positive feedback. Did the person like your work? Was he or she impressed by  your outfit? Or was there something about your demeanor that caused the person to pause  and say something? When praise is general like this, there is no way of knowing what behavior should be continued. In contrast, imagine that a person came up to you and said, While  BOX 4.2.  Case Example:   Using Praise to Promote Appropriate Behavior We worked with a ninth-grade student who frequently came to school angry. If the teacher  asked him what was wrong, he would snap back NOTHING!!! and display clear body  language that he wanted to be left alone. When teachers redirected and reprimanded  him, he argued back and would sometimes mutter threats under his breath. One teacher  chose to try something different. In the morning, when the student entered her class,  she simply said to him, Good morning, Im glad youre here, and then she walked away.  Later in class she said to him, I read your essay and appreciated the insight you had  about the main character of the book, and then again walked away. Each day, she made  an effort to recognize something that she could praise him for. She knew the praise  had to be authentic and given privatelyafter all, this student was an expert on adults  who were insincere. The students behavior did not take a dramatic turn, but slowly she  noticed the student remaining on-task more, and he occasionally smiled.

Providing Students with Behavioral Feedback	 67 you were working with that student in that really difficult situation this morning, I was so  impressed with how calm you stayed. This type of praise is specific and you can therefore  do much more with the information provided. In this particular case, if you wanted to continue to receive accolades from that person, you would know to focus on remaining calm  during the next stressful situation that arose. Now, lets extend the example to working with students. Saying Great job! to a student is nice to hear, but it does not communicate any behavioral information. It would be  far more effective to say to the child, Right now, I expect all students to be on task, and  I notice that you are working on the assignment or When Michael was just yelling, you  did a really nice job ignoring him by reading your book. Both of these statements include  elements that are vital to the provision of effective feedback. First, the feedback is specific,  in that it provides information regarding exactly what the student was doing correctly see  Table 4.2 for examples of specific vs. general praise. Second, the feedback is contingent, in  that it is delivered only following the behavior that the teacher hopes to increase. Although  most researchers have empirically emphasized the importance of these two elements e.g.,  Chalk  Bizo, 2004; Jenkins et al., 2015, Brophy 1981 also noted that praise has to be sincere and believable. Saying to a student, Great work, you managed to get one whole math  addition problem finished in that last hour will function as a reprimand and a put-down.  Similarly, if a student has been acting out and then receives praise from a teacher for doing  something well, the student may not believe it. Finally, as emphasized by Partin, Robertson,  Maggin, Oliver, and Wehby 2009, it is important that the students skill level be taken into  consideration when providing praisethat is, those students at a lower level of performance  may require praise for less significant or what are often considered prerequisite behaviors  TABLE 4.2.  Examples of General versus Specific Praise General praise Behavior-specific praise Nice job! Marcus, nice job taking the time to sound  out that word! Im so proud of you! Karina, I know it can be hard to introduce  yourself to someone new. Im so proud of  you for sitting next to a new friend today! Thanks for doing that! Susan, thanks for pushing in your chair  quietly! Way to go! Jameson, Im so impressed that you were  able to finish all of your math problems  before recess. Way to go! Well done! Sophie, I really liked the way that you  sat down right away and got out your  materials. Well done!
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 e.g., simply getting out materials as opposed to actually starting to work, whereas providing praise for more substantive behaviors may be more effective for those students with  well-developed behavioral repertoires see Coach Card 4.2. Just as studies conducted in natural classroom environments have found that teachers tend to acknowledge appropriate behavior less frequently than inappropriate behavior,  recent work has similarly indicated that teachers tend to use general praise more frequently  than behavior-specific praise. In examining rates of praise across kindergarten to thirdgrade classrooms, Reinke, Herman, and Stormont 2013 found that teachers used general  praise roughly three times more frequently 25.8 times per hour than specific praise 7.8  times per hour. Research conducted across four kindergarten classrooms produced similar  results, with general praise being noted nearly 40 times per hour as opposed to specific  praise, which was utilized less than 10 times per hour Floress  Jenkins, 2015. Despite low rates of actual usage, there are important advantages of teacher-delivered  behavior-specific praise. For one, when delivered publicly, explicit praise statements not  only reinforce what one particular student has been doing well but also remind his or her  classmates of the behavioral expectations Stormont  Reinke, 2008. Additionally, there is  a growing body of evidence suggesting that use of behavior-specific praise can significantly  improve the behavior of a wide range of students. We review some of this research base  next. Empirical Examples Over the past four decades, researchers have examined the effects of behavior-specific  praise across a range of student ages and contexts see Table 4.3. For example, within a  preschool setting, teachers were trained to deliver behavior-specific praise during problematic classroom transitions e.g., I am so proud of the way you put all the cars in the bin;  Fullerton, Conroy,  Correa, 2009. Higher rates of teacher-delivered praise during the  intervention phase were associated with higher levels of compliance across four students.  Similarly positive findings have been evidenced at the elementary level, with higher rates of  behavior-specific praise shown to reduce disruptive behaviors Becker et al., 1967 as well  as increase work completion Reinke, Lewis-Palmer,  Martin, 2007. Furthermore, praise  has even been shown to have an effect on students who are not personally receiving the  praise. For example, increased amounts of teacher attention to one second-grade student led  to an increase in attending behavior for a second student seated at an adjacent desk Broden,  Bruce, Mitchell, Carter,  Hall, 1970! Research has also demonstrated that behavior-specific praise may be effective for students with emotionalbehavioral disorders EBDs. In a study involving fifth-grade students  in a self-contained classroom for students with EBDs, for example, increases in teacherdelivered behavior-specific praise were associated with improvements in students on-task  behavior during social skills instruction Sutherland, Wehby,  Copeland, 2000. Specifically, on-task behavior increased from less than 50 of intervals during baseline to more than  80 during intervention phases. Allday and colleagues 2012 sought to answer a slightly 

Providing Students with Behavioral Feedback	 69 TABLE 4.3.  Studies Examining the Use of Praise Study Sample Intervention Design Results Blaze, Olmi,  Mercer, Dufrene,   Tingstrom  2014 High school  students in general  education Compared  quiet versus  public praise ABCAC  design  across four  classrooms Both forms of praise  resulted in significant  improvements in engaged  and disruptive behavior;  no significant differences  between conditions Cihak, Kirk,   Boon 2009 19 third-grade  students in general  education Tootling ABAB within  one classroom Decrease in disruptive  behavior with  introduction of tootling  intervention Fullerton,  Conroy,  Correa  2009 Preschool children  in university-based  early childhood  centers Use of  specific praise Multiple  baseline across  four students Increase in both  engagement and  compliance with  instructions with use of  specific praise Grieger,  Kaufman,   Grieger 1976 Kindergarten  students Peer  reporting ABAB design  averaged  across two  classes Modest improvements  in cooperative play;  more notable effects for  aggressive acts Jones, Young,   Friman 2000 13-year-old  students in a  residential program  for delinquent  adolescents Positive peer  reporting Multiple  baseline across  three students Increase in number of  cooperative statements  made with introduction  of positive peer-reporting  intervention Lambert,  Tingstrom,  Sterling, Dufrene,   Lynne 2015 36 fourthand  fifth-grade  students in general  education Tootling ABAB across  two classrooms Notable reductions in  disruptive behavior  and improvements in  appropriate behavior Sutherland,  Wehby,   Copeland 2000 Nine fifthgrade students  with emotional behavioral  disorders in a  self-contained  classroom Behaviorspecific praise ABAB within  one classroom Increased on-task  behavior when praise  introduced
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 different question, which was whether delivering behavior-specific praise to all students in  the classroom would result in behavioral improvements on the part of those students at risk  for behavioral disorders specifically. Across four elementary classrooms i.e., grades K, 1, 2,  and 6, teachers were instructed regarding the difference between general and behaviorspecific praise and provided with feedback regarding their use of behavior-specific praise.  All four students demonstrated higher levels of on-task behavior, even though three of the  four target students received less teacher praise themselves. When examining the literature on praise, however, it is important to note that these  studies tend to involve elementary and early middle school classes. The effectiveness of  praise for secondary students is less understood. For example, high school students who  display symptoms of anxiety and depression may respond better to praise than do students  who are disruptive Lane, Wehby, Robertson,  Rogers, 2007. We suspect that increasing  the amount of praise may prevent some negative behaviors from occurring by removing an  antecedent for power struggles; however, some high school students may be less affected  by adults than by peers in these settings Hawkins  Heflin, 2011. Furthermore, whereas  studies at the elementary level have generally focused on publicly delivered praise, those  conducted with secondary students have more typically incorporated the use of quiet, private praise. This may be true in light of findings that secondary-level students report preferring no praise or silent praise to public praise Elwell  Tiberio, 1994. PeerDelivered Praise Although most research has focused on teachers use of praise in the classroom, it is important to note that teachers do not have to be the only purveyors of praise. In fact, one of the  difficulties with relying exclusively on teachers to provide students with behavioral feedback is that they may not observe or be aware of positive behaviors as they are occurring,  particularly those that are prosocial in nature Skinner, Neddenriep, Robinson, Ervin,   Jones, 2002that is, a teacher who is already working to balance the complexities of delivering engaging instruction while managing student misbehavior may have limited cognitive resources left over to provide positive feedback to the students who are doing what  is expected of them. An additional concern is that many students may not find teacher  praise to be reinforcingin other words, they may not care what the teacher thinks about  them. However, they may still find peer attention reinforcing. One alternative approach is  therefore to shift responsibility for behavioral monitoring and reinforcement to the students  themselves. One of the earliest studies to utilize students as positive informants was conducted  by Grieger, Kaufman, and Grieger 1976. Following a period of free play, kindergarten  students were asked to identify one peer who had done something nice for them and these  identified students were provided with a sticker. This simple intervention resulted in both  improvements in cooperative play and decreases in observed aggression on the playground.  Several studies conducted in the 1990s used a similar positive peer-reporting approach  in order to improve peer perceptions of individual students. These studies found significant  improvements in positive social interactions e.g., Bowers, McGinnis, Ervin,  Friman, 

Providing Students with Behavioral Feedback	 71 1999; Ervin, Miller,  Friman, 1996, as well as cooperative statements Jones, Young,   Friman, 2000. Whereas positive peer reporting focuses on improving peers perceptions of particular students, tootling is a classwide intervention strategy whereby students identify and  acknowledge any and all of their peers who are demonstrating prosocial behaviors Skinner,  Cashwell,  Skinner, 2000. Each time that a student observes a peer helping someone else  during the day, he or she is encouraged to write down the act on an index card, which is  given to the classroom teacher. At the end of the day, the teacher counts up all of the tootles and can either read them aloud or keep them private so as to avoid embarrassment. If  the class meets their goal for the number of tootles earned, the class receives a prize. In  this way, tootling is essentially the opposite of tattling, wherein students tell the teacher  when their peers have engaged in inappropriate behaviors. Tootling has been shown to  result in significant reductions in classroom disruptions Cihak, Kirk,  Boone, 2009; Lambert, Tingstrom, Sterling, Dufrene,  Lynne, 2015 and increases in academic engagement  McHugh, Tingstrom, Radley, Barry,  Walker, 2016. Strategies for Increasing Rates of Praise Given the demonstrated benefits of behavior-specific praise, paired with the fact that low  rates of teacher praise have been generally noted in classrooms, a growing body of research  has focused on the evaluation of intervention strategies for changing teacher behavior. One  of the more common approaches used across studies has involved providing teachers with  1 explicit instruction in the appropriate delivery of praise and 2 verbal feedback regarding the frequency of praise delivery e.g., Hawkins  Heflin, 2011; Sutherland et al., 2000.  One of the feasibility concerns with this coaching approach, however, is that it necessitates  the presence of an external observer in order to determine the frequency of praise delivery. Another option for increasing teacher-delivered praise is to use self-monitoring. As  described more fully in Chapter 7, self-monitoring involves having an individual observe  and record his or her own behavior. For example, in a study by Kalis, Vannest, and Parker  2007, a high school special education teacher was first provided with examples of what  behavior-specific praise should look like and then asked to keep track of the number of  behavior-specific praise statements she made using a handheld counter. Following each lesson, a consultant and teacher met to review the data on praise frequency and compared it  with a predetermined goal. Across two studies Myers et al., 2011; Thompson, Marchant, Anderson, Prater,  Gibb,  2012, a multi-tiered approach was used to provide teachers with the appropriate level of  consultative support in order to promote use of behavior-specific praise. At the universal  level, all teachers were provided with instruction regarding the delivery of praise e.g., why  it is important, what it should look like, how often it should be delivered within the context  of a brief inservice training. Those teachers who were deemed unresponsive to the universal intervention as determined by either personal report or external observations were  then selected to receive a targeted intervention. The targeted intervention was designed to  be more feasible in that it did not require the daily involvement of an external consultant. 
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 In a study by Thompson and colleagues 2012, for example, targeted intervention involved  video self-monitoring, in which teachers videotaped themselves delivering a lesson and  then counted the number of behavior-specific praise statements made while reviewing the  footage. At the tertiary level, however, more intensive supports were provided across both  studies for those teachers who continued to demonstrate low rates of praise. For example,  consultants in the study by Myers and colleagues 2011 provided teachers with daily performance feedback following each observation session. Teachers in the study by Thompson  and colleagues 2012 were also provided with a tactile prompting device, which would help  to remind them to provide praise. Results of both studies confirmed the need to differentiate supports provided to teachers in order to promote the effective use of praise. COMPARING POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE FEEDBACK Over the years, few studies have sought to directly compare the effects of positive and  negative teacher feedback on student behavior. Acker and OLeary 1987 instructed a  classroom teacher to provide feedback in one of four ways: 1 only reprimands for off-task  behavior, 2 only praise for on-task behavior, 3 reprimands for off-task behavior and praise  for on-task behavior, or 4 neither reprimands nor praise. High levels of on-task behavior were noted when students were reprimanded for exhibiting off-task behavior; however,  the addition of praise for on-task behavior was not found to be incrementally effective.  The researchers, however, suggested that the lack of effect for the delivery of praise may  have been attributable to a ceiling effect. The same year, Abramowitz, OLeary, and Rosn  1987 examined the effects of different types of teacher feedback on student behavior in  a remedial summer school program. Following a baseline condition in which the teacher  provided students with no feedback, experimental conditions were implemented in which  the teacher either provided students with 1 encouraging feedback, 2 a reprimand when  they were observed to be off task, or 3 no feedback at all. Significantly lower levels of offtask behavior were noted during the reprimand condition than during the no-feedback or  encouraging-feedback conditions. Work completion, however, was noted to be significantly  higher during the encouraging-feedback condition than when students received no feedback at all. These results appear to suggest that although positive effects have been noted  for the use of both praise and reprimands, these strategies may be used most effectively in  combination with one another. PLANNED IGNORING An action bias refers to the desire that many of us have as human beings to act when something goes wrong. If a drink has spilled, we need to clean it up. If somebody is injured, we  need to provide first aid. Sometimes, however, it really is most appropriate to do nothing.  The first circumstance in which it is most appropriate not to respond is when a child makes  a mistake and begins correcting it immediately on his or her own. When that happens, the 

Providing Students with Behavioral Feedback	 73 child has demonstrated learning and no reinforcement or correction is needed. Similarly, if  a child does something wrong accidently, and it causes no harm, there may be no need to  respond. The second circumstance that calls for ignoring occurs when extinction is appropriate.  Sometimes, inappropriate student behavior is actually reinforced by a teacher responding.  Many of us have worked with students who love talking to us. When we respond by politely  asking the student to stop talking, he or she lures us into an argumentwhich inadvertently  reinforces his or her talking! After all, it is not uncommon for teachers to reinforce students  blurting out by reprimanding them. Under these types of circumstances, doing nothing may  be the best choice. Finally, there are periods of time when giving a reprimand may be disruptive to the  flow of the class. By reprimanding one student, we may actually stop paying attention to  other students whose behavior may become problematic. If a behavior is not serious, the  classroom instruction should go on. Of course, doing nothing is not always the best choice.  In these circumstances, providing some kind of feedback is recommended. To address many of these situations, a planned ignoring intervention can be put into  place see Coach Card 4.3. Planned ignoring essentially means not responding to a particular behavior. It uses the principles of extinction: essentially, a behavior that is no longer reinforced will stop. By not responding, the teacher continues to teach and conduct the lesson  as if nothing had occurred. A case example describing the use of planned ignoring is provided in Box 4.3, which illustrates both the difficulty and the effectiveness of doing nothing.  The effectiveness of planned ignoring has typically been investigated in combination with  praise. Across two studies designed to improve the classroom engagement of elementary  BOX 4.3.  Case Example: Planned Ignoring We once worked with a middle school teacher who had a student who really enjoyed drawing the teacher into an argument. When the teacher would say, Write 150 words and spell  them correctly, the student would say, Can I just write the word I 150 times? When the  teacher would ask all of the students to push their chairs in, the same student would wait  until everybody else pushed their chair in, look at the teacher, and try to get the teacher to  say specifically, Hudson, please push your chair in. The teacher described this situation as  annoying, but only disruptive if she began reprimanding the student. When that happened,  the student would argue back, and a long argument would often result that would disrupt the  class. However, the students behavior was not a danger to others. To address the problem, the teacher ultimately chose to ignore the students behavior.  She set a personal goal for herself. Every time the student said something out loud that she  judged as an effort to get her to react, she ignored the student and kept a running tally of the  number of times she ignored the problem behavior. If she successfully ignored the student  150 times, she would reward herself with a latte from her local coffee shop. Alas, the story  has a bittersweet endafter ignoring the behavior 15 times, the student stopped calling out  to try and make her respond, and the teacher never got the chance to reach her goal of 150  ignores!
PROMOTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES	 school students Hall et al., 1968; Yawkey, 1971, the classroom teacher was instructed to  provide students with praise for exhibiting on-task behaviors while ignoring inappropriate  behaviors. This strategy resulted in significant improvements in on-task behavior across  both studies and eight students. The use of planned ignoring in isolation, however, may have less promising results.  Madsen and colleagues 1968, for example, found that the use of planned ignoring alone  had little effect on inappropriate student behavior. However, as other studies have suggested, the pairing of ignoring inappropriate behavior and praising appropriate behavior  was highly successful in improving student behavior. These results suggest that ignoring  should rarely be implemented as a stand-alone procedure, but should be paired with positive reinforcement of an alternative behavior. In other words, if a 10-year-old boy raises  his hand, he should receive teacher attention. If he uses other strategies to gain attention,  these inappropriate strategies should be ignored. This process, whereby a student receives a  reward i.e., attention for doing what is desired and the problem behavior is ignored, is also  called differential reinforcement of an alternative behavior DRA. One thing to keep in mind when using planned ignoring is that things often will get  worse before they get better. Think about what might happen to the 10-year-old who likes  getting teacher attention, and does so by blurting out answers during a classwide discussion. If the teacher suddenly stops responding, the student is likely to blurt out even more.  After all, if something has worked in the past, then maybe more of it would work better. This  extinction burst, which we discussed in Chapter 2, may cause the teacher to respond to the  student in an effort to control the behavior. Unfortunately, when attention is intermittently  provided for behaviors that should be ignored, the behavior is likely to become resistant to  future extinction efforts. Thus, it is important to make sure that you are willing to cope with  an extinction burst if you want to include an ignoring intervention. NONCONTINGENT ATTENTION Recall our discussion from Chapter 2 about motivating operationsif a person has been  deprived of something, he or she is more likely to do something to get it. For example, if a  child has been deprived of attention such as through a planned ignoring intervention, he  or she may be more likely to do something disruptive in order to get attention back. One  way to more appropriately provide students with the attention they desire may therefore  be through the use of noncontingent attention. When attention is given noncontingently,  a teacher will reinforce students behavior by providing attention frequently through the  school day. For example, some teachers greet their students at the door when they come into  the classroom. Other teachers simply engage students who are working on an assignment or  who are in the middle of a transition. From a behavioral perspective, students who receive  frequent attention have less of a need to misbehave in order to get it. Of course, teachers may not be the only ones to provide attention. In a positive peerreporting intervention, Morrison and Jones 2007 found that noncontingent attention was  effective at reducing acting-out behaviors. They speculated that the dose of attention 

Providing Students with Behavioral Feedback	 75 reduced the need of some students to act out for the purpose of getting attention. A primary  advantage of noncontingent attention is the ease with which the intervention may be implemented Vollmer, Iawata, Zarcone, Smith,  Mazaleski, 1993. After all, attention is easy  to provide and can be done on a regular basis. Simply put, noncontingent attention may be  provided at any time for any reason. CONCLUSIONS Our look at the evidence leads us to believe that reinforcing desirable behavior is more  effective for most children than waiting for a behavior problem to occur and then reacting to it. That is not to say that educators should focus only on positive behavior and simply hope and pray that problem behavior does not occur. Rather, problem behavior should  be handled in a careful, deliberate, and systematic way. As we mentioned in the previous  chapter, rules alone have little impact on behavior. When paired with feedback, however,  rules do result in behavioral changes Madsen et al., 1968. The type of feedback that we  provide may involve praise, reprimands, or ignoring. The research seems to suggest that  a beneficial procedure to follow is to reinforce those behaviors that you want to see with  praise or some other kind of positive attention while also ignoring the smaller forms of  inappropriate behavior that continue to occur. When coupled with use of the strategies we  described in Chapter 3 e.g., delivering effective instructions, proximity, active supervision,  we can expect to find notable improvements in student behavior. However, a more systematic approach may be needed for classrooms with higher than usual levels of disruption.  Under these circumstances, a classwide token economy may be useful.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 4.1.  Delivering Effective Reprimands In order to be most effective, reprimands should be:

 Brief.

 Delivered immediately.

 Delivered quietly.

 Delivered individually.

 Made using a calm, firm, unemotional tone.

 Paired with eye contact.

 Paired with specific feedback regarding what the student should be doing  instead.

 Provided in close proximity to the student.

 Specific regarding what the student is doing wrong.

 Followed by the teacher moving away from the student while the student  modifies behavior.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 4.2.  Delivering Effective Praise In order to deliver praise most effectively: 1.	 Select the best behavioral targets.

 Those behaviors that are new to the students.

 Those behaviors that students need to perform more often.

 Those behaviors that are incompatible with problem behavior.

 Students who are infrequently praised. 2.	 Provide praise immediately following the behavior you wish to increase. 3.	 Ensure the praise will PASS the test.

 Proximity: Be close enough to the student so the praise can be given in  private and quietly.

 Age appropriate: Praise students for things that they would expect to be  praised fornot for things they would find insulting.

 Sincere: Students know when we are lying. Be sincere about the praise you  are giving.

 Specific: Make sure that the student knows exactly what he or she is doing  correctly.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 4.3.    Effective Use of Planned Ignoring Steps involved in using planned ignoring:

 Identify behavior that you want to ignore.

 Determine if you can handle an extinction burst if not, select a different  intervention.

 Create a plan for managing an extinction burst.

 When behavior occurs, continue teaching as if nothing happened.

 When the appropriate behavior occurs, provide student with attention. Alternative: When a student is displaying an attention-seeking behavior, some  teachers respond with a phrase like I can respond only to students who are  raising their hand or I would be happy to answer your question once the room  is quiet. This approach may be effective for some students, but may serve as  reinforcement for others to increase their acting-out behavior.

PART III STRATEGIES FOR  ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE  BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS
As we saw in Chapter 4, praise can be a powerful reinforcer for many students. Research  studies have shown that providing students with specific, contingent praise leads to both  improvements in appropriate behavior and decreases in disruptive behavior e.g., Blaze,  Olmi, Mercer, Dufrene,  Tingstrom, 2014; Lambert et al., 2015. Praise can be an effective  motivator for many students because as human beings, we want to understand those things  that we are doing correctly and know that someone else appreciates those things. However,  even though praise is cheap and easy to deliver, it is unlikely to be universally useful for all  students. There may be circumstances in which praise loses its reinforcing value, or there  may be students who do not find adult attention reinforcing Case in point: One student  David worked with was praised for working hard on a statewide standardized test and  turned to him, saying, Why should I care what you think of me? Youre not my friend. In  these types of situations, teachers and school administrators may need additional strategies  to manage student behaviors. One alternative approach, which makes positive reinforcement more concrete and tangible, is the use of a token economy system. Within a token economy, positive verbal feedback is paired with the delivery of tokens.  Tokens may come in various forms, including plastic chips, points, and tickets. These tokens  serve as a type of classroom currency, which can be used to purchase different forms of  extrinsic reinforcement. The idea of providing rewards for good behavior is nothing new. In  fact, in the 15th century, Erasmus argued that teachers should replace their use of a cane  to punish bad behavior with the provision of cakes and cherries for good behavior Skinner, 1966. What is different about a token economy, however, is that students are rewarded  systematically and frequently OLeary  Drabman, 1971. Decision rules are established  ahead of time that clearly outline what students need to do to earn a token so that reinforcement is consistent and predictable. When the use of praise has been compared with the use of a token economy, stronger  effects have generally been found for the token economy system e.g., Breyer  Allen, 1975;  CHAPTER 5 Implementing Token Economies
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 Broden, Hall, Dunlap,  Clark, 1970; OLeary, Becker, Evans,  Saudargas, 1969. The  most obvious explanation for this has been that the external reinforcement is seen as more  desirableand therefore more motivatingto the students than teacher praise. One alternative explanation, however, is that the act of giving out tokens forces the teacher to more  closely monitor his or her own behavior Breyer  Allen, 1975that is, whereas providing  verbal feedback requires the teacher to independently remember to do so amid instruction  and classroom management, tokens provide a more tangible reminder of the need to recognize and reward when students are engaging in appropriate behavior. To understand token economies, it is worth looking at the concepts of primary and  secondary reinforcers. In Chapter 2, we outlined our cordial disagreement regarding the  deliciousness of chocolate. Assuming that we wanted to reinforce Amy for completing an  accreditation report, imagine what would happen if we gave her chocolate each time she  completed writing one page. Two problems could arise. The first is that she might become  tired of the chocolate although this does seem impossible, right? and it may lose its reinforcing valuethat is, whereas chocolate might have been very motivating in the beginning, over time Amy may become satiated and less motivated to work for the sugary treat. If,  however, she doesnt grow tired of the chocolate, the second problem relates to the amount  of work needed to keep good, high-quality chocolate readily available. Chocolate is difficult  to store and also potentially expensive, so keeping it available throughout all 500 pages of  an accreditation report could prove tricky. What we need instead is to have an intermediate  step between completing a page and earning the chocolate. This is where the tokens come  in. Tokens can be administered at the point of performance i.e., when the behavior actually  occurs, and then exchanged for reinforcement at a later time. The ultimate token that we use in our everyday life is money. Imagine if you went to  work and, instead of providing you with money, your employer provided you with housing, food, transportation, entertainment, travel, flowers that you could send to a loved one,  hygiene products, furniture, health care, dental care, shoes, clothing formal, informal, and  business attire, of course!, a computer, pictures to hang on the wall, and appliances for your  house clearly, the list could go on. Although this would enable you to get the things that  you both need and want, you may not always get the things you want exactly when you want  them. It is impossible to meet an individuals exact desire at every moment. Instead, money  is a great substitute because it allows us the flexibility to purchase what we want when we  want it. We can choose what to spend it on or whether to save it. The same advantages also  extend to the classroom. Providing students with tokens that they can exchange when they  want, and for what they find most motivating, can work to efficiently meet the needs of the  many different students in a classroom. In this chapter, we outline the critical components that constitute a token economy  system, highlighting a number of decisions that must be made along the way regarding  implementation. In addition, we describe ways in which token economy systems have been  modified within the literature over the past half century. Although some of the discussion  may focus on individual students, the primary focus is on developing token economy systems that are applicable to large groups of students in a classroom setting.

Implementing Token Economies	 83 IMPLEMENTING A TOKEN ECONOMY SYSTEM When it comes to implementing a token economy system, there are four essential components that must be in place. First, one must determine at what level the token economy will  be implemented. Second, it is necessary to establish a set of behavioral expectations so that  students understand what behaviors will be reinforced. Third, there must be a process for  delivering tokens contingent on appropriate student behavior. Fourth, there must be clear  guidelines for how tokens will be exchanged for backup rewards. Each of these components  is discussed in further detail next see also Coach Cards 5.1 and 5.2. At What Level Should the Token Economy Be Implemented? Before setting out to establish the specifics of a token economy system, it is first important to  determine the level at which the system will be applied. Depending on the circumstance, a  token economy may be used to support one students behavior or an entire school. Although  many examples of successful implementation of token economy interventions at the individual level can be found in the literature, there are several advantages of implementing  a token economy at the classwide level Filcheck, McNeil, Greco,  Bernard, 2004. First,  using a classwide system can be more efficient for the teacher than managing multiple  individual behavior plans. Rather than having to keep track of which behaviors are being  targeted for whom and what each students individual goals are, one consistent set of expectations and procedures can be used for all students in the classroom. Second, using a classwide system prevents bringing unnecessary attention to individual students. Students who  are receiving an intervention may feel singled out because their behavior is being monitored  more closely than that of their classmates. At the same time, classmates may feel envious  of those students who are receiving an intervention because they have the opportunity to  receive special rewards Filcheck et al., 2004. Implementation of a schoolwide token economy system offers additional benefits. For  one, the expectations for student behavior are made consistent across all settings in the  school and can therefore be consistently reinforced throughout the students day. Students  also receive an additional layer of behavioral support across time, as they do not need  to learn new expectations as they move from one grade to the next. One of the earlier  examples of a schoolwide token economy system was provided by Boegli and Wasik 1978,  who implemented the intervention within a K6 elementary school of nearly 500 students.  Teachers at each grade level e.g., K1, 23 came together at the beginning of the year  to generate a list of behavioral objectives that were developmentally appropriate for that  particular age group. For example, completing homework was considered appropriate at  the intermediate grades but not targeted for younger students. Token delivery was a shared  responsibility among all adults in the building, including the principal, counselor, teachers,  teaching aides, office staff, and custodians; however, tokens could be exchanged only within  the students classroom. In addition to this classroom token exchange, schoolwide auctions  were also held periodically, in which students could bid on items that had been donated by 
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 parents or community members e.g., magazines, toys, candy. Following the implementation of the intervention, the researchers observed a notable drop in classroom disruptions,  improved reading and arithmetic achievement scores, and a decrease in the number of  suspensions. A schoolwide token economy system is also considered to be one of the core Tier 1  components within a schoolwide positive behavioral interventions and supports SWPBIS model. Within schools implementing SWPBIS, the school team first establishes a set  of three to five positively worded expectations for student behavior that can apply to all  settings in the school. For example, the expectation may be that all students should be  safe, respectful, and responsible. Once the broad expectations are established, the team  works to specify what meeting these expectations would look like in different settings in  the school. For example, being responsible in the classroom may mean completing assignments, whereas being responsible in the lunchroom may mean throwing away ones trash in  the proper receptacle. Both the overarching expectations and situation-specific behaviors  are explicitly taught to all students at the beginning of the school year with booster sessions  incorporated periodically. All school staff share responsibility for reinforcing students when  they demonstrate the schoolwide expectations. Typically, a schoolwide ticket system e.g.,  Caught being good, High-fives is used across all grades and settings e.g., classroom,  nonclassroom. Students are provided with individual feedback when they receive a ticket;  however, they also often receive schoolwide acknowledgment when earned tickets are publicly posted or announced. In addition to verbal feedback that is provided to all students,  many schools use raffles to provide further reinforcement to select students. Those students  who win the raffle might be provided with tangible e.g., item from the school store or  activity e.g., invitation to a special lunch rewards. It is important to note, however, that  although the effectiveness of SWPBIS has been demonstrated across several large randomized controlled trials e.g., Bradshaw, Mitchell,  Leaf, 2010; Horner et al., 2009, the effectiveness of the token component of SWPBIS has not been isolated. What Behaviors Can Be Targeted? The first step in implementing a token economy system is to establish the behavioral expectations for which students will be reinforced. In looking at the literature on the use of token  economies, students have most typically been reinforced for exhibiting those behaviors that  teachers expect to see in the classroom. For example, students might receive tokens for  arriving to class on time, facing the front of the room, sitting quietly in their seats, and working on assignments. Reinforcing students in this way for expected behaviors has been shown  to successfully decrease disruptive or inappropriate behavior e.g., OLeary et al., 1969;  Ringer, 1973, increase on-task behavior e.g., Broden, Hall, et al., 1970, and even improve  academic performance e.g., Birnbrauer, Wolf, Kidder,  Tague, 1965; Boegli  Wasik,  1978; see Table 5.1. However, in reviewing early research conducted on token economies  in the 1960s, OLeary and Drabman 1971 concluded that token economies are most likely  to have an effect on nonacademic disruptive behaviors such as being out of ones seat, talking to peers, and turning around in ones chair. In contrast, less work has been doneand 

Implementing Token Economies	 85 less evidence has been demonstratedon the effectiveness of token economy systems in  improving academic performance. It is possible to frame behavioral expectations in one of two ways see Table 5.2 for  examples. One possibility is to create a comprehensive list of all specific target behaviors  that one expects to see students demonstrate. For example, one teacher might delineate that  students are expected to sit quietly, face forward, listen to the teacher, raise their hands to  be called upon, and begin working on assignments quickly and quietly. The teacher would  therefore administer tokens to students who were observed to be engaging in these particular target behaviors. A second possibility, however, is to frame the expectations more  globally. For example, the general expectations in a classroom may be for students to work  hard and be nice to others. The teacher would then administer tokens to students when  they demonstrated specific behaviors believed to be consistent with the general expectations e.g., starting work immediately would be a specific example of working hard. If, however, the classroom is within a system that is implementing SWPBIS, the behavioral targets  TABLE 5.1.  Empirical Studies Examining the Use of Token Economy Systems Study Sample Intervention Design Results Birnbrauer,  Wolf, Kidder,   Tague 1965 8to 14-yearold students  with intellectual  disabilities Token  economy ABA design  across five  students Modest improvements in  accuracy and work completion  during token economy;  however, no return to baseline  during reversal phase Boegli   Wasik 1978 Implemented  schoolwide 214  students in grades  K3, 245 students  in grades 46 Token  economy AB design  across  primary and  intermediate  grades Notable drop in classroom  disruptions; improved reading  and arithmetic achievement  scores; decrease in number of  suspensions Broden, Hall,  Dunlap,   Clark 1970 Students in  grades 78 in a  special education  classroom Token  economy ABAB within  one classroom Increase in study behavior  when token economy  introduced Main  Munro  1977 Ninth-grade  students in  general education Compared  praise with  token economy BCBC design Notable decrease in  unacceptable classroom  behavior when token economy  introduced Ringer 1973 Fourth-grade  students in  general education Token  economy ABAB within  one classroom Notable reductions in  inappropriate behavior when  token economy implemented  during independent seatwork;  results less defined during  small-group work
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 should align with the schoolwide expectations that are routinely taught and reinforced e.g.,  Be safe, Be respectful, Be responsible. Either approach to framing behavioral expectations may be used in a classroom as long as students have a full understanding of how  tokens may be earned. How Should Tokens Be Delivered? As noted at the beginning of this chapter, tokens can come in various shapes and sizes. For  one, tokens may come in the form of objects that can be held by a student, such as plastic  chips, stars, marbles, or tickets. Tangible tokens are more often employed with younger children, who can more easily keep track of the number of tokens earned OLeary  Drabman,  1971. When using this type of a tangible token system, teachers typically hand the token to  the student, who can place it in a bank or other place e.g., inside ones desk for safekeeping.  Depending on the age and developmental level of the student, however, it may be necessary  TABLE 5.2.  Examples of Global and Specific Target Behaviors from the Literature Study Global target behaviors Specific target behaviors Boegli  Wasik 1978  Being on time  Having needed materials  Helping others  Completing assigned work Breyer  Allen 1975  Task-oriented behavior Broden, Hall, et al. 1970  Sitting quietly  Working on assignment Drege  Beare 1991  Using proper language  Showing respect for  authority figures Klimas  McLoughlin 2007  Assignment completion Main  Munro 1977  Appropriate behavior OLeary  Becker 1967  In seat  Face front  Raise hand  Working  Pay attention  Desk clear Ringer 1973  Appropriate behavior Safer, Heaton,  Parker 1981  Satisfactory classroom  behavior Salzberg  Greenwald 1977  On-task behavior

Implementing Token Economies	 87 to carefully consider how and where tokens get stored so that they are not easily lost. For  example, in implementing a token system with a kindergarten student with a developmental  disability, Klimas and McLaughlin 2007 had the student attach poker chips to a Velcro  token board so that the tokens would not get lost and the student could see how much he  had earned. Tokens may also be administered in the form of points or ratings. This type of written  feedback tends to be employed more often with older students, given the less conspicuous  nature of the recording system OLeary  Drabman, 1971. When using points or ratings,  it is also necessary to determine where points will be stored. Students may be provided  with a card or chart, for example, on which recordings can be made. In a study by Ringer  1973, each student was given a card that was divided into 20 squares. As the teacher was  moving around the room during instruction, she would write her initials in one of the boxes  and praise the student when he or she was exhibiting appropriate behavior. At the end of  the intervention session, those students who had filled up all 20 squares took a trip to the  principals office, where they received praise and a special stamp on their card. OLeary  and Becker 1967, on the other hand, provided each student with a small notebook that  was kept on his or her desk. During each lesson, students could earn up to 10 points for  demonstrating appropriate behavior, and these points were entered into the students notebook. One limitation to a ratings-based approach is that the ratings made by teachers may  be subjective, given that each students behavior is not being measured directly OLeary et  al., 1969. At the same time, however, asking a teacher to conduct more global ratings rather  than to reinforce individual instances of desired behavior can also prove to be more feasible,  particularly if the size of the class is large. Regardless of the form in which tokens are distributed, however, it is important that  they meet four main conditions. First, you should be able to administer the tokens effortlessly. As such, they should be easily transportable and accessible, and providing them  to students should not distract substantially from instruction. Second, tokens should be  administered quickly and contingently. If the delay between exhibiting a desired behavior  and receiving a token is too long, the student may not understand what he or she had done  to receive the token. Third, students should easily understand the value of a token. Explaining the exchange system to an older child or adolescent, who understands how currency  works, can be fairly straightforward. However, a more detailed explanation may be necessary for younger children. For example, consistently pairing a point or token with a backup  reinforcer when a token system is first introduced will help the student to understand the  value of the token. Finally, it is important that the delivery of a point, token, or ticket be paired with verbal  feedback. A token economy system is not meant to be a replacement for positive verbal feedback, but is instead something to be used along with frequent praise and private recognition  of good student work. Pairing a token with explicit, positive feedback helps to ensure that  the student understands the relationship between the desired behavior and the token reinforcement. For those students who may not be able to fully demonstrate the desired behavior right away, praise should also be provided for approximations of the target behavior in  order to provide sufficient motivation OLeary  Drabman, 1971. For example, a student 
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 who has not been able to complete enough of his or her assigned work to earn a token could  be verbally reinforced for getting some portion of the work done. In this way, students will  remain motivated to continue to engage in desired behaviors even if they do not receive  reinforcement as quickly as their peers. How Should Rewards Be Incorporated? One of most critical elements to ensuring a token economys success is making sure that the  available rewards are adequately reinforcingthat is, students need to view the rewards  as desirable if the intervention is going to motivate them to change their behavior. For this  reason, token economy systems tend to incorporate a variety of possible rewards rather than  just one. Having multiple rewards available helps to ensure that there is something within  the system that each student finds reinforcing OLeary  Drabman, 1971. With the right  amount of flexibility, you can put a token price on a range of things that you are willing to  let students work toward. Whether its 5 minutes of extra recess, the answer to one question  on a 15-item test, or the chance to help you erase the whiteboard, tokens can have a tremendous amount of flexibility. Having a variety of reinforcers therefore allows Amy to earn  chocolate, whereas David gets an hour of video-game time that he can play instead of going  to a schoolwide faculty meeting! Many different types of rewards have been used within the literature; however, these  individual rewards generally fall into one of four categories: edible, tangible, activity, or  social see Table 5.3. Edible rewards include small snacks or treats. Tangible rewards are  those objects or prizes that a student can possess, ranging from gold star stickers to small  toys. An activity reward allows the student to do something or engage in an activity that  he or she otherwise would not be able to do. Examples of activity rewards include getting  to watch a video at the end of the day or getting 5 extra minutes of recess. Finally, social  rewards are those that allow the student to do something with someone else. Depending on  the students preference, this could mean getting to have lunch with a teacher or getting to  play a game with a classmate. TABLE 5.3.  Examples of Backup Reinforcers Edible reinforcers Tangible reinforcers Activity reinforcers Social reinforcers  Candy  Gum  Small snack  Small toys  Bookscomic books  Pencils  Prizes from  classroom store  Five minutes early  dismissal to lunch  Ability to change  desks for one day  Free time to do art  projects, play board  games, play with  blocks, etc.  Homework pass  Opportunity to visit  the nurse  Opportunity to talk  with a friend for 5  minutes  Praise from the school  principal  Invitation to a class  party

Implementing Token Economies	 89 One way to ensure that available rewards are sufficiently reinforcing is to administer  a reward preference survey prior to beginning the intervention. A reward preference survey asks students to indicate whether i.e., yesno or rate how i.e., not at all, somewhat  desirable they believe a potential reward to be. Using data from a reward preference survey, a teacher could then be selective in choosing the items or activities with the highest  perceived value. With younger children, it may also be useful to make the rewards more  prominent throughout the intervention so as to increase their motivating value. In a study  by OLeary and colleagues 1969, for example, second-grade students were asked to select  the prize that they wished to earn before the actual rating period began. In this way, the  potential reward was made more salient to the younger children. It has been suggested that teachers first begin a token economy system using smallerscale or more activity-based rewards such as stickers or extra free time. If these rewards  do not prove to be powerful enough, then larger rewards such as tangibles e.g., toys or  edibles may be considered OLeary, Drabman,  Kass, 1973. The rationale for considering  rewards in this way is that research has suggested that it may be easier to successfully fade  out an intervention when behavior is being maintained by less powerful, or more natural,  rewards. One final consideration in selecting rewards is the feasibility of the reward choices that is, it is important that the rewards are not so cost prohibitive or cumbersome that  a teacher will be unable to implement them. OLeary and colleagues 1973 deliberately  selected highly feasible rewards that would be available to any classroom teacher when  implementing a token economy system across three elementary-level resource classrooms that is, each point earned could be exchanged for 1 minute of free time, which could be  spent painting, playing a board game, playing with blocks, or whatever the student desired.  A similar point-to-minute system was used in a study with middle school students in special  education Broden, Hall, et al., 1970; however, each tally mark represented 1 minute that  the student could leave early for lunch. It may also be easier to deliver rewards through a lottery systemthat is, rather than  using tokens to directly purchase backup rewards, students may use their tokens to participate in a lottery. At the end of each day, each student would receive as many entries into  the lottery as the number of tokens earned. A lottery drawing could then be held daily or  weekly to select one or more winners from the classroom. Lottery rewards may be known  ahead of time or may remain a mystery until the drawing occurs in order to enhance students motivational interest see Chapter 6 for a discussion of Mystery Motivator and other  randomized reward systems. Introducing the Intervention It is advisable to provide the following information when introducing a token economy system to students see Coach Card 5.3. First, you should provide a rationale for why the  token economy is being introduced. Consider either the concerns that you have had about  student behavior or which behaviors are desired but not currently being demonstrated. 
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 Second, clearly define the target behaviors and provide a rationale for why these behaviors  have been selected. Students must have a clear understanding of what behaviors they are and are notexpected to exhibit. It may therefore be useful to model what the expected  behaviors look like for the class at this time. It is also important, however, that the students  understand why you are focusing on these particular behaviors. If there is not a rationale  provided, the choice may appear arbitrary. You should be as explicit as possible about how  exhibiting these target behaviors will enhance the functioning of individual students or the  overall class. Third, the procedures for earning tokens should be made clear. This includes  what students need to do to earn tokens e.g., exhibit one or more target behaviors, when  students will be able to earn tokens e.g., during select periods or throughout the day, and  how often tokens will be delivered e.g., at the end of a period or continuously. Fourth, the  function of the tokens or points should be explained. Tokens may be described as a form  of currency that can be cashed in for things or activities. Fifth, students should be made  aware of what types of rewards they can earn. If there are different levels of rewards that  require different numbers of tokens, this should be understood. Finally, teachers should  outline the procedures for redeeming tokens. For example, some teachers may allow students to exchange their tokens throughout the day, whereas others may choose to limit  redemption to only 1 day per week. VARIATIONS ON THE TOKEN ECONOMY Successful examples of token economy interventions can be seen within the literature across  a wide variety of populations, ranging from general education classrooms to boys whose  behaviors were so serious that they required residential treatment services Mendham   Thorne, 1984. In addition, there are studies supporting token economies with groups of  students with intellectual disabilities e.g., Baer, Ascione,  Casto, 1977, EBDs e.g., Drege   Beare, 1991, and ADHD e.g., McGoey  DuPaul, 2000. However, despite the old  adage If it aint broke, dont fix it, variations on the basic token economy system may  prove beneficial in some situations. Two of the more common variations involve the use of  response cost and level systems. Response Cost Response cost is a behavioral contingency approach in which reinforcers are taken away  contingent on inappropriate behavior. One of the response cost strategies that we sadly!  hear about often in schools is the idea of taking away a students ability to go to recess if he  or she engages in inappropriate behavior. In this situation, something desirable recess is  being withheld or taken away from the student in the hope that this will make the student  less likely to engage in the problem behavior in the future. Within a standard token economy system, students receive tokens for engaging in  appropriate behaviors, while inappropriate behaviors tend to be ignored. Providing tokens 

Implementing Token Economies	 91 to students can give a teacher a great deal of power to recognize positive behavior. In general, this is the best approachstudents need to have opportunities to receive recognition  for the ideal behaviors they are displaying. However, tokens can also be used as a method  for providing disincentives to problematic behavior. Using response cost within a token  economy involves providing the student with tokens for engaging in appropriate behaviors,  but also taking tokens away contingent on inappropriate behavior. All students typically  begin the session with the same predetermined number of tokens. As the day goes on,  students numbers of tokens may go up or down depending on their behavior. However,  any tokens that the student still has at the end of class may be exchanged for reinforcers. A  flowchart is provided in Figure 5.1 to assist you in designing a token economy system with  or without response cost. In order to illustrate what a token economy involving response cost might look like,  we provide a couple of concrete examples. In some cases, all students start out with zero  tokens and then can both earn and lose tokens as time goes on. For example, in a study by  Drege and Baer 1991, students in an EBD program could earn up to 120 points per day  for engaging in appropriate behaviors e.g., following directions, using proper language,  respecting authority figures; however, points were taken away for exhibiting inappropriate  behaviors e.g., swearing, throwing temper tantrums. In other cases, all students start out  with a set number of tokens, which are lost when inappropriate behavior occurs. In a study  by Fabiano, Pelham, Gnagy, and Burrows-MacLean 2007, this type of approach was used  with a group of students who had been identified as having ADHD. Each student began the  class period with 100 points but then lost 10 points for each rule infraction. These students  then had the opportunity to earn back some of the points lost at the end of the period, as  they could earn 25 points for the successful completion of an assignment. Every student  FIGURE 5.1.  Flowchart for designing token economy interventions with or without response cost. Decision made to  implement token  economy Will students  receive or  lose tokens? Determine  number of tokens  students begin  with Determine how  tokens will be  delivered Receive Lose Will prizes  be known  ahead of  time? Determine pricing  of rewards Create Mystery  Motivator chart Yes No Determine  number of tokens  needed to earn  reward Both
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 who earned a predetermined number of points was allowed to participate in an end-of-theweek activity. One important caveat to keep in mind when deciding how to implement a token economy involving response cost is that you want to avoid a situation in which a student quickly  digs himor herself into a hole. For example, a teacher may put 10 dashes on the board and  remove a dash when a student acts out. We have both observed classes in which all 10 points  disappear in the first 5 minutes . . . and the class period lasts another 45 minutes! At that  point, the system loses all reinforcing value and it is likely that students will respond with  even worse behavior. For this reason, it is extremely important to ensure that students have  the opportunity to earn points as well as lose them. Although several studies have incorporated response cost as one part of a multicomponent intervention e.g., De Martini-Scully et al., 2000; Zaghlawan, Ostrosky,  Al-Khateeb,  2007, to date only a handful of studies have examined the independent effect of response  cost on student behavior. As outlined in Table 5.4, response cost strategies have been  TABLE 5.4.  Empirical Studies Examining Use of Response Cost Procedures Study Sample Intervention Design Results Conyers et al.  2004 Preschool  children in a  general classroom Compared response  cost and DRO Alternating  treatments  design within  one classroom Significant decreases  in disruptive behavior  when response cost  implemented Drege   Beare 1991 Students in grades  12 in a classroom  for students with  EBD Response cost plus  time-out for severe  behaviors Multiple  baseline across  three students Significant decreases in  off-task and disruptive  behavior when  intervention introduced Iwata   Bailey 1974 Elementary school  students in a  special education  classroom Compared response  cost and token  economy ABAB within  one classroom No significant  differences for  behavioral outcomes;  work completion  somewhat higher in  response cost condition McLaughlin   Malaby  1972 Students in grades  56 in general  education Compared response  cost and token  economy BCBC within  one classroom Lower rates of  inappropriate  verbalizations during  token economy condition Trice   Parker 1983 10th-grade  students in a  resource program Compared response  cost and DRL ABACA design Immediate decrease in  profanity when response  cost introduced Note. DRL, differential reinforcement of low rates of behavior; DRO, differential reinforcement of other behavior.

Implementing Token Economies	 93 applied from elementary through high school and across general and special education settings. Findings support the general effectiveness of response cost in decreasing inappropriate behaviors e.g., Conyers et al., 2004; Trice  Parker, 1983; however, there is also some  evidence to suggest that response cost may also improve desired behaviors e.g., increasing  work completion; Iwata  Bailey, 1974. Interestingly, however, one study to directly compare token economy and response cost interventions found stronger effects when the token  economy was in place McLaughlin  Malaby, 1972. Level Systems A level system combines a token economy with the behavioral principle of shaping in order  to improve student behavior Cancio  Johnson, 2007. Level systems began in the 1960s  within residential and hospital settings, and have subsequently often been used with students with significant behavior problems see Table 5.5. Students earn points for demonstrating appropriate behaviors in the same way that they do within a traditional token  economy; however, the expectations for appropriate behavioras well as the rewards that  students can earnintensify as the student moves up through different levels of the system.  That is, expectations are set fairly low at the initial level; however, the rewards that students  can earn are also smaller in nature. Once students are consistently meeting the expectations  set at the initial level, they then move up to the second level, where expectations are set a bit  higher and students can earn more desirable rewards. Level systems typically incorporate  at least four levels and by the time that a student gets to the final level, the goal is that he or  she is demonstrating exemplary behavior Cancio  Johnson, 2007. TABLE 5.5.  Empirical Studies Examining Use of Level Systems Study Sample Intervention Design Results Filcheck, McNeil,  Greco,  Bernard  2004 Preschool classroom Seven-level  system ABA within  one classroom Decrease in inappropriate  behavior when level  system implemented;  however, no return  to baseline when  intervention withdrawn Mastropieri,  Jenne,  Scruggs  1988 High school resource  classroom for  students with EBD Four-level  system AB design  across 15  students Decreased talk-outs for  14 out of 15 children;  decreased out-of-seat  behavior for all 15  students Mendham   Thorne 1984 Schoolwide in a  residential setting for  7to 12-year-old boys Level  system ABAB within  one school Decrease in inappropriate  behavior when level  system implemented
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 One of the unique considerations in implementing a level system is that it is necessary  to determine what the criteria are for moving between levels. Often, teachers will look at  the percentage of possible points earned in order to decide whether the student is ready to  move on to the next level. For example, students may need to earn 75 of the possible points  for 4 consecutive weeks before they can move on. The criteria for moving down levels must  also be specified. For example, students may move down a level if they fail to meet a percentage goal for several weeks or if they engage in a behavior that is considered significantly  problematic e.g., physical aggression. In addition, it is necessary to determine what rewards are associated with each level  of the system. As discussed earlier in this chapter, rewards may be edible, tangible, activity based, or social in nature. The first level might include small rewards such as pencils  or snacks, whereas the highest level might include large rewards such as a special lunch  or early dismissal. When implementing a level system with students with more significant  behavioral concerns, however, levels have often been paired with increasing privileges. For  example, a student at level 1 may need to ask permission before leaving his or her seat,  whereas a student at level 4 may be able to leave the classroom to get a drink or use the  restroom at any time. As one example, Mendham and Thorne 1984 implemented a schoolwide level system  within a residential setting. Students were evaluated in relation to how well they stayed on  task during class, followed routines, followed instructions, and played during break. A total  of four sequential levels were utilized in this system, with the available rewards ranging  from small candies at level 1 up to special privileges, such as watching a video, at level 4. As  students moved up the levels, the behavioral expectations not only became more demanding  but the reinforcement also became more delayed. For example, an expectation for playtime  at level 1 was that the student stayed within bounds, whereas an expectation at level 4 was  that the student organized his or her free time productively. In addition, students at level 1  received tokens frequently; however, students at level 4 received tokens only once per week. Given that the nuances of a traditional level system might be difficult for younger students to fully comprehend, Filcheck and colleagues 2004 modified this type of system  for use with preschool students. All students received a shape e.g., dinosaur, kite that was  initially placed at the middle level on a seven-level chart. If a student exhibited appropriate  behaviors, the teacher would provide verbal praise and move the students shape up on the  board. If a student exhibited inappropriate behaviors, he or she would first receive a verbal  reminder and then the shape would be moved down on the board if the behavior continued.  In order to make the levels salient for young children, the top three levels were represented  by sunny faces that became happier as the student moved up the chart. In contrast, the  bottom three levels were represented by cloudy faces that became sadder as the student  moved down the chart. Approximately two to four times per day, the teacher would provide  a group-based reward to all students whose shapes were in the positive i.e., sunny levels.  The reward, which was often activity based, was selected from a deck of possible reward  cards, and those students who earned the reward would engage in the reward activity while  their classmates began the next assigned activity. All shapes would then be moved back to  the middle, neutral level to begin the next intervention period.

Implementing Token Economies	 95 FINAL CONSIDERATIONS:   FIXING PROBLEMS AND FADING THE INTERVENTION The implementation steps outlined earlier in this chapter are designed to guide you through  the process of establishing a token economy system in your own classroom. Nevertheless,  implementation does not always go exactly as intended and changes may be needed in order  to both bolster effectiveness and increase feasibility over time. In this final section, we  outline strategies for dealing with problems as they arise as well as fading the intervention  over time. Troubleshooting: When Token Economy Systems Go Wrong Token economy systems are designed to be fairly straightforward to implement for teachers and to have broad appeal to a range of students. Nonetheless, problems may arise that  serve to reduce the effectiveness of the intervention. Here, we highlight a few of the more  common problems that may arise and offer potential solutions for addressing these issues. Problem 1: Reinforcement Is Sporadic One reason why a token economy system may fail is because there is insufficient adult supervision OLeary  Drabman, 1971. If either the teacher to student ratio is too high, or the  teacher does not monitor the classroom sufficiently, many instances of desirable behavior  may go unnoticed. If students come to see that they are engaging in appropriate behaviors  but are not regularly receiving positive feedback or reinforcement for those behaviors, they  may learn that there is no benefit to demonstrating those behaviors. If this potential issue  stems from a lack of manpower i.e., one teacher cannot provide students with feedback frequently enough, one option is to consider employing students to provide feedback to their  peers. For example, within the tootling intervention, when students catch their peers doing  something good, they are taught to write the tootle on a card and submit it to their teacher  Cihak et al., 2009. In a similar manner, students could be provided with tokens that could  be given to others only for engaging in the behaviors expected in the classroom. If, on the  other hand, the issue stems from a lack of monitoringsupervision, it may be necessary to utilize prompts in order to increase the regularity and frequency with which tokens are delivered. Keeping a set number of tokens in ones pocket may serve as a weighty reminder that  tokens need to be delivered, or a variable timer might be used to provide an audible prompt. Problem 2: The Token Exchange Latency Is Too Long In some situations, problems may arise when there is too long of a delay between the administration of tokens and the receipt of a reward. The term temporal discounting has been  used to describe the phenomenon by which the value of a reward decreases as the amount  of time until it is received increases Reed  Martens, 2011. Therefore, for some students,  the longer they have to wait to exchange their tokens for a prize, the less motivated they 
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 may become to earn tokens. Reed and Martens 2011 examined this phenomenon by implementing a classwide token economy system under two reward conditions. In the first condition, students earned tokens during the class period, which could be exchanged for a  reward immediately following the intervention session. In the second condition, earned  tokens could be exchanged only at the beginning of the next day i.e., 24 hours later. Results  of this study showed that for students demonstrating high levels of impulsivity, the token  economy was more effective when the delay to reward was much shorter. Problem 3: Rewards Are Priced Incorrectly It is very important to carefully consider the pricing of rewards, as problems may arise if  rewards are either too easy or too difficult to earn. When the price of rewards is set too low  i.e., very few tokens are needed, students may earn rewards very quickly and therefore  become satiated. Satiation may result in reduced motivation to engage in desired behaviors  because the rewards are no longer seen as motivating. On the other hand, when the price  of rewards is set too high i.e., many tokens are needed, students may feel that success is  unattainable. The same thing can happen if the criteria needed to receive a token are too  stringent. Both of these situations may lead students to experience learned helplessness and  simply give up because they do not feel that it is possible to earn a reward. Although the pricing of rewards may be a general problem classwide, it is also possible  that the pricing system may be inappropriate only for particular students. This may be  because it is much easier for some students to meet the behavioral expectations than others.  Therefore, rather than using one universal standard for all students, it may be necessary  to consider varying the threshold depending on individual students levels of functioning.  In such a case, different reinforcement criteria might be used for particular students. For  example, approximations of a target behavior could be reinforced e.g., talking quietly rather  than remaining silent or warnings could be given before tokens are taken away within a  response cost system. Problem 4: Students Are Hoarding Tokens Often students will be allowed to carry over earned tokens from one day to the next. In most  cases, this will not be a problem; however, challenges may sometimes arise with particular  students. For example, a student who knows that he or she already has enough tokens to  purchase what he or she wants may choose to misbehave because the student is not motivated to earn additional tokens. This problem was illustrated in a study by Baer et al. 1977,  in which the researchers found that one of the students was still able to purchase reinforcers  when his behavior was largely inappropriate because he was able to combine a small number of tokens earned that day with other tokens that had been saved up. In this case, the  decision was made to institute a rule whereby any tokens not exchanged that day would be  forfeited. Another solution might be to put an expiration date on the tokens, such that they  cannot be redeemed after a particular date.

Implementing Token Economies	 97 Problem 5: Implementation Is Sporadic Finally, the most common problem may arise if the token economy is not being implemented  consistently across time. We have seen situations, for example, in which a token economy  system is suddenly removed one day by an exasperated teacher. Typically, this has occurred  when the class has been displaying high levels of misbehavior. Not only does this remove a  potential behavior management tool, it also violates the trust that students may have with  a teacher. Students need to understand that both the expectations for their behavior, and  the way in which they will be reinforced for demonstrating appropriate behavior, are both  consistent and predictable. Fading the Intervention Although a token economy system can be effectively woven into the fabric of a classroom  and used throughout the school year, ideally, teacher-administered reinforcement would  eventually be replaced with more naturally occurring forms of reinforcement Drege   Beare, 1991. Two frequent concerns expressed about token economies are 1 the potential  cost involved in having to supply ongoing rewards for students and 2 the worry that students may come to believe that they should be rewarded for anything that they do. One way  to address both of these potential problems is to begin to fade the intervention after it has  demonstrated initial success. There are several strategies that may be used to fade a token economy intervention.  The first option is to gradually reduce the frequency with which tokens are delivered.  Whereas it is important when first introducing the intervention to provide students with  tokens frequently, over time reinforcement may become more intermittent. One way in  which to decrease the frequency of token delivery is to continue to provide students with  verbal feedback each time they exhibit a target behavior, but to provide tokens according to  an intermittent schedule e.g., every third or fifth time the behavior occurs or in a random  fashion. Over time, this ratio of positive feedback to tokens may also be increased. Another  way in which to decrease the number of tokens administered is to gradually reduce the  amount of time during which the intervention is implemented. For example, if the token  economy is initially in place throughout the entire school day, you might consider scaling  back implementation to particular time periods. Target periods may be selected according  to time of day e.g., implement only in the morning or in consideration of when behavior  continues to be most problematic e.g., during transitions. The second option for fading a token economy is to increase the number of tokens  needed to purchase particular rewards. In the early stages of implementation, it is important that the purchase price for rewards is not set prohibitively high so that all students  have a chance of receiving reinforcement. Over time, however, after students have had a  chance to experience success with the system, the cost of items might be increased. For  example, if the cost of 5 minutes of free time was originally set at five tokens, this criterion  might be increased to 10 tokens after several weeks of implementation.
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 The third option for fading a token economy is to increase the length of time that students have to wait to exchange their points for rewards. Again, when first introducing the  intervention, it may be helpful for students to have the opportunity to purchase a reward  every day so that there is not a long latency between receiving a token and receiving a prize.  As students become more accustomed to the system, however, the opportunity to exchange  tokens may be limited to every other day or even once a week. CONCLUSIONS Token economy systems have been successfully used in both general and special education  settings for nearly a half century. Within these systems, teachers administer either points or  tangible tokens to students contingent upon demonstrating expected behaviors, which can  later be exchanged for rewards. Token economies may be applied across the age span by  carefully considering how tokens will be administered e.g., plastic chips vs. points written  in a log and what rewards will be most developmentally appropriate e.g., stickers vs. free  time. In some cases, you may consider introducing a response cost component, whereby  students can both earn tokens for appropriate behavior and lose tokens for inappropriate  behavior. Furthermore, the use of a level system i.e., pairing a token economy with gradually increasing expectations may be beneficial in those situations in which higher levels of  problem behavior are present.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 5.1.    Preparing to Implement a Token Economy Steps Considerations Determine whether  response cost will  be incorporated.  Will students receive tokens for engaging in desired,  appropriate behaviors?  Will students lose tokens for engaging in inappropriate  behaviors? Identify the target  behaviors.  Will target behaviors be framed globally e.g., be kind to  others, pay attention?  Or will specific target behaviors be outlined e.g., use  kind words, raise hand to be called on? Determine  time period for  implementation.  During what time period are the highest levels of  problem behavior typically observed?  Consider starting with a shorter block of time e.g.,  10-minute period before extending implementation. Determine how  tokens will be  delivered.  Will points be recorded in a notebook or on a  whiteboard?  Will physical objects e.g., tokens, marbles, tickets be  administered? Determine  appropriate rewards  for students.  What types of rewards will students be able to earn  e.g., edible, tangible, activity, social?  Consider administering a reward preference survey to  identify rewards that are sufficiently motivating. Determine the  pricing of rewards.  Will a certain number of tokens be needed to earn a  particular prize?  Will tokens be used as entries into a classroom lottery? Establish when  tokens may be  exchanged.  How long will students have to wait to exchange tokens  for rewards?  How often will a reward lottery take place?  Will this occur daily? Weekly?
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 5.2.  Treatment Integrity Checklist  for Implementing a Token Economy Name:  	

  Date:  	 	

STEPS IN IMPLEMENTING A TOKEN ECONOMY

 Review behavioral expectations.

 Deliver tokens when expected behavior is observed.

 When delivering tokens, explicitly indicate what the student has done to earn  the token.

 When violations are observed, explicitly remind the student what he or she can  do to earn tokens.

 Allow students to exchange tokens for rewards or enter into a lottery drawing. If implementing response cost:

 Remove tokens when violations are observed. Total number of steps completed  Percentage of steps completed 
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 5.3.    Steps in Introducing a Token Economy System Step Sample dialogue Provide rationale  for introducing  token economy. As a class, we have been having a lot of trouble using our indoor  voices and staying focused during lessons lately. Unfortunately,  the reminders that I have given you do not seem to be working.  Therefore, we are going to try something new. Establish target  behaviors and  provide rationale  for why they are  important. There are three things that I believe are very important if you  are going to learn the most from each class lesson. First, you  need face forward in your seat with your eyes on either me or the  board. Second, you need to stay in your seat and listen quietly  to instruction. Third, whenever I am writing something on the  board, you need to be taking notes. If you do all three of these  things, not only will you get the most from the lesson but your  classmates will be able to pay attention better as well. Describe  procedures for  earning tokens. During each lesson, I will be walking around the classroom  looking for students who are demonstrating these important  learning behaviors. If I see you doing all of these things, you may  get one of these tokens. You may not get a token every time that  you are demonstrating these learning behaviors but you should  have the opportunity to earn at least a few each day. Explain purpose  tokens serve. What can these tokens be used for? Well, you can think of a  token like a form of fake money. You can use the tokens to buy  different things in the classroom. Describe available  awards. Some of the things that you can buy are small so they dont cost  as much. Small prizes are things like stickers or 5 minutes of  computer time at the end of the day. Other things that you can  buy are much bigger so they cost more. Big prizes are things like  early dismissal to lunch or a toy from the prize box. Describe  procedures for  redeeming tokens  or entering tokens  into a lottery. At the end of each day, I will open up the class store. If you  want to cash your tokens in for a prize, you can do so then.  However, you can also choose to save up your tokens for a larger  prize and exchange them later.
Group contingencies may be one of the most powerful and easily implemented classroom  management interventions available to teachers. When implemented in a positive frame,  they can be used to create healthy, safe, and interactive classrooms. This chapter explores  the power of the group contingency by discussing different types, applications, and ways in  which group contingencies can be used to improve chaotic classroom settings such as the  one described in Box 6.1. CHAPTER 6 Group Contingencies BOX 6.1.  Group Contingencies in Action I David stumbled across group contingencies as a new teacher with no previous training. When students acted out, I tried everything that I knew. When I yelled for the first  time, the students yelled right back at me saying, That is not how you are supposed to  talk to a lady! I tried threatening them with demeritswriting poor conduct reports for  every infraction that I noticed, and sending students out of the classroom. I issued reprimands. As you are likely not surprised to find out, none of these things worked, meaning  they didnt make the behavior any better. What did work was putting the whole class on silence for 2 minutes meaning they  were not allowed to talk, and extending that for the whole class period if one student  broke the rule. In other words, the class responded to negative reinforcementallowing  the students to avoid the pain of not being allowed to talk by convincing them to be  silent for 2 minutes. What I found is that students were more willing to work for their  peers than for me. I used this as a major component of my classroom management plan.

Group Contingencies	 103 TYPES OF CONTINGENCIES Lets begin by returning to the contingencies described earlier in this book. In Chapter 4,  we described a contingency as an ifthen statement that describes what will happen if  an individual does something. What is common to any contingency is that it can be broken  down into seven components: 1 the behavior of interest, 2 the person responsible for the  behavior, 3 when the behavior is supposed to happen, 4 when the behavior will be evaluated, 5 who will receive the reward or punishment, 6 what reward or punishment will be  earned, and 7 who will provide the reward or punishment. One of the more familiar contingency examples that might hit home would be when your mother told you that you could  have ice cream only if you ate all of your vegetables. This is an example of an individual  contingency, in which a reward is provided to an individual based on his or her own behavior. It is also possible to implement a group contingency, in which rewards are provided to  an entire group, such as a classroom. Extending the vegetable example, if all of the students  in the lunchroom had to finish their vegetables before they could go out to recess imagine  the backlash!, this would represent a group contingency see Table 6.1 for examples of both  individual and group contingencies. Elliott, Turco, and Gresham 1987 highlighted many of the advantages of group contingencies. First, these interventions are popular among teachers due to their efficiency. Rather  TABLE 6.1.  Types of Individual and Group Contingencies Contingency What  behavior is  of interest? Who is  responsible for  the behavior? Who receives  the reward  punishment? What reward  punishment is  earned? Who provides  the reward  punishment? Individual contingencies Individual token  economy Any behavior One student One student Varies Teacher Praise Any behavior Individual or  whole class Individual,  small group,  or whole class Teacher  attention Teacher Tootling Prosocial  behavior One student One student Praise Another  student Group contingencies Independent i.e.,  classwide token  economy Prosocial  behavior All students One student Varies Teacher Dependent Any behavior One or more  students All students Varies Teacher Interdependent  e.g., Good  Behavior Game Any behavior Whole class All students Varies Teacher
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 than having to manage multiple behavior plans with different specifications, a teacher  needs to recall only one set of rules and expectations. There are also a number of teachers  who feel uncomfortable rewarding a subset of the class for good behavior while the rest of  the class is not acknowledged. Group contingencies avoid this problem by allowing all students an equal opportunity to earn rewards. Finally, teachers find that group contingencies  address not only the behavior of one target student but improve the behavior of nearly all  students in a classroom. Because group contingencies encourage students to work together  in class, they may help to foster a community of learning. Kelshaw-Leving, Sterling-Turner,  Henry, and Skinner 2000 wrote that this interdependency or intertwining of fates can  cause diverse students to encourage or assist each other so that the group can receive reinforcement p. 524. This occurs because student behaviors are reinforced not only by the  extrinsic reward that is offered by the teacher, but also by increasing the discussions among  students and allowing student behaviors to be rewarded by other students behavior. In  other words, these approaches may cue students to behave appropriately and may reinforce  ideal behavior for other students Skinner, Skinner, Skinner,  Cashwell, 1999. Beyond the practical and philosophical benefits we have outlined, research has also  suggested that group contingencies may be one of the most powerful interventions available  to teachers. Stage and Quiroz 1997 conducted a meta-analysis of 99 intervention studies  designed to decrease disruptive behavior in public education settings. A total of 16 different interventions were identified, ranging from parent training to classroom reinforcement  strategies to exercise programs. The largest effect size, however, was found for group contingency interventions M  1.02. The findings of Stage and Quiroz 1997 have been further supported by several recent reviews of the literature, which have suggested that group  contingencies are highly effective in promoting the behavior of both preschool students  Pokorski, Barton,  Ledford, 2017 and school-age children and adolescents e.g., Little,  Akin-Little,  ONeill, 2015; Maggin, Johnson, Chafouleas, Ruberto,  Berggren, 2012. When we begin discussing group contingencies, it is important to acknowledge that  there are three different types that were first identified by Litow and Pumroy 1975: independent, dependent, and interdependent. These are defined below and in Table 6.2. Independent Group Contingency: To Each His or Her Own Within an independent group contingency, the same rules apply to all students; however,  the contingency is delivered to an individual child based on his or her own behavior. As  discussed in Chapter 5, many teachers are reluctant to begin individual behavior plans  with individual students for reasons of fairness and time. Independent group contingencies  represent an attractive alternative because they allow teachers to treat every child the same  way. Also in Chapter 5, we discussed classand schoolwide token economies whereby each  student receives reinforcement based on the same rules. For example, a teacher may say  that a timer is going to go off at an unknown time remember variable interval schedules  from Chapter 2? and that if a student is on task has only needed materials on his or her  desk, is looking at his or her paper or work at that time, the student will receive a checkGroup Contingencies	 105 mark on a piece of tape. Then, at the end of the day, every student who gets 20 checkmarks  before 3:00 gets an extra 5 minutes to play outside. Token economies are arguably the most  recognizable form of an independent group contingency; however, there are other ways  in which independent group contingencies may be implemented. For one, it is not always  necessary to use secondary reinforcement such as tokens or points. Instead, students may  receive the reward immediately after demonstrating the expected behavior. For example, a  teacher could say that each student who completes a math assignment with 80 of problems  correct gets to work on a math enrichment program on an iPad. Another variation on an independent group contingency involves providing students  with behavioral feedback when they do not meet behavioral expectations. For example, in a  study by Axelrod 1973, each students name was written on the board followed by the numbers 25 down through 1. When a student committed a rule infraction, the highest number  was crossed off. The student then received the same number of tokens as the highest number remaining on the board. Although students lose points for breaking the rules within this  type of system, it is important to note that they ultimately receive positive reinforcement  based on the number of tokens remaining at the end of the day. We have unfortunately also  seen many classrooms in which independent group contingencies are being used, but in  which they are punishment based e.g., If anybody breaks the rules, he or she will receive  a demerit. As discussed in Chapter 4, the problem with this type of system is that students  TABLE 6.2.  Types of Group Contingencies Who must follow  the expectations? Whose behavior do  we use for criterion? Who receives  reinforcer? Example Dependent One or two  individuals One or two  individuals Entire group Jason is expected to complete his math  assignment. If he does so, the entire  class receives an additional 5 minutes  of computer time. Independent Entire group One or two  individuals One or two  individuals The entire class is expected to  complete a math assignment. Each  student earns one homework pass if he  or she finishes the assignment. Interdependent Entire group Entire group Entire group The entire class is expected to  complete a math assignment. If  each and every member of the class  completes the assignment, the entire  class receives one free question on a  test. Note. From Hulac and Benson 2010. Copyright  2010 Sage Publications, Inc. Reprinted by permission.
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 receive feedback regarding only what they should not do as opposed to what they should  do. Independent group contingencies are most effective, however, if the expected behavior  is clearly defined, the students believe they can successfully achieve the expectation, and  the reward is delivered as promised. Regardless of the way in which independent group contingencies are implemented,  an important distinction is that the individuals reward is not dependent upon the actions  of others. As such, independent group contingencies characteristically do not instill peer  mediation for contingencies. One exception is a recent study by Dart, Radley, Battaglia,  et al. 2016, who designed an independent group contingency that incorporated classroom  competition the classroom password. At the start of each class period, the teacher would  announce a classroom password that would be said a certain number of times throughout  the period, as well as a prize e.g., 25 pieces of candy. The students were then responsible  for placing an X on a sheet of paper each time the teacher uttered the password. The goal in  having students keep a frequency count of the password was that it would help them to better attend to instruction. At the end of the period, the teacher collected the recording sheets  and evaluated the accuracy of each students estimate. Five students were then randomly  selected from among those with correct answers to share the prize for the day. Despite positive empirical evidence see Table 6.1, independent group contingencies  can be both time intensive and difficult to manage given the need to closely monitor the  behavior of each student. For these reasons, it may be more practical to consider the use of  either dependent or independent group contingencies, in which rewards are based on the  behavior of an individual or group of students. Dependent Group Contingency: One for All Dependent group contingencies refer to situations in which the behavior of an individual, or  a small group of individuals, determines the reward that all students receive. For example,  if a group of students was misbehaving, and the teacher chose to reward the entire class  when those particular students behaved appropriately, this would be considered a dependent group contingency. One of the key advantages of a dependent group contingency system is that it is highly efficientthat is, because it is necessary to only monitor the behavior  of select students, this greatly reduces the requirements for data collection Heering   Wilder, 2006. One of the first things that must be determined when implementing a dependent group  contingency is upon whose behavior the rewards will be based. Drabman, Spitalnik, and  Spitalnik 1974 divided all students in a first-grade classroom into four smaller groups and  then compared both the effectiveness and acceptability of three different types of dependent group contingencies. Regardless of condition, each student could earn up to 15 points  during an observation period for exhibiting appropriate behaviors and each point could be  exchanged for 1 minute of free time. Within the first condition, group reinforcement was  based on the behavior of the lowest-performing studentthat is, all members of the group  received the number of points earned by the student who was most disruptive. Within the  second condition, group reinforcement was based on the behavior of the highest-performing 

Group Contingencies	 107 student. In other words, all members of the group received the number of points earned by  the student who was least disruptive. Finally, within the third condition, group reinforcement was based on the behavior of a randomly selected student. Therefore, the teacher randomly selected one students name from each group and all members of the group received  the number of points earned by that student. Results suggested that there were no statistically significant differences with regard to changes in student behavior; however, clear  preferences were noted across these three variants. Although students reported liking the  system in which rewards were based on the behavior of the highest-performing student  in the group, the teacher did not like this option. This was likely because it was possible  for students to receive up to 15 minutes of free time when their individual behavior was  very poor. The system that received the most favorable ratings from both the teacher and  students, however, was that in which rewards were based on the behavior of a randomly  selected student. Both the students and teacher found this system to be most equitable, and  the teacher also reported that it required the least amount of time and effort. Successful examples of dependent group contingency systems being used to improve  student behavior can be found across both special and general education settings see Table  6.3. In some cases, the selected students have been made known ahead of time so as to provide motivation. Hansen and LignugarisKraft 2005, for example, implemented a dependent group contingency with junior high school students in a self-contained classroom for  students with EBDs. After providing social skills training focused on making positive verbal statements to peers, the teacher explained to the class that they could earn a grab bag  reward each day for demonstrating the target behavior. At the start of each day, the names of  two students in the classroom would be selected at random and announced publicly. If both  of these students made at least four positive statements to peers during the day, the entire  class would be able to choose a reward at the end of the day. One concern in making the selected students known ahead of time, however, is that  this can put a high amount of pressure on those students whose behavior determines the  reward for the rest of the class Gresham  Gresham, 1982. These types of situations may  result in aggression directed toward those students. To address the issue of pressure being  placed on students, Skinner, Williams, and Neddenriep 2004 recommended keeping the  person or group upon whose behavior the group reward was being determined a secret from  the rest of the class. In a study by Heering and Wilder 2006, for example, one randomly  selected row of students was observed each time that a chime sounded at predetermined  intervals of approximately 12 minutes. If all students in that row were found to be on task,  the class received a point for that interval. Feedback was not provided, however, until the  end of the period when the teacher reported the percentage of intervals in which students  were found to be on task. If students were on task during at least 75 of the observed  intervals, the class received a reward. In this way, the class received feedback about their  behavior overall; however, points or the lack thereof could not be traced back to particular  students. As another example, Williamson, Campbell-Whatley, and Lo 2009 worked with 10thgrade students in a special education resource classroom to improve overall levels of on-task  behavior. The teacher first modeled what on-task behavior looked like and had students 
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 TABLE 6.3.  Empirical Studies Examining Use of Dependent and Interdependent Group  Contingency Interventions Study Sample Type of  contingency Design Results Campbell   Skinner 2004 Sixth-grade general  education classroom Timely  Transitions  Game AB design  within one  classroom Large decrease  in time spent  transitioning Donaldson,  Vollmer, Krous,  Downs,   Berard 2011 Kindergarten  general education  classrooms Good Behavior  Game Multiple  baseline across  five classrooms Rates of inappropriate  behavior decreased  when Good Behavior  Game implemented Hawkins,  Haydon,  Denune, Larkin,   Fite 2015 High school students  in an alternative  school for students  with EBD Randomized  interdependent  group  contingency ABAB design  across three  classrooms Large improvements  in percentage of  students ready to  begin class within first  5 minutes Heering   Wilder 2006 Thirdand fourthgrade general  education classrooms Dependent Multiple  baseline across  two classrooms Improvements in  on-task behavior  across both classrooms Kleinman   Saigh 2011 Ninth-grade history  class in urban  setting Good Behavior  Game ABAB within  one classroom Decreases in verbal  disruption each time  Good Behavior Game  introduced Kowalewicz   Coffee 2014 K4 general  education classrooms Interdependent  with Mystery  Motivator ABAB changing  criterion design  across eight  classrooms Improvements in  disruptive behavior  across all eight  classrooms  further  reduction noted when  criterion changed Robichaux   Gresham 2014 Students in grades  13 in general  education Interdependent  with Mystery  Motivator Multiple  baseline across  three classrooms Significant reductions  in disruptive behavior  across classrooms Williamson,  CampbellWhatley,  Lo  2009 10th-grade special  education classroom Dependent ABAB across six  students Improvements in  on-task behavior  from baseline to  intervention; however,  clear reversal noted  for only one student continued

Group Contingencies	 109 rehearse on-task behaviors while receiving feedback. Every 5 minutes the teacher would  then visually scan the classroom and note which students were on task at that moment. At  the end of the period, one students name was pulled from a jar but not shared with the  class. If that student met the criteria four out of five intervals on task, the whole class  received a reward e.g., homework pass, free time. As we discussed with independent group contingencies, it is important to distinguish between the reward-based dependent group contingencies discussed herein and  punishment-based contingencies. Although research evidence supports administering  group rewards based on the performance of select individuals, the consequences of punishing all students based on the performance of select individuals are unknown and likely  dangerous. The movie Full Metal Jacket tells the story of Private Gomer Pyle, who is trying  to finish basic training with the Marine Corps. When Private Pyle is caught with a jelly  donut in his locker, the frustrated drill sergeant chooses to punish the rest of the group for  Pyles mistake. Although Pyle works harder as a result, he also frustrates his fellow soldiers  so much that they retaliate against him. Obviously, this variant of the dependent group contingency would be unethical to use in schools and should not be employed. In this way, careless implementation of group contingencies can create dangerous, hostile situations where  the safety of children can be put at risk. Interdependent Group Contingency: All for One Of the three group contingencies discussed in this chapter, the greatest amount of research  evidence exists to support the interdependent group contingency. Within an interdependent  group contingency, all students in a group must meet a criterion in order for all students to  receive the reward. For example, a teacher may expect that all students enter the classroom,  remove their coats and hats, hang up their bags, and be seated at a carpet in the front of  the room in 90 seconds. If every student in the class meets that criterion, the entire class  may earn an extra 2 minutes of computer time. Because all students are working together to  TABLE 6.3.  continued Study Sample Type of  contingency Design Results Wright   McCurdy 2011 Kindergarten  and fourth-grade  students in general  education Compared  Good Behavior  Game and  Caught Being  Good Game ABAC across  two classrooms Both variations  effective in reducing  disruptive behavior  and increasing on-task  behavior Yarborough,  Skinner, Lee,   Lemmons  2004 Second-grade  general education  classroom Timely  Transitions  Game ABABAB design  within one  classroom Large decrease  in time spent  transitioning
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 earn a shared reward, there is believed to be greater motivation for students to support one  another and work together as a team Kelshaw-Levering et al., 2000. Interdependent group contingencies have been successfully used within the literature  to improve both student behavior and academic performance see Table 6.3. In a study by  Ling, Hawkins, and Weber 2011, for example, an interdependent group contingency was  used to improve engagement during carpet time in a first-grade general education classroom. While seated at the carpet, the class could earn a smiley face if each student was sitting appropriately, keeping his or her hands and feet to himor herself, speaking only when  called on, and paying attention. In contrast, when used to improve academic performance,  criteria are typically established in relation to students work accuracy. Interdependent contingencies have been used to increase assignment grades Popkin  Skinner, 2003, the  percentage of passed quizzes Sharp  Skinner, 2004, and even homework performance  Theodore et al., 2009. There are several advantages to using an interdependent group contingency that is based  on the behavior of the entire class. For one, it is easier for the teacher to manage because the  decision regarding reinforcement is black and whiteeither everyone receives the reward  or no one does. How one criterion is established for the group depends largely on the type  of behavior targeted. If the goal is to increase a desired behavior, a minimum criterion for  that behavior might be set for each student e.g., all students must give one another at least  two compliments during the day. As one example, Brantley and Webster 1993 established  three prosocial expectations for a general education classroom of 25 fourth-grade students:  pay attention and finish your work, get the teachers permission before speaking, and stay in  your seat without touching others. Every 45 minutes, a student received a checkmark next  to his or her name if that student exhibited two or more prosocial behaviors during an interval. If every student had five of seven checkmarks on 4 of 5 days, the class was rewarded. If the goal is to decrease an undesired behavior, a threshold could instead be established for each students behavior e.g., all students must receive fewer than two reminders  to sit quietly or for the class as a whole e.g., the class must receive fewer than two reminders to sit quietly. When implementing interdependent group contingency interventions  across eight elementary classrooms, teachers in a study by Kowalewicz and Coffee 2014  kept a running tally of disruptive behaviors exhibited by any student. If the total number of  disruptive behaviors noted fell below the established criterion, the class received a reward. In still other situations, however, it may make more sense to compute an average e.g.,  the class lines up within 2 minutes on 80 of occasions. In implementing an interdependent group contingency in a self-contained classroom for students with emotional disturbance, Popkin and Skinner 2003 established different goals for performance across three  subjects spelling, math, English. If the average performance across all students met or  exceeded the criterion e.g., 80 accuracy, the class received a reward. An additional advantage of classwide interdependent group contingencies is that a  wider range of rewards can be utilized when reinforcement is administered to everyone.  When implementing an independent group contingency, such as a token economy, the use  of tangible or edible rewards is often preferred because these rewards can easily be distribGroup Contingencies	 111 uted to some but not all students in the classroom. In contrast, it can be very challenging  to limit some students access to activity-based rewards. Providing only particular students  with extra recess time or a pizza party, for example, could be difficult for a teacher to manage Kelshaw-Levering et al., 2000. In addition, it is possible to think more broadly about  what activity-based rewards might look like when rewards are made available to the entire  class. Skinner and colleagues 1999, for example, offered such creative suggestions as allowing students to attend a special assembly to watch the principal kiss a pig or having teachers  in formal attire serve students their lunches! VARIATIONS ON GROUP CONTINGENCIES Group contingencies are imminently flexible in that a variety of behaviors can be rewarded  at a variety of times in a variety of ways. This next section describes some of the variations  of group contingencies that have appeared in the research over the years. The Good Behavior Game One of the more popular variations on the interdependent group contingency is what has  been called the Good Behavior Game GBG; Barrish, Saunders,  Wolf, 1969. The GBG  varies from a traditional interdependent group contingency in that it incorporates an additional competitive element in which teams of students compete against one another. When  the GBG was first developed in 1969, the rules were as such. First, the teacher established  several rules, including 1 everybody had to remain in their seat, 2 nobody could sit on  top of his or her neighbors desk, and 3 nobody could talk without permission. Next, the  teacher divided the class into two teams. Each team was allotted 10 points, which were represented by 10 dashes on the board. If any member of one team committed an infraction,  that teacher erased a dash mark from the board. Finally, at the end of the period, the team  with the most points was awarded a prize. Although many subsequent studies have applied  these game rules, there is the concern that members of the losing team may respond with  anger or disappointment and problem behaviors motivated by jealousy could occur. As a  result, other variants have allowed both teams to win if they meet a certain criterion. For  example, any teams that have more than 5 points at the end of the day win a reward. One notable application of the GBG was Kleinman and Saighs 2011 study within a  ninth-grade classroom in New York City. A new teacher with no classroom management  training took over a class in the middle of the school year. According to the authors, students reportedly refused to stay seated, frequently shouted at one another, cursed, and  occasionally became involved in physical altercations with classmates. At one point, students reportedly screamed, cursed, and threw objects at the new teacher p. 96. When  the game was implemented, the teacher divided the classroom into two teams, which were  designed to be equal in terms of both number of students and number of students with a  propensity to display problematic behaviors. Once the game started, the teacher would 
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 respond to a misbehavior by identifying the student as well as describing the infraction.  The student then received a point on the board. The team with the fewest points at the end  of the day received a piece of candy, and then the team with the fewest points at the end of  the week received a pizza or cupcake party. During the implementation phases of the GBG,  disruptive behaviors were observed to drop by 90! Positive Variations on the GBG As originally designed by Barrish and colleagues 1969, the GBG is an interdependent  group contingency involving response cost. Although response cost is a signal that is useful for communicating to students that they have committed an infraction, it also has some  drawbacks. The first is that it fails to communicate to students what they should be doing.  The second is that it may set up opportunities for students to argue. You probably can easily imagine erasing a point from a team and immediately hearing the claims from students  that they did not commit the infraction! Perhaps the most pressing concern, however, is  the retaliation that these approaches may bring. If one student was responsible for multiple  infractions that caused a team to miss out on a prize, it is possible that others in the class  may retaliate against that person. Given these concerns, an alternative approach involves  recognizing student behaviors that are prosocial. Across a small number of studies, the effectiveness of both the traditional GBG and  a more reinforcement-based GBG variation have been directly compared. Wright and  McCurdy 2011 designed the Caught Being Good Game, in which teachers assign points to  teams whose students are following a particular expectation when a silent timer goes off. In  a study by Tanol, Johnson, McComas, and Cote 2010, teams began with a clean slate but  earned stars for following the rules. Any team that had three or more stars remaining at the  end of the 10-minute period received a reward. Across both studies, traditional and positive  GBG variants were found to be similarly effective in changing student behavior; however,  teachers in the study by Tanol and colleagues 2010 reported a stronger preference for the  reinforcement condition due to the fact that it was seen as fostering a more positive environment. Over the years, variations of the GBG have been successfully used with students  across different ages from kindergarten Donaldson, Vollmer, Krous, Downs,  Berard,  2011 through ninth grade Kleinman  Saigh, 2011. The GBG has also been used across  a range of settings, including general education classes e.g., Barrish et al., 1969, transitional classes of students with low achievement and highly disruptive behaviors Johnson,  Turner,  Konarski, 1978, specials e.g., during library; Fishbein  Wasik, 1981, and even  in the lunchroom e.g., McCurdy, Lannie,  Barnabas, 2009. Perhaps most interesting,  however, has been the diversity of behaviors targeted using the GBG. Studies include helping residents of a state hospital improve their work output Lutzker  White-Blackburn,  1979; firstand second graders to increase their toothbrushing frequency Swain, Allard,   Holborn, 1982; a group of Sudanese second graders to decrease aggression and out-of-seat  behaviors Saigh  Umar, 1983; three classes of high school students identified with emotional difficulties to reduce cursing, inappropriate verbalizations, and out-of-seat behaviors 

Group Contingencies	 113 Salend, Reynolds,  Coyle, 1989; and upper elementary school students in physical education classes to display more prosocial behaviors during a game of volleyball Patrick, Ward,   Crouch, 1998. Given demonstrated long-term effects on student development, the GBG  has even been referred to as a behavioral vaccine Embry, 2002. Randomizing Intervention Components Although group contingencies certainly have the power to make intervention implementation more efficient, there are also some potential limitations to utilizing the same behavioral  expectations and rewards for all students in the class. For one, keeping the target behaviors consistent across time may cause problems. In some cases, students may improve with  regard to the specific behaviors targeted in the intervention while their behavior in other  areas worsens McKissick, Hawkins, Lentz, Hailley,  McGuire, 2010. Additional problems may result from the use of a single behavioral criterion. If the criterion established for  the group proves to be too challenging for particular students, these individuals may see  the goal as unachievable and give up on trying altogether McKissick et al., 2010. Finally,  it may be challenging to identify rewards that are sufficiently reinforcing to all students in  the group Kelshaw-Levering et al., 2000. If particular students are not motivated to earn  the available rewards, the effectiveness of the group contingency intervention may be significantly reduced. Given these potential limitations, some researchers have recommended  the randomization of components within group contingency interventions. Within the literature, the most popular randomized group contingency intervention  has been termed the Mystery Motivator Rhode, Jenson,  Reavis, 1992. Within the Mystery Motivator, rewards are made available only on certain days and what the actual reward  is remains a mystery until it is earned. By not revealing the reward ahead of time, it is  believed that students motivation and interest will be peaked Murphy, Theodore, Aloiso,  Alric-Edwards,  Hughes, 2007. Typically, the classroom teacher marks particular days on  a calendar with an M using a variable ratio reinforcement schedule. This is done either  using an invisible marker or covering up all calendar squares with pieces of paper or Post-it  notes. If the established goal for the day is either met or surpassed, that particular calendar  square is revealed. If there is an M on that day, a reward is randomly selected. Often,  cards indicating the available rewards have been drawn from a manila envelope with a large  question mark on it e.g., Kowalewicz  Coffee, 2014. If there is not an M, the teacher  provides the students with positive verbal feedback for a job well-done. Over the years, Mystery Motivator interventions involving independent, interdependent, and dependent group contingencies have been used with students of different ages and  abilities to target a range of outcomes. Successful examples can be found in preschool e.g.,  Murphy et al., 2007, elementary e.g., Robichaux  Gresham, 2014, and high school e.g.,  Schanding  Sterling-Turner, 2010. In addition, the Mystery Motivator intervention has  been shown to improve both behavioral e.g., Murphy et al., 2007; Robichaux  Gresham,  2014 and academic e.g., Madaus, Kehle, Madaus,  Bray, 2003 outcomes. Several other examples can be found within the literature, however, in which multiple contingency components have been randomized. Group contingency interventions 
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 have commonly used different jars e.g., McKissick et al., 2010, shoe boxes e.g., Popkin   Skinner, 2003, or envelopes e.g., Schanding  Sterling-Turner, 2010 in order to randomize the different intervention components. In implementing such an intervention in a  second-grade general education classroom, McKissick and colleagues 2010 randomized  the target behaviors e.g., out-of-seat behavior, talking out, disrespect, behavioral criteria  i.e., one to four behavioral occurrences, and available rewards e.g., small tangibles, free  time at the end of class and found notable increases in student engagement as a result.  Popkin and Skinner 2003 used a similar type of intervention to improve performance on  in-class assignments in a middle school self-contained classroom. In this case, randomizing  the performance criterion e.g., 90 accuracy in spelling and rewards e.g., extra computer  time, playing games helped to improve the daily grades obtained by students in spelling  and mathematics. Jones, Boon, Fore, and Bender 2008 modified the basic dependent group contingency  to create the Mystery Hero intervention. The goal of the intervention was to decrease the  number of verbally disrespectful behaviors occurring in a middle school resource classroom. At the start of each period, the classroom teacher would randomly select the name  of one student i.e., the Mystery Hero and place this name in an envelope. In a second  envelope, the teacher would place a randomly selected reward for the day i.e., the Mystery  Reward. If at the end of the period, the Mystery Hero had reduced his or her number of  inappropriate verbalizations from the previous day, the entire class would receive the Mystery Reward and the Mystery Hero would receive public verbal reinforcement e.g., Jose  did such a nice job of speaking respectfully to each of you today that he has earned everyone  in the class a homework pass. However, if at the end of the period the goal was not met, no  public statement was made. Rather, the teacher met privately with the student to provide  feedback and encouragement regarding future behavior. Kelshaw-Levering and colleagues 2000 implemented an ABACBC design in order to  investigate the effectiveness of randomizing different components of a group contingency  intervention. During the B phase, rewards were randomly selected from a jar, as is typical  in a Mystery Motivator intervention. During the C phase, four different jars were used in  order to randomize all components of the intervention. Slips of paper in the first jar were  labeled with different target behaviors of interest and slips in the second jar were labeled  either individual or group to indicate the type of contingency in place. When an individual contingency was in place, a slip was drawn from the third jar, which contained the  names of all of the students in the class. Finally, the fourth jar contained slips of paper indicating the different rewards available. The Timely Transitions Game As discussed in Chapter 3, one time of the day that problem behavior is more likely to occur  is during a transition Arlin, 1979. This is because transitions are times when expectations  for students are more ambiguous and when less supervision is typically afforded. Establishing a step-by-step routine for what students should do during transitions therefore removes  any ambiguity and makes the expectations for student behavior clear and predictable. To 

Group Contingencies	 115 address problems with transition, Campbell and Skinner 2004 created a variation on an  interdependent group contingency, called the Timely Transitions Game TTG. First, the  teacher explains the expectations for the students during the transition and posts these in  the front of the classroom. Next, appropriate transition behaviors are practiced and students  receive corrective feedback if necessary. Once the expectations are well understood, the  teacher explains that the class can earn a reward if the amount of time that it takes to transition is equal to, or less than, a criterion that will be randomly drawn each day. During each  day of intervention, the teacher then times the students to see how long the transition took.  If the actual time spent transitioning is no more than the randomly drawn criterion, the  class receives 1 point toward a larger reward. In a study by Yarborough, Skinner, Lee, and  Lemmons 2004, daily points came in the form of letters, which could be used to spell out a  reward i.e., P-A-R-T-Y. Although research on this type of intervention is somewhat limited,  studies have reported substantially faster and more orderly transitions across elementary  e.g., Yarborough et al., 2004, middle e.g., Campbell  Skinner, 2004, and high school  e.g., Hawkins, Haydon, Denune, Larkin,  Fite, 2015 settings. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS:   FIXING PROBLEMS AND FADING THE INTERVENTION Having described the many different ways in which group contingencies may be structured  in the classroom, we now turn to discuss how to troubleshoot problems that may arise as  well as how to fade a group contingency intervention over time. Troubleshooting Although group contingency interventions may be flexibly constructed in order to best meet  the demands and characteristics of your local setting, unanticipated problems may arise in  the process of implementation. Within this section, we draw your attention to a few of the  more common problems that may surface and offer suggestions for how these problems may  be addressed. Problem 1: The Criterion Set Is Not Appropriate Regardless of the type of contingency system implemented, the criterion for gaining or  losing points needs to be not too easy and not too hard. Finding this Goldilocks point,  however, can be a challenge for teachers. Our suggestion is that teachers always first err on  the easy side. If students find something new that is too difficult, they are apt to give up  quickly. Once students have experienced some success with the system, the bar can then be  raised concerning behavioral expectations. If implementing an interdependent group contingency, it is important to keep in mind that it may sometimes be difficult for students to  achieve the criterion given the composition of the teamsthat is, teachers may accidently  make the teams unfair by including too many students who display inappropriate behaviors 
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 in one group. It is important that all students feel like they have a chance to earn a reward,  and it may be useful to ensure that teams are balanced with regard to students who typically  behave as expected and those who may do so less frequently. Problem 2: Individual Students Seem to Be Sabotaging  the Group Reward We all know that there are some students who may find acting out reinforcingand this  does not necessarily change just because a group contingency is put into place. In fact, some  students may even seem to enjoy the fact that their acting-out behavior caused their teams  to lose points. These challenges may occur frequently, but there are several ways of addressing individual students who are trying to ruin it for the group. For example, if one student  commits too many rule violations, that student could be excluded from the reinforcer if  his or her team won that week Medland  Stachnik, 1972. The problem, however, with  excluding a disruptive student from the contingency altogether is that these are often the  students who most need behavioral supports in place. Therefore, another alternative is to  place the student who is disrupting the intervention on their own independent group contingency. The student should be eligible to receive some type of rewardthough this will  sometimes look different from the larger class rewardand should be able to rejoin his or  her team with improved behavior. Third, rather than deducting points for infractions, the  focus of the intervention could instead be shifted to reinforcing appropriate behavior. It has  been suggested that students are more likely to band together to encourage one another  when appropriate behaviors are targeted Skinner et al., 1999. Problem 3: Students Are Retaliating against One Another As noted earlier in this chapter, the use of dependent or interdependent contingencies may  result in a high amount of pressure being placed on students Tingstrom, Sterling-Turner,   Wilczynski, 2006. For example, a student who loses points for the rest of the group or class  may become the subject of the wrath of other students. There are two potential ways to handle this problem. First, the teacher may provide explicit instruction to the other students in  the class regarding how to respond to an offending student if another student causes the rest  of the group to lose points. For example, rather than yelling at the student or groaning about  the loss of points, students could be taught to provide corrective feedback for past behavior  and encouragement for future behavior to their classmates. Second, as noted above, teachers may also apply a rule whereby if one team member is responsible for a certain number  of points, he or she would not be counted as part of the team that day. Problem 4: Other Students Feel That It Is Unfair to Be Losing Out  on a Reward When One Student Misbehaves This last problem is more philosophical than the other problems are, and really has to do  with our understanding of fairness. All students deserve the things that they need. In genGroup Contingencies	 117 eral, this refers to a safe place to learn, the opportunity to receive an excellent education,  and activities that promote their physical, cognitive, and social growth. When we hear this  concern, we often have to ask ourselves whether the child has really been harmed by not  receiving an extra pizza party, an extra 5 minutes of recess, or an extra homework pass. In  such situations, we have to say that the answer is no. However, if the reinforcer is something  that the students needsuch as access to any part of the curriculum or opportunities to  move and exercisethen the intervention should be considered unethical and should not  be implemented. Using Randomization to Solve Multiple Problems Earlier, we discussed how randomization could be used to enhance group contingencies.  They can also be used to solve several problems that may crop up. For example, some students may not find the group reward equally motivating. In those circumstances, it is appropriate to utilize a Mystery Motivator or to randomize the reinforcers using envelopes, jars,  or invisible ink Kelshaw-Levering et al., 2000. As we mentioned earlier, there may also  be some students for whom a predetermined criterion is too high. To address this problem, many teachers choose to randomize the criterion. For example, a teacher may have an  envelope with the percentage of correct responses that the whole class needs to average to  receive a reward. In the envelope are numbers between 50 and 80. This way, students  know that there is a chance that the criterion is accessible to them. Note: As the class  begins to show improvement, some of the lower numbers can be taken out of the envelope  and replaced with higher numbers! Randomizing the criterion may also help those students  who stop working when the criterion is met. For example, a student may realize that he or  she has already completed 60 of the problems on a worksheet and may decide that he or  she does not need to do any more work. If the criterion is unknown to the student, and the  possibility of a 90 criterion is in the envelope, the student would likely continue working  to make sure he or she does not fall behind the criterion. Fading the Intervention Ideally, students would come to class prepared to work and would need no extrinsic behavioral supports; however, we know that that is not always reality. Group contingencies can  be incredibly helpful in bringing student behavior to an expected level of functioning; however, in the long term, we would prefer for students to be able to display appropriate behavior without external supports. In order to move toward this expectation, we need to consider  options for fading these interventions. When considering how to fade an intervention, it is worth revisiting what we learned  about schedules of reinforcement in Chapter 2. When we are first learning a new behavior,  reinforcement needs to occur frequently or even continuously. This way, we learn quickly  what behaviors will be rewarded and which ones will not. However, creating behaviors that  are sustained requires the use of variable reinforcement schedules whereby the behavior  is reinforced less frequently. Thus, having students work for larger rewardsbut providing 
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 those larger rewards less frequentlymay help students begin to regulate their own behaviors. Rather than giving students an opportunity for reinforcement every 5 minutes, for  example, a teacher may slowly increase that interval to 6, 7, or even 10 minutes. The slower  the increase, the more likely students will not notice the difference. Another approach involves raising the criterion over time. When starting a new intervention, teachers want students to be successful, and they may set a low bar so that students  win the game. For example, a teacher may initially determine that the class will earn a  reward if 75 of students earn 75 or more on their homework assignments. After the class  consistently meets that criterion, however, the teacher may make the criterion slightly more  challenging by requiring that 75 of students earn 80 or more on their homework assignments. Again, a slow increase in the criterion will again be less detectable, but will help  students to rely less on the intervention over time. A final option may involve increasing the number of target behaviors or settings over  time. In this way, the expectations for student behavior gradually become more challenging  and students must therefore put forth greater effort in order to earn established rewards.  For example, a group contingency intervention may initially focus on ensuring that the students sit quietly during whole-class instruction; however, once this goal has been achieved,  important classroom behaviors such as asking questions and participating in group discussion may be added to the list of behavioral expectations. In addition, once success with the  intervention is demonstrated during whole-class instruction, the group contingency could  be extended to other instructional periods and settings during the day as well. CONCLUSIONS When we started our discussion of reinforcement in Chapter 4, we highlighted a fairly  simple contingency: If Beatrices desk is clean at the end of the day, Beatrice will receive a homework pass from  the teacher. Because this is a book about managing entire classrooms of students, however, we want to  think about developing group contingencies that are both efficient and able to support a  range of students at the same time. It is probably easiest to invoke a group contingency that  can be applied in one fell swoop, such as the following: If everybody in the class turns in a math assignment with 80 accuracy, the whole group  gets a Frisbee. However, you can probably identify many problems that may arise:  What if some students cant do the assignment?  What if a student fails to complete the assignment with 80 accuracy and ends up  causing everybody to lose their Frisbee?

Group Contingencies	 119  What if students dont care about Frisbees?  What if the teacher does not want to track the behavior of all students?  What if students work hard on their math, but slough off on their other assignments?  What if students stop working after they get 80 correct? Thankfully, there is not just one way to implement a group contingency, but many different  options and configurations available see Table 6.4 on page 120 for a comparison and Coach  Cards 6.16.5 for implementation guidance. Your challenge is finding the one that will  work best in your own setting. Keep in mind, however, that although group contingencies  provide an effective means of reducing student misbehavior and allow a teacher to spend  more time on instruction, teaching students behavioral skills is still critical. Group contingencies are methods to support student behavior, but do not provide a substitute for teaching. One method that has useful implications for improving both behavioral and academic  skills involves self-managementa process that helps to internalize the behaviors that we  want students to demonstrate. This is the focus of the next chapter.
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 TABLE 6.4.  Comparing Implementation of Various Group Contingency Interventions Steps Whole-class  contingency Good Behavior  Game Caught Being  Good Game Good Behavior  Game with  reinforcement Identify the target  behaviors. Usually only  positive  reinforcement Response cost  onlydesigned to  reduce problem  behaviors Positive  reinforcement  only Response cost  and positive  reinforcement Determine whose  behavior rewards  will be based upon. Individuals  randomly drawn  from a hat Anybody in the  class on one of  two teams Anybody in the  class on one of  two teams Anybody in the  class on one of  two teams Determine criteria  for receiving prizes. If everybody  whose name is  drawn from the  hat has met the  criteria A team has a  certain number of  points remaining  on the board. Or: The team with  the most points A team has a  certain number of  points remaining  on the board. Or: The team with  the most points A team has a  certain number of  points remaining  on the board. Or: The team with  the most points Determine whether  any components  will be randomized. Reminder: For all interventions, both rewards and criterion may be randomized! Divide the  classroom into  teams. The whole class  is typically the  team in these  situations. Divide the class  into two equal  teams. Divide the class  into two equal  teams. Divide the class  into two equal  teams. Determine the  criteria for earning  andor losing points. Criterion may  be assignment  completion,  assignment  accuracy, or  ability to ignore  one students  problematic  behavior. Any infraction  results in a point  loss. When a random  interval timer  goes off, the  teacher looks  to see whether  all students are  meeting the  expectation and  awards points  accordingly. A mixture of  random interval  timer and  point loss for  infractions. Determine time  period for the game. Reminder: We recommend starting with a 15-minute time period. Then work  your way to periods of the day that are especially difficult.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 6.1.  Steps in Introducing   a Group Contingency with Response Cost Step Sample dialogue Provide rationale for  introducing group  contingency intervention. Class, today we are going to play a game. This game is going to help  decrease the amount of time we spend talking while we work on  our assignments. It is important that we cut down on the amount of  time that is spent talking because it is taking away from the time  that we have available to learn. Establish target behaviors  and provide rationale for  why they are important. There are a few particular behaviors that have become problematic  in the classroom. These behaviors are problematic because they  make it difficult to learn at the same time. These are the behaviors  that we should not see: 1.  Being out of our seat without permission. 2.  Having other materials on our desks. 3.  Talking when we need to be working silently. Explain how teamstargets  will be established. Interdependent GC: At the start of each week, I will divide you into  three teams. You will work with your team to follow the rules each  day. Dependent GC: Each day, I will randomly select the name of a  student or group of students out of this jar. This student will be the  Mystery Student for the day or this team will be the Mystery Team  for the day. Describe procedures for  earning points. Interdependent GC: Each day I will put 10 dashes on the board for  each team at the start of the period. If I see a member of your team  breaking one of the class rules, your team will lose one dash. Dependent GC: Each time that this timer goes off, I will look to  see whether the Mystery StudentTeam is breaking any of the class  rules. If so, the entire class will lose one dash. Explain criteria for receiving  prizes. Interdependent GC: At the end of the day, each team that has at  least seven dashes remaining will earn the daily reward: an extra 5  minutes to play on the playground. Dependent GC: At the end of the day, if there are at least seven  dashes remaining, the entire class will earn the daily reward: an  extra 5 minutes to play on the playground.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 6.2.  Treatment Integrity Checklist  for Implementing a Group Contingency Intervention  with Response Cost Teacher:  	 	

  Date:  	 	

Observer:  		

  Activity:  	

STEPS IN IMPLEMENTING A GROUP CONTINGENCY  INTERVENTION WITH RESPONSE COST

 Review behavioral expectations and goal for earning reward.

 Select studentteam if implementing dependent group contingency.

 Signal to students that game is about to begin.

 Begin the interval timer if applicable.

 Remove tokens when violations are observed.

 When violations are observed, explicitly remind the student what he or she can  do to earn tokens.

 Determine whether the goal is met for the day.

 Administer reward if earned. Total number of steps completed  Percentage of steps completed 
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 6.3.  Steps in Introducing   a Group Contingency in Which Points Are Earned Step Sample dialogue Provide rationale for  introducing group  contingency intervention. Class, today we are going to play a game. This game is going to help  increase the amount of time that we spend quietly working on our  assignments. Having a quiet work environment is important because  it allows other students to focus and to get more of their work done. Establish target behaviors  and provide rationale for  why they are important. There are a few ways that you can demonstrate to me that you are  working quietly. These include: 1.  Facing forward in your seat. 2.  Raising your hand if you need to ask a question. 3.  Keeping your eyes focused on your work. Explain how teamstargets  will be established. Interdependent GC: At the start of each week, I will divide you into  three teams. You will work with your team to earn points each day. Dependent GC: Each day, I will randomly select the name of a  student or group of students out of this jar. This student will be the  Mystery Student for the day or this team will be the Mystery Team  for the day. Describe procedures for  earning points. Interdependent GC: If I see a member of your team demonstrating  one of the expected behaviors, your team will earn a point. Dependent GC: Each time that this timer goes off, I will look to see  whether the Mystery StudentTeam is demonstrating the expected  behaviors. If so, the entire class will earn a point. Explain criteria for receiving  rewards. Interdependent GC: At the end of the day, each team that has more  than 10 points will earn the daily reward: an extra 5 minutes to play  on the playground. Dependent GC: At the end of the day, if there are at least 10 points  on the board, the entire class will earn the daily reward: an extra 5  minutes to play on the playground.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 6.4.  Treatment Integrity Checklist  for Implementing a Group Contingency Intervention  with Reinforcement Teacher:  	 	

  Date:  	 	

Observer:  		

  Activity:  	

STEPS IN IMPLEMENTING A GROUP CONTINGENCY  INTERVENTION WITH REINFORCEMENT

 Review behavioral expectations and goal for earning reward.

 Select studentteam if implementing dependent group contingency.

 Signal to students that game is about to begin.

 Begin the interval timer if applicable.

 Deliver points when expected behavior observed.

 When delivering points, explicitly indicate what the students hashave done to  earn the point.

 When violations are observed, explicitly remind the students what they can do  to earn points.

 Determine whether the goal is met for the day.

 Administer reward if earned. Total number of steps completed  Percentage of steps completed 
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 6.5.  Steps in Introducing   the Good Behavior Game Step Sample dialogue Provide rationale for  introducing the Good  Behavior Game. Class, today we are going to play a game. This game  is going to help increase the amount of time that we  spend quietly working on our assignments. Having a  quiet work environment is important because it allows  other students to focus and to get more of their work  done. Establish target  behaviors and provide  rationale for why they  are important. There are a few ways that you can demonstrate to me  that you are working quietly. These include: 1.  Facing forward in your seat. 2.  Raising your hand if you need to ask a question. 3.  Keeping your eyes focused on your work. Explain how teams  will be established. At the start of each week, I will divide you into two  teams. You will work with your team to earn points each  day. Describe procedures  for earning points. If I see a member of your team demonstrating one of  the expected behaviors, your team will earn a point. Optional Describe  procedures for losing  points. If a member of one team violates one of these class  rulesprofanity, touching another person, or yelling out  without permissionthat team will lose 1 point. Explain criteria for  receiving rewards. At the end of the day, each team that has more than  10 points will earn the daily reward: an extra 5 minutes  to play on the playground.
Up until this point in the book, we have focused on intervention strategies that are directed  by the classroom teacher. Whether providing behavioral feedback, delivering tokens, or  managing a group contingency system, primary responsibility for both intervention development and implementation is retained by adults in the classroom. This clearly makes  sense from a practical standpoint, in that the classroom teacher is used to a managerial  rolemanaging lesson plans, assessments, individual personalities, and even the classroom  environmenton a daily basis. Philosophically speaking, however, it has been argued that  the use of teacher-directed interventions ultimately means that student behavior remains  externallyrather than internallymanaged Gross  Wojnilower, 1984. As a result, students may not learn the skills needed to regulate their own behavior in future contexts. Given these concerns, one potential alternative involves shifting responsibility for  intervention components from the teacher to the student. Within the literature, the term  self-management has been used to refer generally to those interventions in which students  are expected to play a more active role in the modification of their own behavior Briesch   Briesch, 2016. Those interventions falling under the umbrella of self-management, however, have been found to vary widely with regard to what components are included and  how procedures are carried out. In fact, in a review of the literature, Briesch and Chafouleas 2009 identified a total of 16 different intervention configurations across 30 studies of  behavioral self-management. Despite variations in the literature, the basis of all self-management interventions is  self-monitoring. Outside of the classroom, many of us engage in self-monitoring on a regular basis. If you have ever used an activity-tracking device to record the number of steps  you took, or a food journal to keep track of what you have eaten, you have engaged in selfmonitoring. Self-monitoring involves systematically observing and recording instances of  a predetermined target behavior. When applied to classroom situations, students might be  asked to mark down each time they make an off-topic comment during classroom instruction or each time that they raise their hand appropriately. In order to build a more compreCHAPTER 7 SelfManagement

SelfManagement	 127 hensive self-management intervention, this basic self-monitoring component is often supplemented with additional components such as an evaluation of performance, assessment of  rating accuracy, administration of points or rewards, andor monitoring of performance over  time Briesch  Briesch, 2016. Different explanations have been put forth as to why self-management may be effective  in changing behavior. One explanation is that keeping track of ones behavior may lead to  behavior change due to what has been called the principle of reactivity Nelson  Hayes,  1981. Think about how your teaching changes when your supervisor comes in to watch you.  Most of us become more aware of the things that we are doing well, as well as the things that  we are probably supposed to be doing but do not do. This refers to the reactivity phenomenon, whereby a behavior changes when somebody watches it. Usually when we think about  reactivity, we think about individuals acting differently in the presence of observers. However, reactivity can also occur if you are the only one in the roomthat is, the simple act of  paying closer attention to your own behavior can cause it to change. McFall 1970 described  this phenomenon by explaining that nearly everyone has had the experience of becoming  self-conscious about his behavior and, as a result, experiencing a change in that behavior.  For example, if a persons attention is drawn to the way he walks, holds his hands, or swings  a golf club, it often makes it difficult for him to perform these activities naturally p. 140. Kanfer 1970, on the other hand, offered a different explanation for how selfmanagement works, depicting the process as requiring more conscious participation on the  part of the individual. Within this model, the individual receives feedback about his or  her behavior through self-monitoring, self-evaluation, and self-reinforcement phases. After  observing ones own behavior in the self-monitoring phase, this observation is compared to  some preestablished goal or standard in the self-evaluation phase. Depending on whether  ones actual behavior exceeds or falls below the goal or standard, either self-reinforcement  or punishment occurs in the final phase. This self-reinforcement or punishment then plays a  role in changing future behavior. For example, within the classroom, a goal set for a particularly mobile student might be that he or she should not get out of his or her seat more than  twice during a class period. After receiving some training, the student keeps a tally of each  time that he or she gets out of his or her seat i.e., self-monitoring. At the end of the period,  the student compares the tally with the preestablished goal of two instances of out-of-seat  behavior i.e., self-evaluation. If his or her tally falls at or below two for the period, the student takes a short motor break before returning to his or her work i.e., self-reinforcement.  If the motor breaks are sufficiently reinforcing, it is believed that the student will be more  motivated to remain in his or her seat in the future. IMPLEMENTING SELFMANAGEMENT   TO SUPPORT STUDENT BEHAVIOR Beginning in the 1970s, many studies were published supporting the effectiveness of selfmanagement in changing student behavior in school-based settings. In order to synthesize this ever-expanding literature base, several systematic reviews and meta-analyses have 
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 recently been conducted of the self-management literature. Roughly 20 years ago, Stage  and Quiroz 1997 highlighted the effectiveness of self-management in their meta-analysis  of behavioral interventions designed to decrease disruptive behavior in classroom settings.  Self-management was found to be one of the most effective interventions conducted in  public education settings, with a reduction in problem behavior of nearly 1 full standard  deviation across 30 single-caseand group-designed studies. More recently, meta-analytic  reviews have found similarly strong effects for those studies conducted in elementary general education settings Busacca, Anderson,  Moore, 2015; percentage of nonoverlapping  data  90.49 as well as for those single-case studies conducted more generally irrespective of grade level or setting Briesch  Briesch, 2016; percentage of all nonoverlapping data   88.70, phi  0.93. Most of these reviews have largely focused on the effectiveness of self-management  interventions when carried out with individual students. However, there are situations in  which the same problem behavior has been identified for multiple students in a similar  setting. Here, it is more efficient to apply the same strategy to the group rather than create multiple individualized plans that may compete for already limited resources such as  instructional time Mitchem  Young, 2001. Use of self-management as a classwide intervention also affords the added benefit of teaching skills related to independence and personal responsibility to all children rather than solely those children identified as having  particular behavioral needs Miller, Strain, Boyd, Jarzynka,  McFetridge, 1993. Given  that meta-analytic reviews have found strong effects both for students with disabilities and  also their typically developing peers across both general and special education settings  Briesch  Briesch, 2016; Busacca et al., 2015, these findings suggest great promise for the  use of self-management at the classwide level. Empirical evidence in support of the use of classwide self-management extends back  to the 1970s as well e.g., Ballard  Glynn, 1975; Glynn  Thomas, 1974; Glynn, Thomas,   Shee, 1973; however, there has been renewed interest in this intervention approach in  recent years Briesch et al., 2013; Chafouleas, Hagermoser Sanetti, Jaffery,  Fallon, 2011;  Denune et al., 2015; Hoff  Ervin, 2013; Trevino-Maack, Kamps,  Wills, 2015. As outlined in Table 7.1, studies have been conducted across diverse populations to target a range  of behaviors using various procedures. Given that there is not one right way to implement  a self-management intervention, our aim in this chapter is to highlight the range of applications that do exist so that you may be able to design an intervention configuration that best  fits your situation. We begin by describing some of the important considerations that go  into designing any self-management intervention and then follow with specific discussion of  those modifications that can be used to enhance feasibility of implementation at the classwide level see also Coach Cards 7.1 and 7.2. Is SelfManagement Right for Everyone? The first question that you may be asking yourself is whether self-management is an  intervention that would be appropriate for your particular students. Over the years, selfmanagement interventions have been shown to be effective in improving the behavior of a 

SelfManagement	 129 wide range of students. First, although self-management interventions have most commonly  been employed with students in the late elementary grades, they have been shown to be  equally effective across a wide range of age and grade levels Briesch  Briesch, 2016. In  fact, successful examples can be found ranging from the preschool Connell, Carta, Lutz, et  al., 1993 to the high school Trevino-Mack et al., 2015 level. Although the core elements  of a self-management intervention e.g., training in behavioral definitions, self-observation,  self-recording remain consistent regardless of the students age, the way in which these  intervention steps are carried out must be made developmentally appropriate. For example,  within early education settings, it is likely that self-management components will need to  be more heavily adult directed given the developmental skills of young children Holland,  Malmberg,  Gimpel Peacock, 2017. As we move through this chapter, we therefore highlight specific ways in which self-management interventions may be adapted for use with  students at different grade levels. TABLE 7.1.  Empirical Studies Examining Use of Classwide Self-Management Study Sample Intervention Design Results Briesch,  Hemphill,   Daniels 2013 Seventh-grade  students in general  education CWSM  DGC Multiple baseline  across two  classrooms Moderate  improvements in  on-task behavior Chafouleas,  Hagermoser  Sanetti, Jaffrey,   Fallon 2012 Eighth-grade  students in general  education CWSM  IGC Multiple baseline  across three  classrooms with  embedded changing  criterion design Large decrease in  off-task behavior;  less notable  improvements in  engagement and  preparedness Denune et al.  2015 Sixth-grade students  with EBD Compared IGC  and   IGC  CWSM ABCBC design  within one  classroom CWSM did  not enhance  effectiveness of  IGC alone Hoff  Ervin  2013 Second-grade  students in general  education CWSM Multiple baseline  design across three  classes Moderate decrease  in off-task behavior Mitchem,  Young, West,   Benyo 2001 Seventh-grade  students in general  education CWPASM Multiple baseline  design across three  classes Large increases in  on-task behavior Trevino-Maack,  Kamps,  Wills  2015 10thand 11th-grade  students in remedial  reading course CWSM  TE ABAB design across  three classes Moderate  improvements in  active engagement Note. CWPASM, classwide peer-assisted self-management; DGC, dependent group contingency; IGC, interdependent group contingency; TE, token economy.
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 In addition, self-management interventions have also been found to be effective for both  students with and without exceptionalities. One population with whom self-management  interventions have frequently been used is those students with ADHD. A recent metaanalysis found self-management interventions to be highly effective in both increasing  appropriate and decreasing inappropriate behaviors among students with ADHD Reid,  Trout,  Schartz, 2005. Additionally, DuPaul, Eckert, and Vilardo 2012 found that cognitive behavioral interventions involving self-management strategies produced significantly  larger effect sizes effect size  3.31 than those interventions involving basic reinforcement  or punishment effect size  2.40 when used with students with ADHD. Multiple selfmanagement studies have also been conducted with students with autism spectrum disorder  ASD. In their meta-analytic review of 11 studies conducted with students with ASD, Lee,  Simpson, and Shogren 2007 found that self-management interventions were effective in  promoting appropriate behavior and that effectiveness did not differ as a function of student  age e.g., preschool vs. school age, target behavior e.g., increase appropriate, decrease inappropriate, intervention components e.g., self-monitoring vs. self-management, or materials  utilized e.g., paper and pencil vs. tokens. Although these results suggest great promise  for supporting classrooms of students with diverse needs, it is important to keep in mind  that the majority of studies to date with students with disabilities have been conducted in  special education settings. Given the suggestion that self-management may be an effective  way of promoting the inclusion of students with disabilities, it appears that more research is  needed to examine effectiveness in general education settings. What Behaviors Can Students SelfMonitor? When it comes to what behaviors can be targeted within a self-management intervention,  most of the evidence that we have exists for a limited number of target behaviors. Findings have been consistent across meta-analytic reviews, with the overwhelming majority of  studies targeting individual students focused on increasing on-task behavior and a smaller  percentage focused on decreasing problem behaviors Briesch  Briesch, 2016; Bruhn,  McDaniel,  Kreigh, 2015; Busacca et al., 2015. When applied classwide, self-management  has been shown to increase on-task behavior when used across both general e.g., Briesch et  al., 2013 and special education settings e.g., Denune et al., 2015. Some research also exists  to suggest that asking students to monitor their on-task behavior may also lead to significant improvement in work completion Merrett  Blundell, 1982. In addition, successful  examples of the use of self-management to reduce disruptive behaviors have also been noted  when students have been taught to monitor behaviors such as inappropriate verbalizations  e.g., Davies  Witte, 2000 and rule-following behavior e.g., Hoff  Ervin, 2013. Although classwide interventions have focused largely on engagement, disruption,  and work completion, a wider range of behaviors have been targeted when implementing  self-management as an individualized intervention. In a study by Stahmer and Schreibman 1992, for example, self-management was used to teach children diagnosed with ASD  appropriate play behaviors e.g., driving a toy car instead of sucking on it or throwing it.  Whereas Strain, Kohler, Storey, and Danko 1994 taught students with ASD how to initiate 

SelfManagement	 131 peer interactions and appropriately respond to requests from peers, Sainato, Goldstein, and  Strain 1992 used self-management to teach preschool students facilitative strategies e.g.,  how to invite a friend to play that they could use to increase the participation of students  with ASD in play activities. Across both studies, strategy training alone did not lead to  increases in strategy usage; however, the introduction of self-recording i.e., having the child  mark yes or no, depending on whether a particular strategy was used successfully resulted  in significant increases in strategy usage across both studies. General education teachers  may therefore consider the use of self-management strategies to support the generalization  of social skills taught in the classroom. What Should SelfRecording Look Like? Just as there are many different possible target behaviors for use within a self-management  intervention, there are also numerous ways that those target behaviors may be recorded.  Specifically, what self-management looks like can differ substantially depending on the  population and target behavior of interest. Selecting the best means of recording first  involves determining what about the behavior is of the most interest. As we discuss in the  next chapter, behaviors can generally be classified as either events i.e., clear beginning and  end, of similar duration or states i.e., semicontinuous, difficult to count. Because event  behaviors are ones that can be counted, the most straightforward means of recording is to  provide students with a blank form such as the one provided in Figure 7.1 see also Form  7.1 for a blank form, and to ask them to keep a tally of how frequently the behavior occurs.  As one example, in a study conducted with high school students at risk for dropping out of  school Gottman  McFall, 1972, students were taught to self-record instances of speaking  during class discussion in order to promote classroom engagement. One of the advantages  of frequency counts is that they are easy for students to learn and useful when the rate of  behavior is of interest Foster, Laverty-Finch, Gizzo,  Osantowski, 1999. In some cases, however, what may be of interest is whether the behavior occurs rather  than how frequently it occurs. If you think over the course of a school day for a few minutes,  you can probably easily come up with a list of expectations for students that they simply  either meet or dont meet: arriving to class on time, having necessary materials, turning in  homework, writing down assignments. For these types of behaviors, keeping a frequency  count would not make sense because it is simply a dichotomous i.e., yes or no decision.  Instead, such yes or no behaviors may best be recorded using a checklist. For example,  Wood, Murdock, and Cronin 2002 worked with four middle school students who had been  expelled from their home school due to significant disciplinary issues. These students were  provided with a 10-item checklist that they were to complete once during an academic  period. The checklist items spanned a range of appropriate academic behaviors, including  whether the student followed the teachers directions and whether he or she participated in  classroom discussions. An example of a self-monitoring form utilizing a checklist format is  provided in Figure 7.2 see also Form 7.2 for a blank form.  All blank forms appear at the ends of chapters, following the coaching cards.
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 Name:  Joanne	

  Date:  April 15	

Activity:  Social Studies	 	

  Time:  10:3011:30	

Did I . . . ? Yes No Arrive to class on time?

Bring my notebook to class?

Bring appropriate writing instruments?

Hand in my completed homework?

Write down the homework assignment?

Number of Yes Checks   3    Total Checklist Items   5     60   FIGURE 7.2.  Self-monitoring dichotomous behaviors. Name:  Joanne	

  Date:  April 12	

Activity:  Social Studies	 	

  Time:  10:3011:15	

Instructions: Mark an X in the box each time that you: 1: Call out without raising your hand 2: Talk to a neighbor without permission X X X X X X X FIGURE 7.1.  Self-monitoring frequency of disruptive behaviors.

SelfManagement	 133 When the behaviors of interest are ones that cannot easily be counted or checked off,  however, alternative ways of evaluating the behaviors must be used. Perhaps the most popular method of recording state behaviors such as classroom engagement has been through  the use of interval recording. As we discuss further in Chapter 8, interval recording involves  observing and recording one or more target behaviors at predetermined periods of time.  For example, in a study by Rooney, Hallahan, and Lloyd 1984, students in a general education second-grade classroom were provided with individual recording sheets and asked to  assess i.e., yes or no whether they were paying attention each time that a tone sounded.  An example of a form that could be used for interval recording involving dichotomous decisions is presented in Figure 7.3 see also Form 7.3 for a blank form. When working with  individual students, self-observing and recording intervals have occurred as frequently as  every minute e.g., Dunlap et al., 1995; Edwards, Salant, Howard, Brougher,  McLaughlin, 1995 or every 5 minutes e.g., Hoff  DuPaul, 1998; Rock  Thead, 2007. In order to  maintain feasibility within a classwide intervention context, however, it is likely that longer  intervals e.g., 1015 minutes will be more appropriate. Alternatively, both state and event behaviors may be assessed using a rating scale format. Rather than recording individual instances of a behavior, an overall judgment is made  at the end of a block of time or day. In a study by Hoff and Ervin 2013, students in a  second-grade classroom were taught to rate how well they, as well as the class overall, followed the classroom rules. Students used a 5-point scale to self-assess at the end of each  class period, wherein a rating of 1 represented that several rules were broken and a rating  of 5 represented that all rules were perfectly followed. An example of an interval recording  form utilizing a rating scale format is provided in Figure 7.4 see also Form 7.4 for a blank  form. One of the key advantages of using a rating scale is that it is less intrusive to the funcFIGURE 7.3.  Self-monitoring dichotomous state behaviors. Name:  Joanne	

  Date:  April 15	

Activity:  Social Studies	 	

  Time:  10:3011:30	

Instructions: Each time that you hear the timer, record whether or not you were paying attention to  instruction. Paying Attention Not Paying Attention x x x x x x x Total: 5 Total: 2 57  71 on task
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 tioning of the classroom because frequent assessments do not need to be made. Rather than  pulling out forms intermittently throughout class to conduct ratings, students can instead  conduct a single summative rating at the end of class. At the same time, one of the key  disadvantages of using a rating scale is that retrospective ratings are more prone to error.  Because the behavior is not recorded at the time that it occurs, there is a greater likelihood  for recollections to be distorted. Finally, in some situations, it may be possible to directly record the permanent products  of a target behavior. Within clinical applications, adults have been taught to self-record a  wide range of variables from the number of miles walked in a day to the number of cigarettes  left in a pack Foster et al., 1999. Within school-based settings, however, the most common  application of this has been self-recording of work completion i.e., performance. A student,  for example, may be asked to record the number of math problems completed by the end of  class or the number of pages read in a story. Within the literature, however, there has been a  debate surrounding the differential effectiveness of teaching students to self-monitor attention SMA versus self-monitor performance SMP, which has received ongoing attention. Monitoring Attention versus Performance Over the years, researchers have sought to determine whether academic and behavioral  gains made when students are monitoring their attention are similar or different from gains  FIGURE 7.4.  Self-monitoring using a rating scale. Name:  Joanne	

  Date:  April 15	

Activity:  Social Studies	 	

  Time:  10:3011:30	

Instructions: Each time that you hear the timer, record how well you were paying attention to  instruction. Rating Form How well was I paying attention?  0  not at all  1  somewhat  2  totally 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 Earned Points   6    Total Points   10      60  

SelfManagement	 135 made when monitoring performance variables e.g., accuracy, productivity. The structure of  these two approaches is very different in that students monitoring attention typically receive  intermittent prompts to self-observe and record. See Figure 7.5 for an example depicting  the distinction between SMA and SMP. Although cueing has sometimes been used within  SMP e.g., Lloyd, Bateman, Landrum,  Hallahan, 1989, students monitoring performance  more typically conduct one summative self-evaluation at the end of a period e.g., Harris,  Graham, Reid, McElroy,  Hamby, 1994; Reid  Harris, 1993. Some authors have argued  that attention is necessary to ensure academic performance Hallahan  Lloyd, 1987, and  therefore is the most important and relevant variable to target. The opposing argument,  however, has been that increasing attention will not necessarily lead to improvements in  academic achievement and that observed on-task behavior is not necessarily correlated with  actual cognitive engagement Treiber  Lahey, 1983. Researchers have compared SMA and SMP during spelling Harris et al., 1994; Reid   Harris, 1993, math e.g., Lloyd et al., 1989, Maag, Reid,  DiGangi, 1993, and writing  e.g., Harris et al., 1994 tasks. Neither approach has been found to be consistently superior in improving on-task behavior e.g., Harris, Friedlander, Saddler, Firzzelle,  Graham,  2005; Harris et al., 1994, and effects on productivity have been shown to vary depending  on the target population. For example, studies conducted with students with specific learning disabilities suggested that SMP resulted in higher levels of academic productivity than  FIGURE 7.5.  Monitoring attention SMA versus performance SMP. SMA would likely occur  multiple times throughout a 20-minute class period. For example, every 5 minutes, a student may  be prompted to record whether or not he or she was paying attention at the time prompted. SMP  would more likely occur at the beginning or end of a 20-minute class period. For example, at the  end of a 20-minute class, the student may record the number of multiplication problems he or she  completed during the class. SMA may be done utilizing either a fixed or a variable schedule. A fixed  schedule would be the student being prompted to self-record after a passage of time that is the same  throughout the period. A variable schedule would be the student being prompted to self-record after  a passage of time that may be different between each prompt. 20-minute class period SMA fixed schedule SMA random schedule SMP 5 min 10 min 15 min 20 min 3 min 9 min 12 min 16 min 20 min
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 SMA Harris, 1986; Reid  Harris, 1993, whereas the opposite was found in one study  conducted with students with ADHD Harris et al., 2005. Rafferty and Raimondi 2009  therefore suggested that because students with learning disabilities are generally characterized by their academic deficits and students with ADHD are partially characterized  by their attentional deficits, self-monitoring the corresponding target may make intuitive  sense p. 282. Limitations to each method have been noted by both students and researchers. It has  been suggested that SMA may be detrimental to academic achievement given that students  must split their focus between the assigned work and rating task Reid  Harris, 1993.  On the other hand, students have expressed concern with regard to the fact that recording  the number of words written or problems completed may be overly time-consuming e.g.,  Harris et al., 1994; Lloyd et al., 1989. Given the fact that limited differences have been  identified between SMA and SMP, it stands to reason that use of SMA may be preferable to  both teachers and students given its relative simplicity Reid, 1996. However, our review of  literature makes clear that no one method is best for all situations. Selection of the specific  pieces of a self-management package should be determined based on careful consideration  of the particular situation. Should Student Ratings Be Externally Evaluated? Within the literature, there are several examples of studies in which teaching students to  simply observe and record their own behavior led to significant improvements in their classroom functioning e.g., Levendoski  Cartledge, 2000; Prater, Hogan,  Miller, 1992. Such  findings seem to be consistent with the reactivity explanation for self-monitoring discussed  early on in this chapterthat is, students may change the way that they behave simply by  way of being asked to think about their behavior more frequently. One potential challenge of  this approach, however, is that it may be necessary for some students to have self-monitoring  prompts or reminders continuously in place in order for reactivity to occur. One alternative approach is to incorporate an evaluation component into the selfmanagement intervention. As discussed previously, Kanfer 1970 theorized that selfmanagement is most successful and sustainable when behavior is not only monitored but also  evaluated and reinforced. This is because the individual can use the evaluative feedback to  make conscious and deliberate changes to future behavior. There are two types of evaluation that are commonly used in self-management interventions: comparison of ratings to a  predetermined goal to assess performance or comparison of ratings to an external standard  to assess rating accuracy. Within the first approach, the classroom teacher typically sets an  ambitious yet achievable goal for ratings based on the students current level of performance  and then assesses whether this goal has been met each day. For example, the goal for a student who is currently calling out 10 times during literacy instruction might initially be to  have no more than seven call-outs during the same instructional period. At the end of each  literacy block, the teacher would then meet with the student to review his or her recording  sheet and determine whether the daily goal was met. Within the second approach, the focus  is more on promoting accurate assessment on the part of the student. A goal would first be 

SelfManagement	 137 set for the accuracy of student ratings e.g., need to be within two tally marks of the teachers  ratings and then the teacher and student would both record the number of call-outs during  the literacy block. At the end of the period, the teacher would then meet with the student  to compare recording sheets and determine whether the accuracy criterion was met. Alternatively, a combination of the two evaluative procedures may be used, whereby the student  receives points based on his or her absolute performance i.e., comparison to predetermined  goal; however, bonus points can also be earned for accurate assessments. Although incorporating an evaluation component is believed to lead to more sustained  behavioral change Kanfer, 1970, it is important to keep developmental appropriateness in  mind when structuring a debriefing meetingthat is, when the adult meets with the student to review his or her ratings, typically some level of discussion occurs surrounding the  ratings made regardless of whether points or tokens are actually assigned. In these situations the adult may, for example, ask the student to identify examples of when he or she was  engaging in appropriate behavior, therein providing validation for the ratings. It has been  suggested, however, that asking younger children to validate their ratings may introduce  unnecessary cognitive andor communicative demands Sainato, Strain, Lefebvre,  Rapp,  1990. As a result, it becomes necessary for the adult to provide the child with a greater  degree of performance feedback than is typical in applications with older children. For  example, lets say that there is a young child who often plays alone during free time because  he or she does not use words to communicate with others. A self-management intervention  could be set up in which the student is asked to self-assess how well he or she used words  with others during free time using a scale with three faces e.g., smiling, neutral, frowning.  Rather than asking the student to provide specific examples of how he or she communicated  with his or her peers, the adult may need to keep anecdotal notes over the course of the  rating period that can be used to support or refute the students ratings when they meet to  compare and discuss ratings. Unfortunately, little is known about the independent effect of self-evaluation on student  behavior given that reinforcement is nearly always paired with the evaluation component.  Two studies conducted in the 1970s, however, found that self-evaluation did not result in  significant behavioral change until contingent reinforcement was introduced Santogrossi,  OLeary, Romanczyk,  Kaufman, 1973; Turkowitz, OLeary,  Ironsmith, 1975, suggesting that the goal comparison may not be effective in and of itself. For this reason, it may be  necessary to consider use of a reward component if evaluation is to be used. Should Rewards Be Incorporated? Once the target behaviors and recording methods have been determined, the next question  that inevitably arises is whether it is important to include a reinforcement componentthat  is, should students receive external rewards for positive ratings or for rating themselves  accurately? Use of rewards within a self-management intervention can provide students  with additional motivation to change their behavior, so long as the rewards are seen as  sufficiently desirable see Chapter 5 for a discussion of rewards and reward preference surveys. Similar to the use of token economies and group contingencies, it is also important to 
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 ensure that the criteria for earning rewards are reasonable so that the student sees success  as something that is achievable. This means both setting a reasonable goal for behavior that  the student has a chance of meeting and ensuring that the student does not have to wait an  inordinate amount of time to receive the reward. As one example, Trevino-Maack and colleagues 2015 combined self-management with  token economy procedures for use with high school students across three remedial reading  classes. During class, students recorded whether or not they completed four tasks that were  believed to be critical to improving their grades: entering information in their daily planner  at the start of class, taking notes, completing assigned work, and completing a reading log.  Each student could earn 1 point daily for each task completed and a bonus point was possible at the end of the week if four reading logs had been completed. Points were exchanged  for tickets, which the students could use to exchange for small prizes e.g., small snack or  save up to earn larger prizes e.g., lunch coupon. Substantial improvements were noted in  students levels of active engagement across all three classrooms examined. To date, mixed results have been found when investigating the effectiveness of reinforcement within the self-management literature. Within those studies that directly compared self-monitoring and self-monitoring plus reinforcement e.g., Gansle  McMahon,  1997; Maag, Rutherford,  DiGangi, 1992, incremental effects of reinforcement were  noted. However, a recent meta-analysis found that those self-management studies that  did not use reinforcement demonstrated significantly larger effect sizes than those studies  that did use reinforcement Briesch  Briesch, 2016. It therefore appears that additional  research is warranted in order to explore the role of reinforcement when implementing selfmanagement at the classwide level. Introducing the Intervention Given the number of variations that may be used, it is important to highlight the following  information when introducing a self-management intervention to students see Coach Card  7.3. First, as is true of all of the interventions we have described throughout this book, it is  important to provide a rationale for why the intervention is being introduced. This allows  the teacher to clarify any concerns and justify the introduction of something new. Second, a  rationale should also be provided for what specific behaviors will be targeted and why. Simply telling students that a behavior is problematic is often not sufficient to ensure behavior  change. Rather, teachers should explain what behaviors students should demonstrate and  how exhibiting those behaviors will help them to succeed academically or socially. Third,  one should explain the procedures that students will use to self-monitor their behavior. This  includes what recording will look like and how often it will occur. Fourth, if students are  to earn points through their self-ratings, this system should be explained. Points may be  administered to individual students, such as in a token economy, or points may be administered to groups of students, such as in interdependent and dependent group contingencies.  Finally, if rewards are to be used, the procedures for earning rewards should be explained.  For example, will students be able to exchange points for rewards or will accumulated points  be used to work toward a larger prize?

SelfManagement	 139 ENHANCING THE FEASIBILITY  OF CLASSWIDE IMPLEMENTATION Despite the fact that self-management interventions have been promoted as less logistically  burdensome for teachers than traditional contingency systems, it is important to keep in  mind that these interventions nevertheless require the commitment of both teacher motivation and resources in order to be successfully implemented. When moving to the use of selfmanagement at the group or classwide level, feasibility becomes a more pressing concern that is, the idea of trying to keep track of multiple monitoring sheets or find a way to provide  feedback to students on the accuracy of their ratings can quickly become overwhelming.  Luckily, small adjustments to the intervention procedures can result in large improvements  with regard to feasibility. Next, we describe a few of the variations on self-management  interventions that may help to promote usability when applying strategies classwide. Modifications to Recording Procedures One of the biggest challenges in implementing self-management classwide is the sheer  amount of paperwork that can be involved. If each student is charged with completing a  rating form, the teacher then has to manage many different pieces of paper throughout the  day. One alternative to using traditional paper-and-pencil means of recording behavior is to  teach students to use signals e.g., raising hand in order to indicate performance of a skill.  For example, one of the classroom expectations for middle school students in a study by Briesch and colleagues 2013 was to maintain their SLANT Sit up, Lean forward, Ask questions, Nod your head, Track the speaker throughout instruction. Students were taught to  self-assess their SLANT by holding their thumbs up i.e., perfect SLANT, thumbs sideways  i.e., not perfect but demonstrating some behaviors, or thumbs down i.e., poor SLANT  each time that a timer buzzed. In this way, teachers may quickly scan the group and provide  brief verbal feedback to each student with regard to the accuracy of his or her assessment  without needing to deal with individual recording sheets. Moving away from paper-and-pencil methods of recording may be particularly useful  when implementing self-management with younger students. For example, transitioning  between activities was identified as problematic in a study conducted in an early intervention preschool setting Connell, Carta, Lutz, et al., 1993, and therefore students were  taught transition skills as well as how to rate their own transitioning behavior on a daily  basis. In order to make the self-rating feasible for a population of 4-year-olds, students  were instructed to raise their hand if they had engaged in a targeted behavior e.g., putting things where they belong, putting on a jacket during the transition. Each students  self-assessment was then compared with the teachers assessment during a group debrief  and students were given either praise or corrective feedback based on the accuracy of their  self-assessments. Across other applications, preschool students have also been taught to  move a bead on a string Shearer, Kohler, Buchan,  McCullough, 1996 or place a foam  disk into a container Strain et al., 1994 each time that a specific social interaction strategy  was used.
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 Modifications to Evaluation Procedures Another aspect of self-management implementation that can become challenging when  applied classwide is the use of evaluation procedures. As discussed earlier in this chapter,  although an evaluation component is not essential, often the classroom teacher meets with  the student to discuss the ratings that have been made and to provide a reward for desirable  performance. Although these individual meetings can be accomplished fairly quickly, the  total amount of time needed can become unwieldy when multiplied by 20 or 30 students in  a classroom. For this reason, one of two modifications have typically been made to evaluation procedures when implementing self-management classwide. Consider Evaluating Behavior at the Group Level One option for enhancing feasibility may be to have students monitor their behavior in  groups rather than having students individually monitor their own behavior. In implementing a self-monitoring system with a third-grade classroom, Davies and Witte 2000 used the  natural seating layout of the classroom as a way to assign students to groups. A team chart  was then placed at the center of each table, which contained three quadrants green, blue,  red and five dots. Whenever a student on the team made an inappropriate verbalization,  that student was instructed to move one dot from the green to the blue quadrant. If any  instances of inappropriate verbalizations were not recorded in this way, the teacher would  instead move a dot to the red quadrant. In order to ensure that students were supportive  rather than critical of one another, the teacher discussed what an appropriate reaction to a  moved dot would look like and provided feedback to individual students whose reactions  were deemed inappropriate. Classwide self-management may also be made more manageable by pairing selfmonitoring with reinforcement strategies that rely on group attainment of a preset goal,  such as found in group contingencies see Chapter 6. Here we provide specific examples of  how self-management may be integrated within all interdependent and dependent group  contingency systems. Within an interdependent group contingency, all students in a class are organized into  smaller groups. If each person in the group receives a rating that is at or above the goal e.g.,  80 correct, then all members in the group receive the reward e.g., pajama party after  10 days of meeting goal. Chafouleas and colleagues 2010 used this approach with three  eighth-grade classrooms. Students were taught to self-evaluate the degree to which they  were prepared for class, engaged in instruction, and completed their homework at the end  of each class period using an 11-point Direct Behavior Rating DBR scale i.e., 0  not at  all, 10  totally. The classroom teacher then met with each student to briefly review his  or her ratings and to determine the degree to which the student ratings matched those of  the teacher. Students received individual points based on both their absolute performance  and the accuracy i.e., correspondence with teacher ratings of their ratings, which they  then combined with the points of their teammates i.e., group of three to five students to  derive an average team score. If at the end of the week the teams cumulative score met or  exceeded the predetermined criterion, the entire team received reinforcement.

SelfManagement	 141 Denune and colleagues 2015 similarly combined self-monitoring with an interdependent group contingency intervention in order to improve the engagement and disruptive  behavior of middle school students with EBD in an alternative school setting. The group  contingency component was modeled after the Good Behavior Game, wherein after the  class was divided into smaller groups, the teacher reviewed the classroom rules with the  students and explained that they could earn rewards at the end of class for meeting a randomly selected goal. Roughly every 10 minutes, the students were instructed to record i.e.,  yes or no whether they were staying seated, using respectful language, paying attention,  and completing their work at the same time that the teacher evaluated these student behaviors. The teacher then drew a percentage criterion of possible points earned e.g., group  earned at least 75 of possible points from a paper bag at the end of the period. Each team  whose points exceeded the criterion would then earn a mystery prize e.g., snacks, small  tangibles, which was randomly drawn from a second paper bag. Within a dependent group contingency, in contrast, whether or not the group receives  the reward is based upon the behavior of select individuals. When combined with selfmanagement, this means that group rewards could be based on the ratings obtained by individual students or the accuracy with which individual students rated themselves. Because  the behavior of only a few students is monitored and counts toward earning the group  reward, both motivation to rate accurately and the feasibility to complete procedures are  potentially enhanced. This option was recently utilized in the study previously described  by Briesch and colleagues 2013 within a middle school general education classroom. Each  time the buzzer sounded, the teacher rated the behavior of three students sitting at a predetermined, but randomly selected, table. The class then received 1 point for each match  between the teachers rating and the students rating, for up to 3 points per interval. In order  to avoid potential stigmatization, the teacher reported the number of points that the class  had received each interval but did not announce which table had been selected for evaluation. Consider Use of PeerAssisted SelfManagement Another option for enhancing the efficiency of classwide applications of self-management  involves utilizing peers to provide a check on the accuracy of self-monitoring results.  Mitchem, Young, West, and Benyo 2001 developed the classwide peer-assisted selfmanagement CWPASM program, which combines elements of classwide peer tutoring  Delquadri, Greenwood, Whorton, Carta,  Hall, 1986 and self-management. In Mitchem  et al.s 2001 study, all students in a seventh-grade language arts classroom were assigned  a peer partner and these pairs were randomly assigned to one of two classroom teams. Students were then taught to rate their own rule-following behavior as well as the behavior of  their assigned partner using a 4-point scale. Each time that a tone sounded approximately  every 10 minutes, students compared their ratings with their partners. If ratings matched,  each student received the number of points assigned by their partner as well as a bonus  point for the pair. If ratings were off by 1 point, each student simply received the points  assigned by his or her partner. In those cases in which a larger discrepancy was identified  between ratings, however, no points were assigned. To make sure the student pairs were 
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 being honest, a mystery match component was introduced, by which the teacher secretly  observed one pair from each team on a given day and then compared his or her ratings with  those self-assigned. Matches identified between student and teacher ratings resulted in 10  bonus points for the student pair. Results of a multiple baseline design suggested significant  increases in the overall level of on-task behavior in the classroom following implementation  of CWPASM. Taken together, promising options for enhancing the feasibility of classwide  application of self-management strategies are available and warrant consideration when  multiple individuals could benefit from intervention supports. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS:   FIXING PROBLEMS AND FADING THE INTERVENTION Having outlined both the rationale and procedures for implementing self-management  strategies classwide, in this final section we focus on what to do when problems arise and  how to begin to fade the intervention as time goes on. Troubleshooting Although things may go wrong when implementing any classroom intervention, the potential for problems to arise may be somewhat greater when implementing self-management  interventions. This is due to the fact that responsibility for implementation no longer rests  solely in the hands of the classroom teacher. Next, we outline a few of the more common  problems that may arise and present potential solutions for addressing them. Problem 1: Students Are Not Rating Accurately One problem that may be encountered is that of students not rating their behavior accurately. This issue was illustrated by Lloyd and Hilliard 1989, who found that student ratings were highly inaccurate when compared with ratings conducted by external observers  mean on task  99 for student ratings, 56 for observer ratings. The authors referred  to this as the Yes, Ive cleaned up my room phenomenon, in that the students claimed  that their behavior was much better than it actually appeared. Disagreements regarding  assessments may lead to tension between the classroom teacher and student that can appear  difficult to resolve. One way in which to promote more accurate assessments on the part of  students may therefore be to provide rewards contingent upon the accuracy of ratings. In  the same study by Lloyd and Hilliard 1989, there was a significant increase in actual ontask behavior as well as rating accuracy mean on task  95 for student ratings, 91 for  observer ratings when students received reinforcement for maintaining at least 80 accuracy with teacher ratings. Such results seem to suggest that the accuracy of student ratings  may be questionable in the absence of external evaluation. Within the literature, there are several examples of studies in which rating accuracy  has been emphasized. In some cases, students have earned points solely based upon the 

SelfManagement	 143 accuracy of their ratings e.g., Peterson, Young, Salzberg, West,  Hill, 2006. However,  more typically, students have earned points based on both the magnitude and accuracy of  their own self-ratings e.g., Barry  Messer, 2003; Rhode, Morgan,  Young, 1983. In a  study by Hoff and Ervin 2013, for example, the teacher compared her rating of the class  to the class rating generated by the students at the end of each period. The class received  a bonus point for a perfect match, kept the points earned on the rating scale for a 1-point  discrepancy, and earned no points if the discrepancy was 2 or more points. Problem 2: SelfMonitoring Appears to Be Too Cognitively Demanding Many of the examples of self-management that we have focused on throughout this chapter  may be more relevant to older students. Those students who are younger or have developmental delays may struggle to understand what behaviors are being targeted or to independently evaluate their own behavior. Fortunately, there are several available options  for extending self-management use to younger populations. First, pictures can be used to  increase the saliency of target behaviors and to facilitate evaluation. Several studies have  utilized pictorial posters in which particular strategies e.g., sharing with a friend; Sainato  et al., 1992 or steps involved in performing a skill e.g., stop what youre doingclean up  materialsmove to assigned seat; Connell, Carta,  Baer, 1993 are depicted and hung on  the classroom wall. The form used for self-monitoring then consisted of a smaller version  of each of the posters rather than utilizing words to describe the behavior. Sainato et al.  1990 extended the use of pictorial representations by photographing the target children  demonstrating appropriate on-task or waiting behavior. In this way, each childs form therefore contained a self-modeling example. Second, the use of pictures may also help to make  the rating scale more interpretable. Whereas older students are better able to discriminate  between values on a Likert-type scale e.g., 1  not following classroom rules, 5  perfectly  following classroom rules, interpretation of this type of scale is much more challenging for a  younger child. Alternatively, use of a smiley face scale facilitates a more accurate rating, and  could be easily converted to a numerical scale to assist in summarization and interpretation  see Figure 7.6. Rating Form How well did I play with my friends? Recess Centers Lunch FIGURE 7.6.  Example of a self-monitoring form for use with younger students.
STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING CLASSWIDE BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS	 Problem 3: Students Become Overly Focused on,   or Distracted by, SelfMonitoring Although we wish for students to become more reflective regarding their behavior through  use of a self-management intervention, there exists a risk that students may become distracted by, or overly focused on, the self-monitoring process. As one example, a student  may have difficulty shifting his or her attention back to assigned work after completing his  or her ratings. Another example might be a student who is fixated on the clock or on his or  her intervention materials in anticipation of the next rating period. There are a couple of  ways to address this type of problem should it arise. First, it may be important to consider  reducing the frequency with which ratings are conducted. If the student is being asked to  self-monitor quite often, this may make it difficult to maintain focus on regular classroom  activities. By observing and recording ones behavior only once or twice a period, however,  this would allow for longer uninterrupted periods of time between rating occasions. It is  also important to maintain a variable interval so that the students do not know when the  timer will go off. A second consideration would involve making changes to the intervention  materials. For example, if having a self-monitoring card on a students desk proves to be  too much of a distraction, use of hand signals may be a preferred alternative. Finally, make  sure the target behavior is one that is incompatible with clock watching or other types of  distracted behavior. Fading the Intervention As with the other interventions that we have discussed in this book, even interventions that  prove to be highly successful cannot be implemented forever. Rather than abruptly removing an intervention, self-management interventions should be gradually faded over time  in order to increase the likelihood of sustained behavioral change. Although several of the  fading strategies discussed in previous chapters also apply here e.g., reduce the frequency  with which rewards are earned, increase the threshold for earning rewards, there are some  strategies that are unique to self-management applications. One of the first options for fading a self-management intervention is to consider changes  to how the monitoring component is conducted. In those situations in which one behavior  has been monitored on a frequent basis e.g., rating how well students were paying attention every 5 minutes, the number of times that a student is asked to self-monitor may be  reduced over time. For example, monitoring may be reduced to every 10 minutes, then  every 20 minutes, and eventually may occur only once at the end of an instructional period.  On the other hand, in those situations in which multiple behaviors are evaluated using a  checklist approach, it may be possible to abbreviate the rating task as time goes on. For  example, rather than asking the student to individually assess whether each specific behavior occurred e.g., Did I arrive to class on time?; Did I bring my books to class?, he or  she might instead be asked to provide one global assessment of class preparation e.g., Was  I prepared for class today?. A second option for fading use of self-management is to gradually move from the use of  teacher-determined to student-determined rating periods. Most often, students have been 

SelfManagement	 145 cued regarding when to conduct self-assessments through the use of a teacher-delivered  prompt e.g., verbal, buzz of a timer. However, over time, students may be charged with the  responsibility for determining when ratings should occur. For example, after removing an  external prompt, students could be instructed to keep an eye on the clock and to remember  to rate their own behavior at least twice an hour. In a study by Prater, Joy, Chilman, Temple,  and Miller 1991, fading of rating prompts was gradually reduced until students were eventually told simply to record their behavior only when they thought about it p. 170. Finally, if the classwide self-management intervention involves comparing teacher and  student ratings, this component may prove overly burdensome over time due to the time  that is required for regular check-ins to occur. It is therefore important that this matching  component be faded. One way in which to fade a matching component is to move toward the  use of random spot checks. For example, the accuracy of students ratings may be checked  only once or twice in a given day. It is important, however, that the timing of the spot checks  remains a mystery to the students, so that they are not able to anticipate when greater care  should be taken with their ratings. When the classroom teacher feels confident that the  students are self-assessing their own behavior with a high degree of accuracy, the matching  component may be discontinued entirely, such that evaluation is based on self-ratings alone. CONCLUSIONS Use of self-management strategies is believed to be advantageous both because they reduce  the implementation demands placed on classroom teachers and promote personal responsibility among students. Although there is a much deeper evidence base supporting the  use of self-management interventions with individual students, an increasing number of  studies focused on classwide applications have been noted in recent years. This growing  evidence base has suggested that classwide self-management may be used successfully to  both promote appropriate behavior e.g., engagement and decrease inappropriate behavior e.g., classroom disruption. In order to ensure that self-management interventions are  maximally feasible, it may be necessary to consider incorporating group contingencies or  utilizing peers as intervention agents.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 7.1.  Preparing to Implement  Classwide Self-Management Steps Considerations Identify the target  behaviors.  Do you wish to increase a desirable behavior e.g., paying  attention, participating in class?  To decrease a problem behavior e.g., calling out, out of seat? Determine time period for  implementation.  Will students self-monitor throughout the day?  During a particular instructional block? Determine what method  students will use to selfrecord.  Can the target behavior be counted?  Are there permanent products that can be evaluated?  Or is use of interval recording most appropriate?

 If so, how frequently will students be asked to record their  behavior e.g., every 10 minutes, once at the end of an  instructional block?

 If so, what type of prompt will be used to signal when it is time  to record e.g., teacher prompt, timer? Determine how behavior  will be recorded.  Will students use a paper-and-pencil monitoring form to record  behavior?  Will hand signals be used to communicate ratings? Determine whether a group  contingency will be used.  Will students self-monitor independently?  Will students be divided into teams for the purpose of selfmonitoring? Determine whetherhow  feedback will be delivered.  Will students be evaluated based on rating accuracy andor actual  performance?  Will students receive verbal feedback regarding their  performance?  Will feedback be delivered in the form of physical objects e.g.,  tokens, marbles, tickets or points for desired behavior?  Will feedback be provided by the teacher or other classmates? Determine appropriate  rewards for students if  applicable.  Will students be able to exchange points or tokens for rewards?  Will these rewards be administered at the individual or group  level? Determine criteria for  exchanging points if  applicable.  How many points will be needed to earn a prizes?  Will these values change over time? Determine when points may  be exchanged if applicable.  Will students be able to exchange pointstokens for rewards every  day or less frequently?
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 7.2.  Treatment Integrity Checklist  for Implementing Classwide Self-Management Teacher:  	 	

  Date:  	 	

Observer:  		

  Activity:  	

STEPS IN IMPLEMENTING CLASSWIDE SELF-MANAGEMENT

 Provide students with necessary rating materials if applicable.

 Review behavioral expectations.

 Set timer to signal student when to observe if needed.

 Ensure students complete self-ratings.

 Complete teacher ratings if applicable. If implementing CWSM with feedback and rewards:

 Provide performance feedback verbally or in form of pointstokens.

 Provide students with rewards if earned if applicable. Total number of steps completed  Percentage of steps completed 
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 7.3.  Steps in Introducing  Classwide Self-Management Step Sample dialogue Provide rationale for introducing  classwide self-management. Ive noticed that many of you have been off task this past week. This makes it  hard to cover the important material that will be on our final exam. To help all  of us be better prepared as you can be, we are going to try something new for  these last few weeks. Establish target behaviors and  provide rationale for why they are  important. We use acronyms to help us remember lots of different things. Provide  examples if needed. Today we are going to learn a new acronym that is  designed to help you remember what it means to be engaged in class. The  acronym is SLANT. First, the S stands for sit up. You want to make sure that  you are sitting up straight in your chairnot slouching down or with your head  on the desk. Second, the L stands for lean forward and listen. If you are turned  around in your seat or talking to your neighbor, you are demonstrating to me that  you are not listening. Third, the A stands for ask questions. Asking questions  shows me that you are paying attention and thinking about the material. Fourth,  the N stands for nod your head. When you nod your head yes or no, you are  helping me know whether you are understanding what we are talking about or  whether you need more information. Finally, the T stands for track the speaker.  This means that whenever someone is speakingwhether it is myself or one of  your classmatesyou should direct your eyes toward that person. This shows  the person that you are paying attention to what is being said. If you are doing  all of these things, then it shows me that you are engaged in what is going on  and ready to learn. Describe self-management  procedures. For these last few weeks of class, I am going to challenge you to become more  aware of what your behavior looks like in class by rating your own behavior.  Each day when you come into class, I am going to remind you of what it means  to have an appropriate SLANT and then set a timer. Each time that the buzzer  goes off, I want you to rate your own SLANT. If you think that you have a really  good SLANT youre doing all five things perfectly, then you should give me a  thumbs-up. If you caught yourself with a pretty bad SLANT e.g., turned around  in your seat, talking to your neighbors, then you should give me a thumbsdown. If your SLANT wasnt perfect e.g., sitting up in seat but not listening  attentively, you should stick out your thumb to the side. You wont know when  the buzzer is going to go off, but it will happen a few times during each class. Explain how students will earn  points if applicable. Each time that you guys rate your own SLANT, I am also going to randomly pick  one table to rate as well. Im not going to tell you which table I picked until after  you show me your rating. If I pick your table and your rating matches mine,  the class will get a point. That means that each time that the buzzer goes off,  the class could earn up to 4 points. Remember that by doing all five things  SLANT, youre showing me that you are engaged so there shouldnt be any  arguments about ratings. If you choose to argue about a point, the class will not  get any points for that rating period and will have to wait until the next beep. Describe how rewards may be  earned if applicable. Each day I will record the number of points that the class earned on the board  as well as the number of points that the class could have earned. If at the end  of the week, the class has earned at least 80 of the points possible, everyone  will earn a small surprise the next Monday. If we can keep that average up until  the end of the trimester, then we will have a class party to celebrate the end of  the year and exams.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. FORM 7.1 Self-Monitoring Form Frequency Name:  	

  Date:  	

Activity:  	

  Time: 	

Instructions: Mark an X in the box each time that you: 1: 2:
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. FORM 7.2 Self-Monitoring Form Checklist Name:  	

  Date:  	

Activity:  	

  Time: 	

Did I . . . ? Yes No Number of Yes Checks         Total Checklist Items               
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. FORM 7.3 Self-Monitoring Form Interval Recording Name:  	

  Date:  	

Activity:  	

  Time: 	

Time Behavior Yes No
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. FORM 7.4 Self-Monitoring Rating Scale Name:  	

  Date:  	

Activity:  	

  Time: 	

Time Behavior Rating 0  not a problem  1  somewhat of a problem  2  a problem  3  a major problem 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3

PART IV STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING  IMPLEMENTATION  AND EFFECTIVENESS
The subsequent chapters in this book are designed to provide you with practical, evidencebased strategies that you can use to support positive student behavior in the classroom.  Although knowing what you can do to effect change in classroom settings is certainly important, knowing whether or not what you did actually worked is of critical importance as well.  Data are an important piece of everyday life in schools. Teachers use data to make decisions  about what type of supports particular students may require, what changes are needed to  instruction, and to measure student growth. The goal of this chapter is to help you identify  the data collection method that makes most sense for the behavior you are looking to change  and also fits well within your daily routines. After guiding readers through the process of  identifying a target behavior and determining how best to measure it, we review strategies  for collecting and evaluating data to determine intervention effectiveness. IDENTIFYING THE TARGET OF MEASUREMENT Although the strategies outlined in this book are designed to support the behavior of all  students in a classroom, there are actually two levels at which we may choose to collect  data. In schools, we are most often accustomed to making student-level decisionsthat is,  data are collected for individual students and used to make decisions in order to promote  the success of that particular student. Classwide interventions see Chapters 57, however,  have the dual advantage of being able to support the behavior of both individual target  students and the larger student body as well. In some situations, although a strategy or  intervention is applied classwide, data collection may be limited to one or more individual  students because it is the behavior of these students that is of greatest interest. However,  data may also be collected at the group level in order to determine the overall effectiveness  of a classwide intervention or may be advantageous if the behavior of multiple students is of  interestthat is, collecting data at the group level reduces the burden on the data collecCHAPTER 8 Collecting Classwide Data
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 tor who is often the already busy classroom teacher! because it is not necessary to manage  multiple data collection plans Krasch  Carter, 2009. IDENTIFYING THE PROBLEM After we have determined whose behavior is of interest, the next step is to identify which  particular behaviors we wish to assess. Although it may be obvious to us that a problem  exists, it can sometimes be difficult to pinpoint precisely what that problem is. Before we  can move forward in collecting data, it is essential that we identify the target behavior.  Target behaviors are those behaviors that we are interested in changing and they can be  either desirable or undesirable. Desirable target behaviors reflect those things that we want  to see increase e.g., class participation, whereas undesirable target behaviors reflect those  things that we want to see decrease e.g., side conversations with classmates. When we use  the term behavior, we mean those things that students do that can be both observed and  measured. Pushing another student or getting out of ones seat are behaviors that can be  both observed and measured. It is important to distinguish behaviors from traits or internal states, which require some level of inference to assess. For example, a student may be  described as hardworking or lazy, honest or sneaky, or outgoing or shy. Generally speaking,  if you can easily put the word is in front of the problem e.g., he or she is overactive, he or  she is deceptive, it is probably a trait. Similarly, internal states are not behaviors. When a  student is feeling anxious or angry, these are things that cannot be reliably observed by an  outside individual. However, we might notice that a students face turns red, veins pop out  in his or her neck, or that the student speaks more quickly and loudly. In the first column  of Table 8.1, we have listed a number of common teacher concerns that cannot be explicitly  observed or measured. To the right of each general concern are more specific observable,  measurable indicators that would serve as appropriate measurement targets. Once we have identified an appropriate target behavior, we next need to operationally  define it. Operational definitions are written using observable, measurable terms, leaving  no room for individual interpretation of what might be meant by a particular term. When a  student is described as exhibiting hyperactive behavior, what comes to mind? A student  who is bouncing up and down in his or her seat and drumming on the desk? Out of his or  her seat and talking to peers? Calling out answers and making distracting noises during lessons? All or none of these examples may capture exactly what we are thinking of when we  hear the term hyperactive behavior. Creating an operational definition therefore allows us  to communicate to others exactly what we mean when we use a particular term. There are several characteristics of strong operational definitions that are important  to note see Box 8.1. The first is that a strong operational definition should include both  examples of what the target behavior is and non-examples of what the target behavior is  not. Providing examples and non-examples helps to clarify which types of behaviors should  count and which ones should not. Consider a situation in which we are interested in measuring disruptive behavior and define disruptive behavior as any verbal or motor behavior  that interferes with the ability of the teacher to teach or other students to learn. Including  examples and non-examples can help to clarify the boundaries of when a behavior would 

Collecting Classwide Data	 157 be considered problematic versus when it might be acceptable. To illustrate this point, the  behavior of talking to peers might be considered an example of disruptive behavior when  it occurs during instruction or when students are expected to work independently. In contrast, talking to peers might be perfectly acceptable i.e., non-example if it occurs during group work or during designated free time. Making these distinctions clear within the  operational definition can reduce later anxiety when it comes to judging what does or what  does not constitute the target behavior. TABLE 8.1.  Identifying Appropriate Target Behaviors General teacher concern More specific target behaviors  that can be observed and measured Student is aggressive. Calls other children names. Hits other children. Pushes other children. Threatens other children. Student is disruptive. Calls out. Drums on desk. Gets out of seat without permission. Makes noises. Student is anxious. Complains of being sick. Turns in incomplete assignments. Doesnt speak in class. Fidgets. Student is lazy. Doesnt follow directions. Submits incomplete homework. Takes a long time to get out materials. Turns in incomplete assignments. Student is hyperactive. Fidgets. Gets out of seat. Plays with objects. Talks with classmates. BOX 8.1.  Characteristics of a Strong Operational Definition A strong operational definition should:  Include both examples i.e., what the behavior is and non-examples i.e., what the  behavior is not.  Pass the stranger test i.e., a complete stranger could read your definition and know  what to observe.  Pass the dead-man test i.e., behavior could not be demonstrated by a dead man.
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 The second characteristic of a strong operational definition is that it should be able  to pass the stranger test. In other words, if a stranger walked into your classroom and  read the operational definition, he or she would be able to reliably determine when the  target behavior was occurring. A definition that passes the stranger test is one that spells  everything out rather than leaving specific terms up to individual interpretation. Noncompliance, for example, may be a relevant problem behavior for a particular student; however,  noncompliance can take on many forms. Although the term may bring to mind the image  of a student standing with arms crossed and aggressively refusing to do what was told,  there are more mild versions of noncompliance that we may also wish to capture such as  laying ones head on the desk rather than beginning work. The stranger test ensures that  the operational definition we create is adequately specific and interpreted similarly by different individuals. Finally, strong operational definitions should pass the dead-man test, in that the target behaviors are not only observable but also involve movement Hosp, Howell,  Hosp,  2003. In other words, target behaviors should be those things that a dead man could not do.  Often behaviors that fail to pass the dead-man test are those that tell us what a student does  not do. Take, for example, the target behavior of sits on the rug without bothering others.  This behavior would fail to pass the test because a dead man could certainly refrain from  bothering others just as long as the target student. In this case, a better target might be one  that illustrates what the student should be doing when sitting on the rug e.g., sits quietly  with legs crossed and eyes toward the front of the room. DETERMINING THE DIMENSION OF INTEREST Once a target behavior has been identified and defined, the next step is to classify the  behavior according to type. All behaviors can generally be classified as either event or state  behaviors see Table 8.2. Event behaviors are those that have a clear beginning and end,  and are generally of a similar length Saudargas  Zanolli, 1990. This means that it is fairly  obvious to even a casual observer when the student first begins to engage in the target  behavior and when the target behavior is over. Event behaviors can also be thought of as  those that easily lend themselves to being counted. For example, because it would be fairly  easy to count the number of times that a student raises his or her hand or shoves a classmate,  these would be classified as event behaviors. State behaviors, on the other hand, are those that vary in duration and are difficult  to count Saudargas  Zanolli, 1990. Student engagement is one clear example of a state  behavior. It is not uncommon for student engagement to ebb and flow throughout an instructional period. For example, a student may be engaged in instruction for 2 minutes, stare off  into space for 30 seconds, reengage for 1 minute, and then talk to a neighbor for a minute  and a half. If we were to count the number of times that this student was engaged during  this 5-minute period of time, the resultant value i.e., 2 would have little meaning. Rather,  there are additional dimensions of state behaviors that must be considered in order to paint  a descriptive picture of what has occurred.

Collecting Classwide Data	 159 In some cases, it may not be immediately obvious whether a target behavior should be  considered a state or an event. In such a situation, it is necessary to examine the nature of  the behavior and the regularity with which it is occurring in order to make this determination. Consider, for example, the target behavior of inappropriate verbalizations, which is  defined as any verbalization that is not directly related to classroom instruction or disrupts  classroom activities. If the primary concern was that a student blurted out answers during  whole-class instruction, this type of inappropriate verbalization would lend itself to being  countedthat is, if each blurt-out was brief e.g., Wait!; I know!; Oooh! Oooh!, and  these interjections did not occur so frequently as to make counting difficult, inappropriate  verbalizations could be considered an event behavior. If, on the other hand, the students  inappropriate verbalizations consisted mainly of tangential conversations with classmates,  this might be more difficult to countthat is, the student may make a quick side comment  to a student across the aisle on one occasion and then engage in a longer conversation with  his or her immediate neighbor. Because simply counting the number of times that the student talked would not accurately reflect how often the behavior was occurring, inappropriate verbalizations would best be considered a state behavior in this situation. Event Recording If we have decided that a behavior is an event behavior, it is then necessary to determine  exactly what about the behavior we are most interested in assessing. There are several different dimensions of a behavior that may be of interest. The first is frequency, or how often  the behavior is occurring. We may be interested, for example, in how often a student raises  TABLE 8.2.  Differentiating between Event and State Behaviors Event behaviors State behaviors Characteristics  Clear beginning and end  Generally of similar length  Difficult to count  Vary in duration Examples  Asking questions  Calling out  Hitting a peer  Noncompliance  Raising hand  Academically engaged  Interacting with peers  Talking to classmates  Tantrumming  Tapping pencil Recording methods  Duration  Frequency countrate  Latency  Percentage of opportunities  Scatterplot  Momentary time sampling  Partial interval sampling  Planned activity check  Whole-interval sampling
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 his or her hand to answer a question or pushes another student on the playground. Keeping  a tally of the number of times that the behavior occurs is certainly the easiest way to measure frequency. Using this approach, the observer simply makes a tally mark each time that  the target behavior occurs see Figure 8.1. This form of data collection is easy to implement,  in that it does not require training or specialized forms. It is important, however, that both  the number and frequency of target behaviors is manageable so that data collection does  not become unwieldy. Keeping count of the number of times that students call out answers  without raising their hands may be reasonable, whereas counting the number of times that  students raise their hands to answer a question could quickly become all-consuming! A tally  can be kept using a paper-and-pencil log; however, the log must be easily accessible so that  the recording of behavior does not disrupt the regular classroom. If this type of recording  is found to be too cumbersome, alternate methods of maintaining a frequency count should  be considered. Common methods that have been used in classroom settings include moving  rubber bands from one wrist to the other, moving paper clips from one pocket to the other,  or clicking a golf counter each time that the target behavior is observed. One important consideration when it comes to using frequency count data is that the  time frame for data collection must be kept consistent if data are to be directly comparable  across days. Imagine, for example, that you were interested in collecting data on calling-out  behavior during the morning meeting. On day 1, you noted six instances of calling out and  on day 2 you noted four instances. It would appear that the behavior was more problematic  FIGURE 8.1.  Examples of event recording sheets. Instructions: Mark a tally each time the behavior  occurs. Behavior Frequency Calling out Raising hand Instructions: Cross out a number each time the  behavior occurs. Calling Out Raising Hand 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Collecting Classwide Data	 161 on day 1; however, this would be assuming that the same amount of time elapsed. If, on the  other hand, the morning meeting lasted only 20 minutes the first day and 40 minutes the  second day, these data would tell a different story. In situations in which the overall observation period is not consistent across time, it is necessary to calculate a rate of behavior. The  rate can easily be calculated by dividing the number of instances of a behavior by the total  number of minutes in the observation period. Using the data above, the rate of calling-out  behavior for day 1 would be 620, or 0.30 call-outs per minute. For day 2, the rate would be  440  0.10 call-outs per minute. Calling out clearly occurred more often on day 1 than day  2 when the overall length of the morning meeting is taken into account! An additional consideration when recording the frequency with which a behavior occurs  is whether the behavior is what can be termed asopportunity dependentthat is, can the  behavior occur an infinite number of times during the recording period or is it dependent  on something else happening? One simple example of an opportunity-dependent behavior  is raising ones hand to answer a question. If we simply recorded the number of times that  a student raised his or her hand during math instruction and found that the answer was  zero, two possibilities exist. The first is that the student was given multiple opportunities to  answer questions; however, he or she chose not to raise his or her hand at all. The second  is that the student did not raise his or her hand to answer a question because no questions  were actually posed. Clearly, zero hand raises would be considered much more problematic  in the first scenario than the second, and therefore information is needed to clarify this.  In those situations in which the target behavior is believed to be opportunity dependent, a  percentage-of-opportunities metric can be calculated by dividing the number of times that  the behavior actually occurred by the number of opportunities there were for the behavior  to occur. For example, if directions were provided to a student on five occasions and he or  she followed the directions only once, the percentage of opportunities on which the student  followed directions would be 15, or 20 of opportunities. Other examples of opportunitydependent behaviors include noncompliance, saying Please or Thank you, and responding appropriately to requests to play. Tallies can be fairly easy to keep and provide useful information regarding the frequency with which a behavior occurs during a specific period of time. If one is interested,  however, in understanding how the behavior looks across multiple periods in the day, this  is best accomplished using what is called a scatterplot. A scatterplot can be used to better understand when problem behavior is occurring and to identify any potential patterns  related to its occurrence. Typically, each column represents a different day of the week and  each row represents a different time period during the day. Time periods should be determined in consideration of what the behavior is and how frequently it is believed to occur.  A 10-minute time period may be appropriate in one situation, whereas an hour block may  make more sense in another. It may also make the most sense to divide the day into activity  blocks e.g., morning meeting, literacy, writing based on daily transitions. Each time that  the target behavior occurs, the teacher is asked to record it within the appropriate time  period. If more than one target behavior is of interest, different markers may be used to represent each target behavior within the scatterplot. Figure 8.2 illustrates how a scatterplot  might be used to record calling out and out-of-seat behavior within a particular classroom.
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 One of the central advantages of a scatterplot is that the graphic depiction allows you  to quickly identify any patterns that may be occurring with regard to the target behavior. In  looking at Figure 8.2, for example, it appears that students are out of their seats O most frequently during the blocks of time from 9:30 to 10:00, 11:30 to 12:00, and 2:00 to 2:30. Given  that each of these time blocks immediately precedes a break in the schedule i.e., snack,  lunch, dismissal, it seems that the students may benefit from inserting a motor break i.e.,  scheduled opportunity to move around in the middle of each instructional block. Although  there is not a clear pattern within each day with regard to calling-out behavior, it does  appear that the behavior becomes more frequent as the week progresses. This information  may also be useful in intervention planning, suggesting that more intensive behavioral supFIGURE 8.2.  Example of a scatterplot. Instructions: Place an X in the box each time that a student calls out. Place a O in the box each  time that a student gets out of his or her seat without permission. Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday 8:008:30 X X X O X X X X X X 8:309:00 O O X X O X X O X 9:009:30 O X X X O 9:3010:00 O O O O O O O O O O X X 10:0010:30 X O X X 10:3011:00 X O X O O X 11:0011:30 O O X O X O O 11:3012:00 O O O O O O O O O O X O O O 12:0012:30 X X X X X X X 12:301:00 O X O X 1:001:30 X O X X X X 1:302:00 O X X X X O O X 2:002:30 O O O O O O O O O O O O O O

Collecting Classwide Data	 163 ports may be necessary near the end of the school week. A blank scatterplot recording form  is provided in Form 8.1. Although with some event behaviors we are most interested in how often they occur, in  other cases what may be of greater interest is for how long the behavior occurs, or duration.  We may, for example, be interested in knowing how long a students tantrum lasts or the  amount of time that a student spends wandering around the room during classroom instruction. Duration is most typically measured by starting a timer when the behavior begins and  then stopping it when the behavior ends. When describing duration data that have been  collected across multiple occasions, these data are most often summarized and reported  with regard to the average length e.g., On average, Jills tantrums lasted 6 minutes or range  observed e.g., Jills tantrums were observed to last anywhere from 2 to 25 minutes. One additional way of looking at the timing of a target behavior is to examine latency.  Although duration looks at how long the behavior occurs, latency is a measure of how much  time elapses before a behavior is initiated. For example, we may be interested in knowing  how long it takes for a student to take out his or her textbook. In this case, latency would  be measured by starting a timer when the instruction was given to take out the textbook  and stopping it when the student actually took the textbook out. Latency data may be summarized in a similar manner as duration data, such as by reporting the average latency or  range of latency periods. State Recording State behaviors, which cannot be easily counted or timed, are best estimated using interval  recording procedures. Interval recording procedures involve observing and recording one  or more target behaviors at predetermined periods of time. We begin by breaking down an  overall observation period into smaller chunks. When interval recording is used by external  observers, these chunks are typically less than a minute e.g., 10 seconds, 15 seconds, 30 seconds; however, if participant observers e.g., teachers are asked to record behavior, longer  intervals e.g., 1 minute, 5 minutes will likely be needed in order to ensure feasibility. Next,  we choose one of three types of recording procedures: whole-interval, partial-interval, or  momentary time sampling. Within whole-interval sampling, the target behavior is recorded  as present only if it was observed during the entire interval. Within partial-interval sampling, the target behavior is recorded as present if it was observed at any time during the  interval. Finally, within momentary time sampling, the target behavior is recorded as present if it was observed at a particular point in the interval e.g., within the first 3 seconds of  the interval. Typically, interval recording procedures have been used to estimate the level of  behavior for an individual target student. The number of intervals in which the behavior was  observed is divided by the total number of intervals and then multiplied by 100 in order to  obtain an overall estimate of occurrence. For example, if a target behavior was observed during 10 out of a total of 20 intervals, the percentage of occurrence would be 50. An example  of an interval recording sheet is presented in Figure 8.3 see also Form 8.2 for a blank form. Because it does not matter whether the behavior occurred for 1 second or 20 seconds  within a 30-second interval, partial-interval sampling has been noted to potentially over164	 STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 estimate the frequency of a behavior Powell, Martindale,  Kulp, 1975; Powell, Martindale, Kulp, Martindale,  Bauman, 1977. In contrast, whole-interval sampling has been  noted to potentially underestimate the frequency of a behavior. This is because if a behavior  occurred for 28 of the 30 seconds in an interval, for example, it could not be recorded as  present. Just as the first two beds that Goldilocks found in the forest were too hard and too  soft but the third one was just right, momentary time sampling is said to strike a more desirable balance between the underestimation of whole-interval sampling and the overestimation of partial-interval sampling. Within momentary time sampling, a behavior is recorded  as present if it occurs at the beginning or end of an interval e.g., first or last 3 seconds. As  FIGURE 8.3.  Example of an interval recording sheet. Instructions: At the start of each interval, record whether the class is on task  or off task  . If any disruptive behaviors occur during the remainder of the interval, place a mark  in  the Behavior 2 column. Time Behavior 1 On task Behavior 2 Disruptive Notes 10:0010:10

10:1010:20

10:2010:30

Multiple students talking to neighbors.  10:3010:40

10:4010:50

Bill told a joke, students laughing.  10:5011:00

A few students continue to laugh.  11:0011:10

11:1011:20

Students turned around to look where  noise came from.  11:2011:30

11:3011:40

11:4011:50

Juan asked what was for lunch, students  whispering.  11:5012:00

Students looking at clock, turned around  in seats.  Percentage  of Intervals  Observed 612  50 1012  83

Collecting Classwide Data	 165 long as the target behavior is not one that occurs at a very low or very high rate, studies have  shown momentary time sampling to provide the most representative estimate of behavior  e.g., Brulle  Repp, 1984; Murphy  Goodall, 1980; Powell et al., 1975, 1977. As an additional benefit, because the behavior needs to be observed for only a few seconds during the  interval, the demands placed on the observer are also greatly reduced. Within the school-based literature, there are many examples of interval recording procedures also being used at the classwide level; however, many of these studies have utilized  very short intervals, thereby limiting the feasibility of such approaches for classroom teachers. For example, in some cases, observers have rotated among the students, observing and  recording a different students behavior during each 10to 30-second interval e.g., Chafouleas et al., 2012; Lannie  McCurdy, 2007. Another possibility involves dividing the classroom into smaller groups and assessing the behavior of the entire group at predetermined  times see Figure 8.4. Sutherland and colleagues 2000; Sutherland, Alder,  Gunter, 2003,  for example, divided target classrooms into quadrants and then rotated between observing  FIGURE 8.4.  Example of a recording sheet for observing groups of students. Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Time Group All students in  group on task? Notes 10:0010:10 1

10:1010:20 2

10:2010:30 3

Side conversations 10:3010:40 1

Turned around in seat 10:4010:50 2

10:5011:00 3

11:0011:10 1

Head down on desk 11:1011:20 2

11:2011:30 3

11:3011:40 1

Staring out window Percentage of  Intervals Observed 610  60
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 each of these four groups of students in random order. At the end of each 1-minute interval,  the class received credit for being on task only if all members of the target quadrant were  simultaneously on task. One interval recording procedure that may be of greater utility to classroom teachers managing competing demands is the Planned Activity Check PLA-Check; Risley   Cataldo, 1973. At predetermined intervals, an observer scans the room and records the  number of students engaging in a specific target behavior. This number is then divided by  the total number of students present and multiplied by 100 to generate a percentage of  students engaged in the target behavior. An overall average for the observation period can  then be estimated by computing an average across all intervals observed see Figure 8.5,  Form 8.3 for a blank form, and Box 8.2 for a case example. Although some studies have used  fairly short intervals e.g., 15 seconds; Raspa, McWilliam,  Maher Ridley, 2001, recent  evidence has suggested that increasing PLA-Check intervals up to 5 minutes may not meaningfully decrease the overall accuracy of observational estimates Dart, Radley, Briesch,  Furlow,  Cavell, 2016. The blank interval rating form provided in Form 8.4 for use in  conducting PLA-Check assessments was adapted from Krasch and Carter 2009. By filling  in the box that corresponds with the number of students demonstrating the target behavior  during each interval, one can easily see any patterns that emerge with regard to problem  behavior throughout the day. Furthermore, by rotating the page 90 degrees and connecting  each of the filled-in boxes with a line, you get a quick graph of what student behavior looks  like throughout the day. RatingBased Tools for Assessing Event and State Behaviors All measurements exist on a continuum with regard to the directness of measurement, or  how close in time measurement occurs to the actual occurrence of behavior. The methods  described above offer the distinct advantage of being highly direct methods of assessment.  Instructions: At the end of each 5-minute block, scan the classroom and record the number of students  observed out of their seats without permission. Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday 10:0010:05  25   25   25   25   25  10:0510:10  25   25   25   25   25  10:1010:15  25   25   25   25   25  10:1510:20  25   25   25   25   25  10:2010:25  25   25   25   25   25  10:2510:30  25   25   25   25   25  Average for  Literacy Block FIGURE 8.5.  Example of a Planned Activity Check recording sheet.

Collecting Classwide Data	 167 BOX 8.2.  Case Example:   Using Observational Data to Monitor Performance After returning from a professional conference, Mr. Chun decides to implement a classwide  token economy system with his third-grade students. He knows that it is important to collect  outcome data in order to determine whether the intervention is working, but he is not sure  of the best way to do this. Given that his main goal is to reduce the number of side conversations that are taking place during class time, he considers how to best monitor this behavior.  Although it would be straightforward to keep a running tally of the number of side conversations observed, Mr. Chun realizes that this will not account for the fact that these conversations vary widely in length. For example, whereas one student may make a quick comment to  his or her neighbor, another pair of students may engage in a lengthier back-and-forth dialogue. In addition, he questions the feasibility of keeping a tally, given the constant vigilance  that would be necessary in order to scan the room for offenders. Given the complexities inherent in counting side conversations, Mr. Chun next considers  use of an interval recording procedure. In order to ensure that interval recording will be practical to use on a daily basis, he decides to use a Planned Activity Check procedure. Mr. Chun  decides to begin the intervention during language arts and sets a vibrating timer to buzz at  5-minute intervals throughout the instructional block. When the buzzer goes off, he scans  the room to count the number of students engaged in side conversations with their peers and  records this number on the form below. At the end of the period, he then calculates an overall  percentage for the day by summing the total number of students observed talking and dividing by the number of students in the classroom 20 times the number of observation intervals  6, or 120. This allows him to track the percentage of students engaging in side conversations on a daily basis in order to assess the effectiveness of the intervention over time. Instructions: At the end of each 5-minute block, scan the classroom and record the number of students  engaging in side conversations with their peers. Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Week 10:0010:05 6 2 0 1 3 10:0510:10 2 0 1 3 0 10:1010:15 5 5 2 0 0 10:1510:20 4 0 2 0 0 10:2010:25 3 8 4 2 0 10:2510:30 0 0 2 2 2 Average 20120  students   17 15120  students   13 11120  students   9 8120  students   7 5120  students   4 10 weekly  average
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 Direct assessment tools are those for which the recording of behavior occurs in close proximity to the actual behavior. Assessment procedures become more indirect as they become  more removed in time from the actual occurrence of behavior. Although some degree of  accuracy is sacrificed when individuals are asked to provide their perspectives on target  behaviors at a later date and time, these procedures do help to maximize feasibility and  therefore may be preferred within the context of busy classrooms. There are several rating-based tools that classroom teachers may use to assess student  behavior in the classroom. The first option is what has been called Direct Behavior Rating  DBR. DBR involves the rating of a predetermined, operationally defined behavior at the  end of a predetermined block of time e.g., math instruction, school day; Chafouleas, RileyTillman,  Sugai, 2007. Ratings have most typically been conducted using a Likert-type  scale consisting of six e.g., Volpe  Briesch, 2012 to 11 e.g., Chafouleas et al., 2010 gradients. For example, a teacher might be asked to rate the percentage of time that a student  was academically engaged during math instruction using a 010 scale. Although the use of  Likert ratings is similar in format to completing a comprehensive rating scale such as the  Behavior Assessment System for Children BASC-3; Reynolds  Kamphaus, 2015, use of  DBR requires that the ratings be conducted based on a more discrete block of time e.g.,  during an instructional period rather than over a period of 12 months. DBR has most commonly been used to monitor the behavior of individual students;  however, extensions to the classwide level have also been noted. In a study by Riley-Tillman,  Methe, and Weegar 2009, the classroom teacher rated the overall engagement of the entire  classroom at the end of each silent reading period across baseline and intervention phases.  Engagement data were simultaneously collected using systematic direct observation in  order to provide a check on the validity of the obtained data. When data obtained from  both sources were graphed, similar findings were demonstrated using visual and numerical  analysis. Examples of DBR forms that may be used with both older and younger classrooms  can be found in Figure 8.6. and a case example is provided in Box 8.3 p. 170. Whereas DBR has typically been used to estimate the percentage of time that a target  behavior occurred, performance-based behavioral recordings may be used when frequency  is not what we are most interested in. For example, Likert-type ratings may be used to estimate duration or intensity Steege  Watson, 2009. When creating a performance-based  behavioral recording form, each point of the Likert scale should be clearly defined see  Figure 8.7, p. 171. In a study by Steege, Davin, and Hathaway 2001, for example, staff in a  group-home setting used a 5-point Likert rating scale to rate stereotypic behavior in three  individuals with autism. The 5 points on the Likert scale were designed to correspond with  the number of minutes during which the behavior was observed e.g., 1  1 second to 2  minutes 59 seconds, 2  3 minutes to 5 minutes 59 seconds, 3  6 minutes to 8 minutes 59  seconds. A very different example of performance-based behavioral recording was developed by Iwata, Pace, Kissel, Nau, and Farber 1990 in order to assess damage to surface  tissue caused by self-injurious behavior. Three-point Likert-type scales were used to estimate both the number of wounds present e.g., 1  one wound, 2  two to four wounds and  the severity of those wounds e.g., 1  local swelling only, 2  extensive swelling. A blank  performance-based behavioral recording form is provided in Form 8.5.

Collecting Classwide Data	 169 Permanent Product Data Although observational or rating-based methods can provide us with important information  as to what effects the intervention has had on key outcomes of interest e.g., engagement, disruptive behavior, productivity, we acknowledge the fact that collecting these types of data  also involves an investment of resourcesthat is, beyond the time and materials needed  to implement the intervention itself, additional energies are needed to collect new data in  order to evaluate intervention effectiveness. There is, however, an alternative approach to  monitoring progress that can help to reduce the demands on busy classroom teachers: use  of permanent product data. Permanent products, or extant data, are those naturally occurring sources of data that  already exist in the environment. Some of the most common classroom-based examples of  permanent products are those of an academic nature: quiz or test grades, completion of  assignments, and submission of homework, to name just a few. Because teachers tend to  maintain a lasting record of these outcomes of interest, such as in a grade book, these data  can be harnessed in order to evaluate student progress rather than needing to collect new  information. Permanent products may also be used, however, to monitor behavioral performance over time in response to classwide intervention. The key to identifying potential permanent products for use in monitoring classwide  interventions is to consider what tangible, lasting records of behavior result from implementation of the intervention. In other words, at the end of the day, what records of student behavior  are you left with? One intervention that most easily lends itself to the evaluation of permanent  FIGURE 8.6.  Example DBR scales for use with older and younger students. 0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10 0 50 100 Never Sometimes Always Academic  Engagement  of Total Time 0 50 100 Academic  Engagement  of Total Time 0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 product data is a self-management interventionthat is, because students typically evaluate  their behavior and record it on a piece of paper, these monitoring sheets may be collected and  used to track performance over time. If students were self-monitoring the number of talk-outs  in class, for example, the average number of talk-outs per class period could be calculated  each day and monitored to determine whether sufficient progress was being made. In some cases, however, permanent records of performance may not be automatically  generated through implementation of the intervention. It may therefore be necessary to  explicitly add a step to incorporate permanent product recording. Consider, for example,  implementation of a classwide token economy intervention. Although the number of tokens  earned each day could certainly be used to monitor performance over time, teachers may  not always know how many tokens each student has earned if the students are responsible  for holding on to them until they wish to redeem them for a reward. A permanent product could easily be generated, however, by keeping a central log of the number of tokens  BOX 8.3.  Case Example:   Using Direct Behavior Rating to Monitor Performance Mrs. Bindra had been successfully using a token economy in her second-grade classroom for  several years, but this year she has made a big move to teach fifth grade. Given that a major  part of her job this year involves preparing her students to transition to middle school, she  would like to put an intervention in place that promotes a greater level of personal responsibility and accountability for classroom behavior. She therefore decides to implement a classwide self-management intervention, wherein all students will complete a checklist at the start  of the day to self-assess how prepared they are for class. Specifically, each student will indicate whether he or she 1 put belongings away in the closet, 2 placed completed homework  in the appropriate bin, 3 took out an appropriate writing utensil and paper, and 4 began  quietly writing his or her daily reflection by the time that the bell rang. Although she could theoretically monitor these preparatory behaviors at the individual  student level, Mrs. Bindra is concerned about the amount of time that this would take each  morning. She would like for the daily check to take no more than a couple of minutes, so  as not to distract from the morning routine. She therefore decides to complete a classwide  rating of behavior using DBR. As students are preparing for class each morning, she will  circulate around the room making mental notes of how many students have not successfully  completed the checklist items. She will then use a 5-point DBR scale i.e., 0  no students  completed, 1  some students completed, 2  roughly half of the students completed, 3   many students completed, 4  all students completed to rate each checklist item. Daily DBR: Classroom Preparation Put belongings away 0 1 2 3 4 Submitted homework 0 1 2 3 4 Took out materials 0 1 2 3 4 Quietly began reflection 0 1 2 3 4 Total Points:

Collecting Classwide Data	 171 earned each day. Similarly, if student performance is evaluated in relation to a goal at the  end of each day when implementing a group contingency intervention, the only record of  performance may be whether or not the goal was met. A more detailed picture of student  performance could be generated, however, by recording the number of points each group  earned on a daily basis and tracking this number over time see Box 8.4 for a case example. Certainly, the key advantages of using permanent product data relate to applied feasibility. The fact that additional data do not need to be collected beyond what was already  generated through the intervention means fewer demands on both time and resources.  There are, however, some disadvantages to the use of permanent product data that should  be noted. Whereas observational and rating-based measures can be tailored to capture different aspects of behavior that may be of interest, permanent products are fixed in nature.  As a result, you are limited to knowing about only certain aspects of student behavior and  cannot necessarily dig below the surface. Knowing how many tokens a student earned in  a given day, for example, does not tell you what types of behaviors the student displayed  to earn those tokens or how many opportunities for earning tokens the student might have  actually missed. It is therefore important to design permanent product recording logs to  include all of the information believed to be pertinent to answering those questions of most  interest. Finally, there are some permanent products such as grades and behavioral attendance that may naturally change over the course of a semester. For example, many classes  start with assignments that are reviews or are very basic, and then the work becomes progressively more difficult as the curriculum becomes more demanding and abstract. Thus,  there may naturally be a worsening in student classwork. Similarly, with behavior, there are  many schools where student behavior during the early fall is reasonably good, but behavior problems and office discipline referrals increase as the school year progresses. If such  change occurs, it may make evaluating classroom behaviors more challenging. Comparison  with other classes may be appropriate in these situations. FIGURE 8.7.  Example of a performance-based behavioral recording form. Rating Key 0  Julias tantrum lasts  1 minute 0  Vocal only, not directed at others 1  Julias tantrum lasts 12 minutes 1  Vocal only, but directed at others 2  Julias tantrum lasts 23 minutes 2  Vocal  physical, does not affect others 3  Julias tantrum lasts 34 minutes 3  Vocal  physical, disturbs others 4  Julias tantrum lasts  4 minutes 4  Vocal  physical, injures others Time PeriodActivity Duration Intensity Morning meeting 2 2 Literacy stations 0 1 Recess 3 4
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 BOX 8.4.  Case Example:   Using Permanent Product Data to Monitor Performance Ms. Cisneros is concerned about the performance of her sixth-grade students in period A,  and believes that these academic problems stem from the level of noise and activity in the  classroom. After consulting with the Student Support Team, Ms. Cisneros decides to implement a group contingency with response cost aimed at reducing disruptive behavior. She  divides the class into four teams for the purpose of playing a game. At the start of each  period, she puts 5 points in each teams point bank on the whiteboard and reminds the  class of the four keys to mathematical success: 1 look at the board, 2 listen quietly, 3  take notes, and 4 ask clarification questions. If any member of the team violates one of the  four classroom expectations, 1 point is taken away from that teams total. At the end of the  week, those teams with 20 or more points on the board are excused from having to do the  weekend homework assignment. At the end of the first week of implementation, Ms. Cisneros sits down with one of her  colleagues from the Student Support Team to discuss any problems that may have arisen.  She reports that the students have been excited about the intervention and appear motivated  to earn the weekend homework pass. When they move to review the student outcome data,  however, they come to realize that there is only one data point for the weekthe number of  points remaining in each teams point bankwhich is written on the whiteboard. In discussing this further, Ms. Cisneros and her colleague decide that it would be helpful to have a daily  record of performance as well in order to better understand how student behavior fluctuates  throughout the course of the week. Together, they draw up a simple recording sheet so that  Ms. Cisneros can enter the number of points that each team has remaining on a daily basis.  She will keep the recording sheet inside of her grade book and then graph the average number of points earned by each team on a daily basis in order to draw a more detailed picture  of student performance in response to the intervention. Group Contingency Point Log: Period A Team 1 Team 2 Team 3 Team 4 Class Average Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday

Collecting Classwide Data	 173 COLLECTING AND EVALUATING DATA   TO DETERMINE INTERVENTION EFFECTIVENESS Collecting Data Determining which data collection method to use can be similar to settling on the perfect  color of paint for your living room. After laying out all of the options side by side, you may  feel yourself drawn to one in particular. The more you sit with that option, however, the  more questions may arise e.g., Will it be too dark? Will it clash with the furniture?. You  may even go out and buy a sample of paint to test out in a small corner of the room before  deciding that another shade would be better. Lots of time and brain power goes into selecting the perfect paint; however, once that decision is made and you can finally breathe in a  sigh of relief, you realize that the work of actually painting the room is still ahead of you. Once you have selected a data collection method that strikes the right balance between  precision and feasibility, it is time to lay out a plan for how the data will actually be collected. Among the questions that need to be answered at this stage are when and how often  data collection will occur. If the intervention that you wish to evaluate is being implemented  only during a particular time of day e.g., during literacy instruction, during classroom transitions, this makes the question of when data will be collected very straightforward. If,  however, an intervention is implemented over a large portion of, or throughout, the school  day, it will be necessary to make some choices. When using data collection methods that  are fairly quick and simple to carry out, it may be possible to divide the overall schedule  into smaller chunks e.g., corresponding to different subjects or instructional activities and  to collect data throughout the school day. On the other hand, if the data collection method  is one that would be too cumbersome to use continuously, specific time periods or settings  might be prioritized and targeted for data collection. The next step is to collect some data before the intervention is put into place in order to  obtain an estimate of baseline performance. The idea of baseline data collection is one that  may strike some people as counterproductive. After all, if we know that there is a problem  and have identified something that may work to alleviate that problem, why wouldnt we  want to put it into place right away? There are at least a couple of reasons why collecting  data in the absence of intervention can be incredibly important. First, baseline data are  needed in order to verify that there is, in fact, a problem that warrants action. If we are  going to invest our time and efforts into carrying out an intervention plan, we first want to  know that such efforts are needed. Collecting baseline data can therefore help to confirm  whether the hunch that we have about a behavior is a correct one. Second, baseline data  are needed in order to set appropriate goals for intervention. If we do not have a concrete  sense of what behavior looked like prior to intervention, there will be no way to tell for sure  whether or not our efforts have been successful. The next question that inevitably arises is one of how long baseline data should be  collected before an intervention can be put into place. Unfortunately, there is no magic  number of days or data points that are needed; rather, decisions must be made by considering elements of each individual situation. The general rule, however, is that data should be 
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 collected until they demonstrate a predictable pattern of behavior Kratochwill et al., 2010.  When the pattern of behavior is predictable, this allows us to estimate what behavior would  probably look like in the future if we chose not to intervene. If you look at Figure 8.8, you  will see two very different patterns of responding. The graph on the left represents responding that is highly variable; it is therefore very difficult to predict what the students behavior  will look like the next day. The graph on the right, however, depicts behavior that is steadily  increasing. If we had to guess what the students behavior would look like the next day, we  would have a fair guess as to what to expect. Generally speaking, fewer data points will be  needed to derive a general sense of baseline performance when estimates of behavior are  highly consistent, whereas a greater number of data points will be necessary when data are  highly variable. The final determination is how long an intervention should be implemented before a  decision regarding student response can be made. As with the collection of baseline data,  there are no hard-and-fast rules regarding the number of data points that should be collected while an intervention is in place. In fact, common recommendations are that an  intervention should be implemented for a period of time that would be considered reasonable in order to see an effect, or for long enough to be able to say with confidence that  the intervention was or was not effective. When more concrete guidelines have been put  forth, individuals and organizations have generally endorsed a range of time. For example,  the RTI Action Network Metcalf, n.d. suggests that a decision regarding student response  to intervention may be made after 612 weeks, assuming that the intervention has been  implemented consistently and weekly data are available. Regardless of the implementation  time frame selected at the outset, however, it is critical that data are monitored in an ongoing fashion in order to determine whether the intervention is showing promise or if changes  may need to be made to the plan. FIGURE 8.8.  Examples of data demonstrating high and low variability. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 1 2 3 4  Disruptive Behavior Days 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 1 2 3 4  Disruptive Behavior Days

Collecting Classwide Data	 175 Evaluating Data Although collecting progress monitoring data surely involves heavy lifting, the work is not  over once the data have been entered into a spreadsheet or computer program! Rather, it is  important that we actually look at the data in order to determine whether or not the intervention has been effective. There are two primary approaches that can be used to evaluate  intervention effectiveness: employing visual analysis or calculating a quantitative measure  of effect size. Visual Analysis When using visual analysis, a determination is made as to whether behavior improved  substantially from baseline to intervention by visually examining a graph. Although this  approach may sound fairly simple, there is more to visual analysis than simply eyeballing  it. Three primary strategies are typically usedeither in isolation or combinationto  visually analyze single-case data see Figure 8.9. The first thing that can be examined  is whether there is a change in the degree of variability in the data. This is sometimes  referred to as the bounce in the data, or how much the values vary from day to day. In  most cases, it is desirable for behavior to become less variable over time. For example, if a  students level of engagement in classroom instruction was found to vary from 35 one day  to 75 the next day, we would want engagement levels to be more consistently high. In  some cases, however, an increase in variability may be seen as a good thing. Often this is  true when the baseline level of a behavior is consistently very low e.g., consistently close to  zero. In such a case, seeing a few spikes in the data would actually be considered a positive finding. The second thing that can be examined when using visual analysis is whether there  is a change in the trend of the data. Trend refers to the slope of the data, or the direction  in which the data are going. When data appear to be going up over time, this represents a  positive trend. When data appear to be going down over time, this represents a negative  trend. If the data appear to be going neither up nor down, this represents a flat, or zero,  trend. The greater the change over time, the steeper the trend will be. The presence of  trend implies that there is a gradual change in the target behavior over time. For example,  if a student receives social skills instruction, we would expect the student to demonstrate a  greater number of prosocial behaviors as the total number of sessions increases. It is important to note, however, that in some cases an immediate change in behavior may be more  likely than a gradual change. The introduction of a token economy, for example, may result  in behavior change as soon as appropriate behavior is reinforced. In such cases, examining  the immediacy of change i.e., how quickly the effect occurs subsequent to introduction of  the intervention may make more sense than examining trend. The third thing that can be examined when using visual analysis is whether there is  a change in the mean level of the behavior from baseline to intervention. When an intervention is put into place in order to decrease a problem behavior, we want to see that the  average level of the behavior decreases from baseline to intervention. In contrast, when 
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 the goal is to increase the degree to which a desirable behavior is present, we want to see  that the average level of the behavior increases from baseline to intervention. Although  examining change in the mean level of behavior can provide useful information, it is  important to keep in mind that the greater the variability or trend in the data, the less  meaningful the mean value becomes. This is clearly illustrated by considering that the  mean of four highly variable data points gathered during intervention 20, 90, 10,  100 would be 55. Although there are three aspects of the data that may be analyzed, this does not mean  that one should necessarily analyze all three. Instead, it is important to consider what about  the behavior you would expect to change after implementing the intervention. If, for example, baseline data highlighted a great degree of variability in classroom engagement from  one day to the next, you might look to see whether the intervention helped to stabilize the  students behavior such that he or she consistently maintained engagement at a particular  level i.e., change in variability. If, on the other hand, classroom engagement was found  to be consistently low during baseline, it might be more meaningful to examine whether  FIGURE 8.9.  Demonstrating changes in variability, trend, and level. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Percent Engagement Days 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Percent Engagement Days 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Percent Engagement Days

Collecting Classwide Data	 177 changes occurred in level i.e., overall increase in mean level of engagement andor trend  i.e., from zero trend to increasing trend. Because a detailed overview of using visual analysis to examine single-case data is  beyond the scope of this chapter, interested readers are referred to Kratochwill and Levin  2014 and Riley-Tillman and Burns 2009 for an in-depth discussion of this topic. Basic Metrics for Quantifying Effect Size Visual analysis has generally been considered to be the gold standard for analyzing timeseries data, given the assumption that two people should be able to look at a graph and agree  that an effect is there if the effect is truly present. Research conducted over the past several  decades, however, has suggested that raters may not be as consistent in their agreement  concerning visual effects as one might be led to assume e.g., Jones, Weinrott,  Vaught,  1978; Ottenbacher, 1990. As a result, an increasing number of researchers in the fields of  psychology and education have begun to calculate effect sizes in single-subject research,  therein focusing on the practical significance of results Brossart, Parker, Olson,  Mahadevan, 2006. It has been suggested that quantitative analysis of single-subject data may be  particularly useful when the baseline data are unstable, or when the researcher cannot  predict the effects of a treatment Parker et al., 2005. In recent years, numerous effect size  estimators have been developed by researchers in the fields of education and psychology;  however, many require sophisticated statistical expertise or software. In this chapter, we  therefore limit our review to those effect size estimators that can be calculated by hand and  easily interpreted by school-based professionals: percentage of nonoverlapping data PND  and percentage of all nonoverlapping data PAND. PERCENTAGE OF NONOVERLAPPING DATA Of all of the effect size metrics that have been proposed for use with time-series data, the  PND metric has been around the longest and is perhaps the easiest to calculate. PND looks  at potential overlap between data points collected in the baseline and intervention phases,  and represents the proportion of intervention data points that exceed those data points  observed during baseline Scruggs  Mastropieri, 2013. In order to calculate this percentage, one must first identify the level i.e., y-coordinate of the best, or most extreme,  baseline data point. Determining the best data point, however, requires consideration of the  nature of the target behavior. If the target behavior is one that is problematic or undesirable,  lower is better i.e., lower levels of disruptive behavior or aggression. However, if the target  behavior is one that is positive or desirable, higher is better i.e., higher levels of prosocial  behavior or engagement. Once the best baseline data point has been identified, the next  step is to count the number of intervention data points that represent improvement beyond  the best point during baseline. This number represents the number of nonoverlapping data  points. The number of nonoverlapping data points is then divided by the total number of  intervention data points and multiplied by 100 to obtain the PND. Interpretive guidelines  for PND have suggested that percentages above 90 represent strong effectiveness, per178	 STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 centages between 70 and 90 represent effectiveness, percentages between 50 and 70  represent questionable effectiveness, and percentages below 50 represent a lack of effectiveness Scruggs  Mastropieri, 1998. PERCENTAGE OF ALL NONOVERLAPPING DATA One of the commonly noted drawbacks of PND has been the fact that it is highly influenced by extreme data pointsthat is, even if the overwhelming majority of baseline data  points represent an undesirable level of behavior, one particularly good data point would  mean that the PND would be 0. The PAND metric was therefore proposed as an alternative to PND that is less dependent on individual data points Parker, Hagan-Burke,   Vannest, 2007. PAND represents the percentage of nonoverlapping data points between  phase changes, which in this case is defined as the minimum number of data points  that would have to be swapped across phases for complete score separation Parker et al.,  2007, p. 197. An additional advantage of PAND is that it can be translated to a Pearsons  phi coefficient, which may be more easily interpreted given that it is a bona fide effect  size Cohen, 1988, p. 223. At the same time, however, it is important to note that the use  of PAND is recommended only in those cases in which a minimum of 20 data points have  been collected. In order to calculate the PAND, the first step involves identifying the minimum number of data points that you would need to swap across phases in order for there to be no  overlap between phases. This number is then divided by the total number of data points  and multiplied by 100 in order to obtain a percentage i.e., PAND. Once the PAND has  been calculated, the next step is to create a 2  2 contingency table see Figure 8.10. First,  the percentage of baseline data points to total data points is entered at the bottom of column  1, in the space marked by the letter E. Second, the percentage of intervention data points  to total data points is entered in the bottom of column 2, in the space marked by the letter  F. Third, the percentage of overlapping data points i.e., 1  PAND is divided by 2 and the  resultant value is entered in cells B and C. Finally, the values for cells A and D are determined by subtracting C from E and B from F, respectively. After all cells in the 2  2 table  have been populated, phi can then be calculated using the formula a  a  c  b  b   d. Imagine, for example, that you collected 5 data points during baseline, 10 during the  intervention phase, and that the PAND value was 60. You will see in Figure 8.10 how a  phi coefficient of 0.09 would be calculated using this information. Interpretative guidelines  put forth by Cohen 1988 suggest that a phi coefficient less than 0.30 is considered negligible, 0.300.49 is small, 0.500.69 is moderate, and 0.70 or above is strong. Determining Next Steps Once visual analysis has been conducted, or quantitative measures of effect calculated,  the ultimate decision regarding intervention effectiveness must be made. If the data suggest that the intervention was effective in changing student behavior, there are a couple 

Collecting Classwide Data	 179 of options that we may consider. In those cases in which the intervention was not overly  burdensome to implement, and therefore could easily be maintained over a longer period of  time, it may make most sense to keep the intervention in place as is. In this situation, the old  adage If it aint broke, dont fix it could certainly apply. For example, after implementing a  token economy system for several weeks, the systems and procedures may become naturally  integrated into the framework of the classroom. In such a case, it would make most sense to  simply keep doing what one has been successfully doing. If, however, implementation has  been challenging and is not seen as sustainable, it may make more sense to look for ways in  which to scale back the intervention. Implementation may be limited to certain times of the  day or reinforcement may be delivered less frequently moving forward. Regardless of the  modifications made to the system, however, it is important to continue to collect outcome  data intermittently e.g., once every week as opposed to once every day in order to ensure  continued effectiveness. If, however, it appears that the intervention has not been successful, it is important  to acknowledge that the absence of a positive intervention effect can signify one of three  things. One possibility is that the intervention was not implemented in the way that was  intended i.e., with fidelity; see Chapter 9. If fidelity data show that the intervention was  not implemented with the frequency or intensity required, troubleshooting should first  focus on putting consultative supports in place to raise fidelity. If, however, fidelity data  show that the intervention was implemented as intended, the second possibility is that the  intervention was of insufficient intensity. As we discuss in Chapter 10, there are several  ways in which we may intensify an intervention to better meet the needs of one or more  students. It may therefore be useful to test such modifications in order to see whether intervention effectiveness is enhanced. The third option, however, is that the intervention simply  was not effective. Even those interventions that have been rigorously evaluated in order to  be classified as evidence based may not be well aligned with the needs, skills, or other  unique characteristics of an individual student. In such a case, an alternative intervention  may be warranted. FIGURE 8.10.  Contingency table for converting PAND to phi. A E  C B 1  PAND  2 C 1  PAND  2 D F  B E  of data points  in baseline F  of data points  in intervention A 13 B 20 C 20 D 47 E 33 F 67 131320  202047  .39  .30  .09
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 CONCLUSIONS No matter how well researched the intervention, or seemingly perfect the fit, we cannot  know with certainty that it was an effective choice without collecting outcome data. As  we have outlined in this chapter, there are several different strategies that may be used to  monitor intervention effectiveness. Whereas direct observation methods provide us with  data that tend to be more objective and therefore accurate, collecting these data may be  more timeand resource intensive. Rating-based tools, on the other hand, may be less burdensome to use but are also subject to a greater degree of subjectivity. Regardless of the  method used, it is important that data are collected both prior to and during implementation in order to determine intervention effectiveness. Either visual analysis or quantitative  effect size metrics may be used to support decision making when unsure of whether an  intervention should be kept in place or discontinued.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. FORM 8.1 Blank Scatterplot Instructions: Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. FORM 8.2 Blank Interval Recording Form Date:  		

  Time:  	

Instructions: Time Behavior 1 Behavior 2 Notes Percentage  of Intervals  Observed
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. FORM 8.3 Planned Activity Check Recording Sheet Classroom:  		

Date:  		

  Start Time:  	

  End Time:  	

Instructions: At the start of the observation, record the total number of students present during the  observation. Then, at the start of each interval, scan the classroom and count the number of students  who are observed to be off task. Total Number of Students Present:             Time Behavior Total Number  of Students Percentage  of Students

Average Percentage of Students
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. FORM 8.4 Blank PLA-Check Form Instructions: Interval Number of Students Engaged in Target Behavior
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. FORM 8.5 Blank Performance-Based Behavioral Rating Form Rating Key 0   1   2   3   4   Time PeriodActivity Target Behavior:

Target Behavior:

Target Behavior:
We have big ideas about classroom management. By reading the first eight chapters of this  book, we hope that you have come away with the positive belief that these interventions  can be effective in changing student behavior and that they are practices that you can feasibly implement. The previous chapters have focused on heuristics and practices that have  empirical support behind them. Unfortunately, even the best intervention will fail to support student behavior if it is not implemented as intended. Consider a child who has been  prescribed some form of medication to address symptoms of ADHD. For students with  ADHD, a consistent medication regimen can be considered a best-practice intervention to  help reduce the number of acting-out behaviors while subsequently increasing the amount  of time spent on task. Unfortunately, many of these students take the medications erratically, which means their behavior can also become erratic. If a child is not taking the medication as designed, does that mean the medication itself is ineffective? Of course not. In  fact, an improper medication regimen is one of the principal concerns for many physicians. The same is true for many of the practices that we described earlierif the intervention is not implemented as designed, behavior may not improve. In other words, it is  not enough to prescribe a behavioral interventioninstead we need to consider whether  interventions can be implemented as intended and whether they are being implemented as  intended. Whether an intervention is implemented as intended has been referred to within  the literature as treatment integrity, treatment fidelity, treatment adherence, procedural  reliability, and treatment plan implementation Gresham, 2009. For simplicity within this  chapter, we use the term treatment integrity. Treatment integrity is critically important  to intervention evaluation. If no changes in student behavior are seen, knowing the level of  treatment integrity can help us to understand whether the lack of response is simply due  to a lack or absence of treatment. This knowledge is particularly important when making  high-stakes special education classification decisions based upon response-to-intervention  datathat is, we do not want to judge a student as nonresponsive to intervention efforts  and in need of more intensive services if the reason for nonresponse is a lack of treatment  CHAPTER 9 Assessing Intervention Integrity

Assessing Intervention Integrity	 187 fidelity. Said differently, if we arent doing the right thing in the right way, then we are in  errornot the children. It should come as no surprise that research has found that student  outcomes improve as intervention integrity improves Gresham, Gansle, Noell, Cohen,   Rosenblum, 1993; Noell, Gresham,  Gansle, 2002; Noell et al., 2005; Sterling-Turner, Watson,  Moore, 2002. If positive changes in student behavior do occur, knowing the level of  treatment integrity can help us to understand whether the effects are due to the intervention or to other outside factors. Although we cannot sit with and coach each of you through the implementation of  every strategy and intervention discussed in this book, we can make recommendations  for things you can do to make sure you are implementing with integrity. This is why it is  important to devote a chapter to discussing the importance of treatment integrity and the  ways in which it may be promoted and monitored. After all, simply knowing that particular  classroom management strategies are effective does not mean that we as educators will  change our practice Fixsen, Naoom, Blase, Friedman,  Wallace, 2005; Noell et al., 2005.  We highlight the different available methods for treatment integrity assessment e.g., permanent product review, direct observation as well as recent literature related to effective  strategies for promoting intervention integrity. ASSESSING TREATMENT INTEGRITY How to Assess Treatment Integrity Within a given day, there are a seemingly endless number of tasks that a classroom teacher  must manage. There is attendance to be taken, homework to be checked, lessons to be delivered, behavior to be regulatedthe list goes on. It comes as no surprise that, with all of  the other things that teachers have to do in the classroom, it can be difficult to also monitor  treatment integrity. In fact, research has shown that there is a tendency for teachers to overestimate adherence to intervention plans when asked to report on implementation Noell  et al., 2005. In a study of nearly 30 teachers, for example, teachers were asked to estimate  their adherence to behavioral intervention plans for individual students Wickstrom, Jones,  LaFleur,  Witt, 1998. Although the teachers themselves reported that they had followed  the plans with a high degree of integrity, direct observations demonstrated that 100 of the  teachers were actually implementing the interventions with less than 10 integrity. In fact,  the average level of integrity was only 4! These results suggest that simply asking someone  if he or she is implementing something is not sufficient. Instead, it is important that we  conduct a deliberate and purposeful assessment of treatment integrity. This is accomplished  through three steps of operationally defining the intervention, selecting an appropriate  method of measurement, and estimating the level of implementation. Operationally Defining the Intervention The first essential step in assessing treatment integrity is to operationally define the intervention. As weve talked about throughout this book, operational definitions are important 
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 when implementing classroom interventions in order to promote a shared understanding of  the target behaviors. In much the same way, operationally defining the intervention helps  to affirm what steps are considered critical to intervention implementation. Operationally  defining an intervention first involves conducting a task analysis. Whenever we have a big  task or project ahead of us in everyday life, an effective strategy to ensure that it gets done is  to break it down into a number of smaller steps. When planning a wedding, for example, the  number of things that need to be done may at first feel completely overwhelming. In planning dinner, there are caterers to be hired, seating arrangements to determine, response  cards to send out, and so on. However, sitting down and writing out a list of all of the individual tasks that need to be accomplished can help to ease anxiety and provide a game plan  for what needs to happen and when. Task analyzing an intervention similarly helps to provide a road map for implementation. Something to keep in mind, however, is that there is often one set of steps that  must be completed prior to implementing an intervention and one set of steps that must  be completed during the intervention. The preparatory set of steps is assessed only once  at the outset of the intervention. This includes steps such as selecting the target behaviors  and determining what rewards will be used. The active implementation steps, on the other  hand, are assessed on a daily basis. These include steps such as reminding students of the  expectations and administering points and rewards. Throughout the previous chapters, we  have provided coach cards that address both the preparatory and active implementation  steps needed to effectively implement a particular intervention. In Table 9.1, we provide an  additional example of how these steps would be delineated for the Good Behavior Game  GBG. In some cases, we may be fortunate to find that a component checklist already exists,  particularly when using a packaged intervention. If not, we must start by identifying the  first essential step needed to implement the intervention e.g., provide a rationale for why  the intervention is being implemented and then follow by adding on subsequent steps e.g.,  teach students what the behavioral expectations are, post expectations at the front of the  classroom. Because it can be easy to overlook a small but important step imagine how your  birthday cake would turn out if you forgot to add the baking powder!, it can be helpful  TABLE 9.1.  Assessing Integrity of the GBG Prior to and during Implementation Preparatory steps one time During implementation daily  Identify the target behaviors.  Communicate the target behaviors to  students.  Determine the criteria for losing points.  Determine the criteria for receiving prizes.  Determine appropriate prizes for students.  Determine a time period for the game.  Divide the classroom into two or more equal  teams.  Reset board to collect points for the session.  Begin the interval and remove points from  each team.  Review number of points at the end of the  session and record on data sheet.  Announce winner.  Administer appropriate reward.

Assessing Intervention Integrity	 189 to ask a colleague who is familiar with the intervention to read over your checklist to see  whether anything is missing. Methods of Treatment Integrity Measurement Once you have outlined the steps of the intervention, the next step is to determine how  integrity will be measured. There are three main approaches that are used to assess integrity: direct observation, self-report, and permanent product recording. As is true of most  things, there are both unique advantages and limitations to the use of each. Selecting an  appropriate method involves balancing the accuracy of assessment with concerns related to  practical feasibility. At one end of the spectrum is an approach that is highly accurate but often more limited in terms of feasibility: direct observation. The use of direct observation involves having  someone other than the primary implementer enter the classroom in order to observe implementation. The primary advantage of using direct observation is that it produces highly  accurate estimates of behavior given the use of an objective observer. There are, however,  a couple of limitations to the use of direct observation as well. One is that it requires additional manpower beyond what is available in the classroom. Additionally, there is potential  for a reactivity effect, in which the person being observed changes his or her behavior due  to the presence of an observerthat is, when a teacher knows his or her implementation is  being monitored, he or she may be more likely to implement the intervention with integrity  than under typical circumstances. At the other end of the spectrum is self-report. The use of self-report involves having the  implementer retrospectively indicate the degree to which an intervention was implemented  as intended. The feasibility of this method is very high, given that it is quick to do and does  not require any external resources. Related, there is also a much lower chance for a reactivity  effect, given that the teacher is the one doing the recording. At the same time, however, this  is often the least reliable method. As we discussed previously, there is a good deal of research  that suggests that teachers tend to overestimate their degree of treatment integrity. Somewhere in between direct observation and self-report is permanent product recording. Permanent products are data that already naturally exist in the classroom environment.  Because there is no need to collect any additional information beyond that which is typical  during implementation, the use of permanent products is more feasible than direct observation. Additionally, because implementation behavior is recorded in close proximity to the  time at which it occurs, use of permanent products tends to result in a more accurate estimate  of implementation than self-report. To assess permanent products, each step of the intervention should ideally result in a tangible outcome that can be reviewed at a later time see  Figure 9.1 for an example of a permanent product checklist for the GBG. Self-management  interventions, for example, easily lend themselves to the use of permanent product recording because the monitoring card serves as a record of whether the intervention was actually  carried out. One potential problem, however, is that not all interventions necessarily lend  themselves to permanent products Noell, 2007. The use of behavior-specific praise is one  example for which there would not necessarily be a record of teacher behavior.
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 Estimating Integrity After selecting a method of recording, the next step is to determine how integrity will be  calculated see Table 9.2. When most of us think about treatment integrity, we think about  it as a dichotomous i.e., yes or no questionthat is, we pose the question of whether something was either implemented or not implemented. This is what is commonly referred to  as adherence. One way that we can assess adherence is to calculate the percentage of total  intervention steps that were carried out. Each step of the plan that was identified in operationally defining the intervention could be included in a checklist, with steps checked off  as they are completed. Dividing the percentage of steps successfully completed by the total  Intervention Step Permanent Product Present  YN? Divide classroom into two or more equal teams. List of teams documented. Reset board to collect points for the session. NA Remind students of the GBG rules. NA Begin the interval and remove points from each  team. Documented loss of points on board. Review number of points at the end of the  session and record on data sheet. Total points for each team recorded on data  sheet. Announce winner. NA Administer appropriate reward. Awarded prize recorded on data sheet. FIGURE 9.1.  Example of a permanent product recording sheet for the GBG. TABLE 9.2.  Available Options for Assessing Treatment Integrity What is measured How measured How reported Adherence Was the intervention  implemented yesno?  Percentage of total intervention steps  completed within 1 day  Percentage of days on which each  intervention step was completed Quality of delivery How was the intervention  implemented?  Qualitative rating of how well the  intervention was implemented e.g., 15 scale Participant  responsiveness How engaged were the  participants?  Qualitative rating of how engaged and  responsive participants were e.g., 15 scale

Assessing Intervention Integrity	 191 number of steps would then provide a percentage of treatment integrity for that particular  session. These daily percentages, in turn, could be averaged in order to provide an estimate  of overall treatment integrity. Although understanding the overall level of treatment integrity can be helpful, in some situations we may be more interested in how often particular  intervention components are implemented. In this situation, we might instead calculate a  percentage within components but across days. However, Dane and Schneider 1998 suggested that other dimensions of intervention  implementation may be important to both consider and monitor as well, including the quality of delivery and participant responsiveness. When we talk about the quality of delivery,  we are more interested in how the intervention is implemented than whether the intervention is implemented. Think back, if you will, to your own days in school and remember  your favorite teachers. Chances are that their demeanor was cheerful and that they were  enthusiastic about the subject matter. If you were lucky, their own excitement for learning  was contagious and rubbed off on you in a way that even made learning trigonometry enjoyable. Throughout class, they maintained a perfect Goldilocks pace that was neither too slow  nor too fast. Now imagine substituting one of those teacherswho was full of energy and  enthusiasmwith what we will call a robot teacher. The latter teacher delivers instruction  in a very dry and matter-of-fact way. Rather than looking excited about the material, the  teacher looks fairly bored or maybe even put out by the task. He or she fluctuates between  moving through lessons at a tortoises pace and speeding through explanations such that  everyone is left behind. Even if both of these teachers get through the prescribed lesson by  the end of the class period, who are you likely to learn more from? For most of us, we are  likely to be more engagedand therefore ultimately get more out of instructionwhen  the quality of implementation is high. Simply assessing whether or not the intervention was  delivered therefore misses this important aspect of treatment fidelity. Quality of delivery is  perhaps most easily assessed using a qualitative rating. For example, an observer might be  asked to rate on the quality of delivery on a scale from 1 to 5, where 1 represents delivery  that was choppy, inconsistent, andor unenthusiastic, whereas 5 represents delivery that was  fluid, consistent, and highly enthusiastic. Participant responsiveness is an additional aspect of treatment integrity that is often  ignored. This concept refers to the degree to which those individuals receiving the intervention are engaged in the process. Although we would assume that participant responsiveness would be higher when the quality of implementation is high, it is important to keep in  mind that this is not always necessarily true. Depending on the students mood, health, or  other outside factors, he or she may be distracted and have difficulty attending to the intervention at hand. If a student spent the entire intervention session with eyes closed and head  down on the desk, we would not expect that student to gain much from the intervention even if each component was delivered precisely and with as much enthusiasm as possible!  Similar to quality of delivery, participant responsiveness is best assessed using a qualitative  rating. For example, a student who was totally unengaged in, or resistant to, the intervention  might receive a rating of 1, whereas a student who was enthusiastically participatory might  receive a rating of 5.
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 What Degree of Integrity Is Enough? Do you remember the amazing findings we discussed in Chapter 1 with regard to the  decreases in aggressive behavior seen when the GBG was implemented in the Baltimore  public school system Kellam et al., 1994? After the researchers stopped working with the  school and providing implementation supports, the school began implementing the same  intervention on their own with a variety of students. Unfortunately, the results of those  interventions were not nearly as powerful. The reason? It appears that the lack of support  and coaching was a critical feature lacking in the schools independent implementation. One of the questions that often arises in any discussion of treatment integrity is what  level of integrity is considered sufficient. We can all agree that little to no treatment integrity should be considered a bad thing, whereas high to perfect treatment integrity should  be aimed for. The question, however, is what to do with integrity that is somewhere in  between. In the world of education, we often fall back on the magical value of 80. We  want the reliability of a test to be at or above .80, we want 80 of students to be appropriately served with Tier 1 interventions, and we want to see 80 agreement between two  observers assessing student behavior in the classroom. Often this desirable value of 80 has  been extended to the assessment of treatment integrity as well, with guidelines stating that  80 or greater integrity is necessary in order to judge implementation as sufficient. One of the problems inherent in the assessment of treatment integrity is that simply  establishing one common criterion level is unlikely to work for all situations. One reason  why a universal criterion does not work is because typically all intervention components are  not equally important. Positive effects may still be seen, for example, if the three components judged most critical are implemented perfectly but the teacher struggles to implement  seven of the components that are more minor in nature Pipkin, Vollmer,  Sloman, 2010.  When we talk about critical components, we are referring to those pieces of an intervention that are believed to be necessary in order to bring about a desired outcome Sutcliffe,  Thomas, Stokes, Hinds,  Bangpan, 2015; in other words, the active ingredients. In some  cases, the developers of an intervention may lay out very clearly what they believe the critical components to be. For example, there may be existing research to suggest that omitting  particular pieces of the intervention does not noticeably affect desired outcomes. In other  cases, however, it may be necessary for the user to make his or her best guess regarding  which components are critical, drawing from either the research or personal experience  with the intervention. Using the GBG as an example, the intervention is believed to result in positive behavior  change because students 1 are explicitly taught behavioral expectations, 2 receive contingent feedback regarding their performance, 3 receive reinforcement for meeting established goals, and 4 are motivated by the competitive element of the game. These would,  therefore, be considered the critical components of the intervention. It is possible to add  other components or to make stylistic changes to how those critical components are carried  out; however, these types of changes would not be considered critical i.e., believed to be  primarily responsible for behavior change. For example, a teacher implementing a variation  of the GBG may recognize that the teams are not equal, and work harder to recognize the 

Assessing Intervention Integrity	 193 good behavior of the weaker team in an effort to make sure the members of the team do  not suffer from learned helplessness and decide the game is unwinnable. As long as both  teams receive regular feedback and the opportunity to earn rewards, such a modification  would be fine. Another teacher may start out implementing the GBG using a randomized  reward, but then come to realize that students really find an extra 5 minutes of recess to be  most reinforcing. In this situation, the decision to change the nature of the reward would  not be considered a modification to the critical components. Another reason why establishing a universal criterion for treatment integrity value may  not make sense is because different students may require different levels of integrity. In  examining the effects of treatment integrity on math performance, for example, Noell et al.  2002 found that some students performed well when the intervention was implemented  exactly as planned, whereas other students performed similarly well when integrity was  much lower. Finally, different levels of treatment integrity may be necessary at different  stages of implementation. Higher levels of treatment integrity may be more critical, for  example, when an intervention is first being introduced and students are acquiring skills  than after implementation has been sustained and the focus is on establishing fluency Noell  et al., 2002. This does not mean that we should have severe trepidation that all interventions we  attempt need to be implemented with perfect integrity. Even interventions delivered with  low integrity may have positive outcomes Sanetti  Kratochwill, 2009. This surprising  finding suggests that making small changes in a classroom may still improve the behavior  of students. It should also free us from the fear that only perfectly implemented interventions will improve student outcomes. Rather than allowing the perfect to be the enemy of  the good, we need to keep in mind that something is almost! always better than nothing.  Teachers should therefore be encouraged to put a behavior improvement plan into place for  their classrooms even if they know that perfect implementation is unattainable. However,  interventions that are implemented as intended will likely give the most effective reinforcement that is delivered at an appropriate dose, at the appropriate time, and with the appropriate nuance. The concepts of key components of an intervention reflects the expertise that a teacher  may have in understanding the unique factors of a group of students. Thus, individualizing  the interventions that we recommend in this book may allow a teacher to tailor his or her  approach to best suit each classroom. Of course, once an intervention is designed, it should  be implemented as intended. Within the next section, we discuss strategies that can be used  to help ensure high levels of integrity. STRATEGIES FOR PROMOTING TREATMENT INTEGRITY As important as we know that treatment integrity is, difficulties are nonetheless encountered that lead to low levels of implementation. In fact, in a meta-analysis of treatment  implementation studies, Noell and colleagues 2014 found that the average level of implementation during baseline was only 36! For this reason, a burgeoning area of research 
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 in recent years has focused on the development and evaluation of strategies for promoting  treatment integrity. These strategies can be divided into three phases: those that are used  prior to, during, and after implementation see Coach Card 9.1. Prior to Implementation Even before they are ever brought into a classroom, some interventions are simply more  likely to be implemented than others. In fact, teachers report that qualities of the intervention itself are the most common barriers to successful implementation Long et al., 2016.  Thus, many interventions are likely to fail before they start because their design does not  consider important contextual factors such as feasibility and ease of implementation. It may  therefore be possible to increase the probability of successful implementation early on by  considering some of the following factors. Interventions Should Be Acceptable The first important consideration is that interventions that are deemed acceptable by consumers are more likely to be implemented. Acceptability refers to whether the intervention is fair, reasonable, and intrusive, and whether the treatment meets with conventional  notions about what treatment should be Kazdin, 1980, p. 259. A great deal of empirical  attention was focused on the concept of treatment acceptability in the 1980s, with researchers documenting consumers acceptability of a range of school-based treatments e.g., Martens, Witt, Elliott,  Darveaux, 1985; Witt  Martens, 1983. Interestingly, however, those  studies that have directly examined the relationship between treatment acceptability and  integrity have suggested that there may be little overlap between what individuals say they  will do and what they actually then do Sterling-Turner  Watson, 2002, p. 46. Acceptability should therefore be considered a necessary but not sufficient condition of implementation integrity. Interventions Should Be Feasible A second important consideration is that interventions that are feasible are more likely to be  implemented. The feasibility of an intervention may be influenced by the amount of time it  takes, the level of resources that are needed, or the complexity of the plan. Imagine a plan  that requires you to give a token to every student once a minute. Although the students  would certainly appreciate the dense reinforcement schedule, it would be unreasonable to  expect a teacher to be able to deliver a token to 20 students every minute for individual students, however, it may be necessary to provide more frequent reinforcement. We discuss this  further in Chapter 10. Frequently, when we are developing a classroom management plan,  we make it too difficult. If you intend to revamp your classroom, and you attempt to implement everything in this book at once, it will require too much work. As Happe 1982 put it,  the plan that requires the consultee to become a timer-setting, data-taking, token-counting,  head-patting octopus has a very low probability of implementation and maintenance p. 33.

Assessing Intervention Integrity	 195 Interventions Should Be Contextually Appropriate Interventions also need to work within the specific context of a teachers classroom setting.  If an intervention is fundamentally incompatible with how things are typically done in the  classroom or larger school system, it is much less likely to be implemented with integrity.  A teacher who is already using some form of classwide feedback, for example, will have an  easier time implementing a classwide token economy or the GBG than one who does not. In  a classroom in which independent seatwork is the norm, the teacher may find token independent group contingencies such as token economy systems easy to implement, whereas  a teacher who employs more group activities may find dependent group contingencies and  routines easier to put into place. Interventions Should Be Well Understood When any of us are trying to do something that is new, we first need some level of instruction. Although we can learn about an intervention by reading about it, the research tells us  that we are more likely to implement something well if we receive modeling and practice  i.e., direct training; Sterling-Turner, Watson, Wildmon, Watkins,  Little, 2001. Ideally,  there would be someone in your building who already has experience with the intervention.  In this case, we suggest watching him or her implement the intervention. Many of these  interventions seem easy at first glance, but involve more planning than expected. Watching another teacher put it into place can be a great way to understand how the intervention  should flow Joyce  Showers, 2002. After the intervention has been modeled, you can  then test it out in the context of a role play. In front of an empty classroom, you can practice  the wording and moving around the classroom when implementing a new intervention.  Ideally, a colleague or coach would be available who could give you clear feedback on your  wording and help you recognize what portions of the intervention you need to practice  again. If you need to adapt your intervention after the first test, feel free to do that! When trying something new, it also works much better to have concrete expectations  spelled out. Throughout this book, you will note that we have provided checklists that you  can follow along with suggested language for introducing the intervention. We encourage  you to use these checklists, but ask you to keep in mind that they should not be treated as  perfect documents that must be rigidly followed at all times. Every teacher works in a unique  context, and every classroom has unique features. The checklists may be adapted slightly to  ensure that they work in your context. After all, the best interventions use research-based  practices but make sure that they are appropriately adapted for a local context Berkel, Mauricio, Schoenfelder,  Sandler, 2011; Rogers, 2003. For example, precision commands often  require that teachers get eye contact from the student. There are some students, however,  who may find eye contact to be uncomfortable or culturally inappropriate. If an intervention does not work, identify those components that are problematic compared with those  that are effective, and systematically tweak those portions that are causing problems. When  spelling out the intervention, be sure to consider necessary resources, adjustments needed  to make use of daily routines, the best time to implement the intervention, how much time 
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 is necessary to implement the intervention, and where the best place is to implement the  intervention e.g., hallway, classroom, playground, lunchroom; Long et al., 2016. During Implementation Whereas the suggestions outlined above are designed to help promote treatment integrity  before the intervention is actually put into place, there are also strategies that can be used  to bolster treatment integrity when you are actually in the thick of things. The use of several of these strategies is dependent upon the availability of a partner or coach. There are  four components of effective intervention support: 1 didactic instruction, 2 modeling the  intervention, 3 practicing the intervention, and 4 providing ongoing intervention support  Joyce  Showers, 2002. Put another way, simply telling someone what he or she should  do does not result in behavior change Reinke, Lewis-Palmer,  Merrell, 2008. This book  is designed to provide you with didactic instructioninforming you of what practices are  supported by the research literature. However, putting something into place the first time  requires immediate and frequent feedback, and this is as true for educators as it is for students. Many classroom teachers believe that they should be able to run their classrooms and  implement changes without support from others. However, most teachers report that they  are more likely to put social and behavior supports into place if they have adequate support  from others in the school setting Reinke et al., 2011. Teachers who have support in implementing interventions are more likely to do so with integrity than those who do not Codding, Feinberg, Dunn,  Pace, 2005. This is because a coach is able to provide an objective  assessment of implementation integrity as well as ongoing support to bolster integrity levels. Include a Cueing Procedure As much as we may not want to admit our fallacy, as human beings we sometimes forget  things. We may have seen a student commit a rule infraction and then fail to follow up on  it. Or, we may have intended to remind students about an upcoming deadline but then forgot. Even with the most carefully laid out plan and best of intentions, sometimes we simply  forget to do what needs to be done. Incorporating cueing procedures, however, can help to  reduce the likelihood of that happening. One way to remind yourself of what needs to be done is to use an intermittent prompt.  In the section on reinforcement schedules, we talked about variable interval and fixed interval schedules. These types of schedules can also be used to remind you to make sure you  are doing what you said you would do. A variable interval timer, for example, can be set  to provide a prompt every 35 minutes to deliver tokens you can use the self-monitoring  interventions described in Chapter 7 on yourself!. This can be done using some type of  reminder app on your smartphone or device. Alternatively, visual cues may be used to  remind us of what needs to be done. A treatment integrity checklist, for example, can be a  great visual reminder of the steps that need to be carried out. It is important, however, that  the checklist is kept in a highly visible location that can easily be accessed during the school 

Assessing Intervention Integrity	 197 day. Even the most explicit and easy-to-follow checklist will be of little value if cozily tucked  away under a pile of papers or stored in a desk drawer. Solicit Performance Feedback One of the strategies for promoting treatment integrity that has received the most attention  within the literature is performance feedback. Performance feedback typically involves the  teacher meeting with a coach following intervention implementation in order to discuss  how well the intervention was carried out as well as what effects the intervention may have  had on student behavior Fallon, Collier-Meek, Maggin, Sanetti,  Johnson, 2015. Within  a meta-analysis of studies that examined school-based intervention implementation, Noell  and colleagues 2014 found that simply meeting with a coach in the absence of the review  of actual data was ineffective in promoting integrity. However, notable improvements in  implementer behavior were observed when teachers received explicit performance feedback based on obtained data. In meta-analyzing those studies that specifically examined  the use of performance feedback, Fallon and colleagues 2015 found such an approach to  be an evidence-based intervention and an effective means for improving classroom behavior. Research has suggested that the best type of feedback to receive in these situations is  visual feedback Fallon et al., 2015; Reinke et al., 2007. Visual feedback involves graphing both the degree of implementation integrity e.g., percentage of steps completed as  well as the outcome data e.g., percentage of time on task and sharing these data with the  implementer. This can be achieved by using the implementation checklist that you created in the first place, and then having your partner or coach take note of those steps that  you performed correctly and those you did not. This information can then be graphed and  reviewed on a frequent basis to ensure that implementation remains high over time Joyce   Showers, 2002. Employ SelfMonitoring Although ideally everyone would have a partner or coach available to provide ongoing performance feedback, we know that in reality this is not always feasible. In such a case, it is  possible to solicit performance feedback from oneself through the use of self-monitoring.  As described in Chapter 7, self-monitoring involves the observing and recording of ones  own behavior. As one example, in a study by Simonsen, MacSuga, Fallon, and Sugai 2013,  teachers use of praise was found to improve substantially when they tracked the number  of praise statements made using either a tally sheet or counter. Each day, these data were  then entered into a log and then graphed in order to provide a record of behavior over  time. Plavnick, Ferreri, and Maupin 2010 taught early education teachers to complete an  implementation checklist at least two times each day when carrying out a token economy  system in a special education classroom. Similarly, results suggested notable improvements  in implementation behavior when teachers were taught to self-monitor.
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 After Implementation Even after we have implemented an intervention for a while and feel like we have mastered  it, it is important to remember that we are never immune to drift. Like a car that needs its  oil changed periodically, we can also break down from our previous precision performance  without a checkup. Think of the diet that worked for a while but then you eventually fell off,  or those New Years resolutions that lasted only until the middle of January. One way to prevent a lapse or drift is to have periodic checkups. These checkups should provide you with  several pieces of diagnostic information. First, you want to know if the intervention is being  implemented with the appropriate integrity. Are there particular steps of the intervention  that you are performing consistently, whereas others seem to have been lost? Second, you  want to know if the intervention is still helping to improve student behavior. Has the level  of student improvement remained consistent over time or has there been a gradual decline  over time as students become more accustomed to the intervention? Finally, the checkup  should help to indicate whether the intervention is still necessary. If so, are there small  changes that we should make? If not, are there larger changes that we should make? It is important that these checkup meetings are guided by data rather than gut impressions. Our tendency to use our intuition and emotions for decision making may help us in  some situations, but is much less helpful when making decisions regarding implementation  effectiveness. The truth is that all of us will implement an intervention imperfectly. This in  and of itself is not a problem. The problem occurs if we are unwilling to face that fact and  to make improvements. Regular checkup meetings with a colleague or coach are part of  a continual improvement process whereby we strive to make improvements knowing that  perfection does not exist and will never be reached. Instead, we need to identify good data  and use it to improve our practice the best that we can. CONCLUSIONS As weve discussed within this chapter, treatment integrity is critical to making decisions  regarding intervention effectiveness, particularly within a multi-tiered model of supports.  If an evidence-based intervention is in place but is not having the desired effects, the first  thing to check is the integrity of implementation. When problems with integrity are identified, it is important to determine why these problems are occurring. Is it, for example, an  issue in terms of fundamental understanding of what needs to be done? Or are feasibility  constraints interfering with the ability to carry out essential steps? It is only once an intervention has been implemented at appropriately high levels that teachers can then collect  data on the effects of their intervention to determine whether or not it is effective. Promotion and maintenance of treatment integrity is best achieved when teachers work with a  coach or a partner who is able to provide modeling, troubleshooting, and ongoing performance feedback.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 9.1.    Strategies for Promoting Treatment Integrity Implementation integrity may be bolstered by considering strategies during three  phases. 1.	 Prior to implementation:

 Ensure intervention is acceptable to stakeholders.

 Ensure intervention is sufficiently feasible to be carried out regularly.

 Make needed modifications to ensure contextual appropriateness.

 Ensure intervention procedures are well understood. 2.	 During implementation:

 Utilize a cueing procedure.

 Solicit performance feedback from a colleague or coach.

 Employ self-monitoring. 3.	 After implementation:

 Conduct checkups to ensure adequate implementation integrity.

 Conduct checkups to ensure intervention continues to be effective.

 Conduct checkups to determine whether intervention is still necessary.
Throughout this book, we have discussed a range of strategies and interventions for use at  the universal level to support all students in a classroom. Within the literature, there are  many examples of universal supports being used to successfully address the needs of struggling students in particular. In a study by Ling, Hawkins, and Weber 2011, for example, a  first-grade student was identified as being frequently off task and not completing many of  his assignments. Rather than developing an individualized intervention focused on this one  childs behavior, the team instead decided to implement an interdependent group contingency with the entire class. The teacher had three expectations: 1 be seated on the carpet  with legs crossed, 2 keep hands and feet to yourself, and 3 talk only when its your turn.  If the students were on task when the teacher was prompted to scan the classroom, they  earned a point toward a group prize. Results suggested substantial improvements not only  in the behavior of the target student but in the behavior of the larger classroom as well.  This is one of many examples of a classwide intervention demonstrating positive effects for  both the classroom overall and at-risk students in particular e.g., Fudge et al., 2008; Hoff   Ervin, 2013; Tanol et al., 2010. Unfortunately, however, although empirically validated classwide supports are expected  to meet the behavioral needs of approximately 8085 of the students in a classroom, there  is no one silver-bullet intervention that will effectively address all behavior problems. The  techniques discussed in this book will help to make classrooms work more efficiently and  safely, but there will inevitably be students who continue to display problem behaviors. In  fact, we estimate that one out of every five students will require some level of additional  intervention. Within a multi-tiered system, extra support typically consists of a small-group  intervention that is provided to students with similar behavioral needs. This targeted intervention is designed to complementrather than to replaceclassroom management practices. In this way, those students believed to be at some level of risk effectively receive a  double dose of behavioral support through the 1 universal-level teaching and reinforceCHAPTER 10 Individualizing Intervention

Individualizing Intervention	 201 ment of expected behaviors and 2 receipt of more intensive supports targeted at specific  areas of need. For example, a student who has difficulty interacting appropriately with  peers might experience the generalized benefits of participation in a classwide token economy system focused on promoting appropriate classroom behavior, but would likely need  more explicit social skills instruction outside of the regular classroom in order to effectively  address interpersonal deficits. In order to maintain feasibility when working with a sizable  percentage of students, it is important for targeted interventions to be easy and efficient to  implement across multiple students. For this reason, manualized interventions with explicit  protocols e.g., social skills training, Behavior Education Program are often used. Although  implementation of secondary-level supports is essential to providing all students in a classroom with the appropriate level of support, discussion of these types of interventions is  beyond the scope of this book. Interested readers are therefore referred to other Guilford  Press resources that provide excellent guidance for supporting the behavioral needs of atrisk students, such as Steege and Watson 2009; Crone, Hawken, and Horner 2010; and  Stormont, Reinke, Herman, and Lembke 2012. Within this final chapter, however, we  discuss proactive strategies that may be used to intensify existing classwide interventions  when particular students are not responding before moving to implement more targeted  secondary-level supports. STRATEGIES FOR INTENSIFYING CLASSWIDE INTERVENTIONS Within multi-tiered systems of support, it can be easy to fall into the trap of thinking about  intervention supports in a linear fashionconsulting the appropriate flowchart to determine what the next steps should be when student behavior has proven unresponsive. If  a student continues to struggle after an empirically supported classwide intervention has  been implemented with fidelity, for example, we may automatically assume that it is time to  move on to a more intensive level of secondary support. Ludlow 2014, however, drew an  important analogy between a teachers use of evidence-based practices and a master chefs  use of classic recipes. She argued that just as a celebrity chef may take a standard recipe  and kick it up a notch by adding new seasonings, teachers may also take an intervention to  the next level by simply tweaking some of the ingredients. Within the following section, we  discuss three strategies for intensifying classwide interventions to support those students  with more defined behavioral needs: increasing intervention dosage, altering intervention  delivery, and changing aspects of the environment IRIS Center, 2015. See Coach Card  10.1 for an overview of these strategies to intensify classwide interventions. Strategy 1: Increase Dosage The first strategy we can use when particular students are not responding is to increase the  dosage or quantity of an intervention. Increasing the amount of time that an intervention  is implemented can be incredibly important for struggling students because it provides  them with more time to practice appropriate behaviors and receive specific performance 
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 feedback. Frequency may be altered by increasing the number of minutes per day or days  per week with which an intervention is implemented. If a classwide intervention is being  implemented only during a particular time in the day e.g., morning meeting, for example,  implementation could be extended to additional lessons or activities in order to strengthen  the dosage. One might consider making this change in schedule for the class as a whole,  such that the group contingency or self-management intervention is simply in place for the  entire school day. However, if keeping the intervention in place for everyone throughout  the day proves logistically complicated, another option is to implement the intervention  classwide during the targeted period and then to keep procedures in place only for select  students throughout the remainder of the day. Strategy 2: Alter Intervention Delivery A second way to intensify intervention is by changing the way in which the intervention is  deliveredthat is, it may be possible to better support at-risk students if certain changes  are made to the classwide intervention to enhance individual fit. Thus, changes to the intervention that make it more developmentally appropriate for a particular student, such as  incorporating more explicit instruction, or more frequent and explicit feedback, may help to  reduce problem behaviors National Center on Intensive Intervention, 2014. Enhance Explicit Instruction Over the past several chapters, we have presented many different interventions and strategies; however, the common element across all of these different approaches is that implementation begins with the explicit teaching of behavioral expectations. One approach that  is often used when teaching new skills is called the I do, we do, you do model of instruction. First, the teacher models the task i.e., desired behavior for the students, explaining  what he or she is doing and why. If, for example, an intervention was in place to improve  classroom transitions, the teacher would first demonstrate what appropriate transitioning  behavior should look like e.g., quietly putting away materials, quickly moving to line up by  the door, facing forward and waiting quietly to be released and explain how transitioning  quickly and quietly ultimately means that there is more time available for learning. Next,  the teacher leads the students through guided practice, having the students perform the  task while receiving ongoing feedback to correct any errors. Finally, the students perform  the task independently under the supervision of the teacher. Although most students are able to perform the desired task or behavior after receiving a brief form of this type of instruction, some students require additional scaffolding  to be successful. Explicit instruction can be intensified by providing additional modeling,  increasing the number of opportunities for practice, or improving the quantity or immediacy of behavioral feedback. In order to avoid drawing unnecessary attention to an individual student, the teacher might have the student stay in for a few minutes at lunch or after  school to simulate a classroom transition. Prompts may be used to ensure that the student  remembers what to do. The student could then practice the outlined steps for transitioning 

Individualizing Intervention	 203 until they are fully mastered. If any problems were noted, such as the student running to  line up instead of walking, the teacher could provide corrective feedback and then ask the  student to perform the behavior again. This independent practice could be performed initially under simulated conditions before transitioning into the target setting. Increase the Frequency and Explicitness of Feedback For some students, problems may arise if there is too long of a delay between when the  student performs the behavior and when he or she receives feedback. After all, many of you  learned from the Stanford marshmallow experiments just to jog your memory, students  were offered a second marshmallow if they could avoid eating one marshmallow that was  left in front of them for 15 minutes that some children have difficulty delaying gratification Mischel, Shoda,  Rodriguez, 1989. This inability to wait for reinforcement is often  characteristic of those students who struggle with self-control and impulsive behavior, such  as those with ADHD. Whereas the average student in a classroom may be able to wait until  the end of the day or even week! to receive an earned reward, students with ADHD may  need reinforcement to occur much more frequently. If too much time elapses, the student  may become distracted by other things and lose sight of the goal and reward. Therefore,  providing the student with more frequent, intermittent feedback whether verbal or in the  form of tokens or points than what is delivered to the rest of the class may be necessary in  some cases. Increase the Power of Reinforcement Remember from our discussion in Chapter 2 that there is a difference between a reinforcer  and a rewardeven though we tend to use the terms interchangeably. Rewards are those  things that we believe someone will like, such as a gold star or a homework pass. Although  the majority of students tend to find typical school-based rewards to be desirable, there is  no guarantee that every student will respond in the same way. Reinforcers, on the other  hand, are those things that have actually been shown to change the frequency or magnitude  of a behavior. We know that something is an effective reinforcer if it results in an increase in  the desired behavior. Although not all classwide interventions involve a reward component,  the effectiveness of those that do may be significantly influenced by the attractiveness of  the available rewards. If a student is not sufficiently interested in the selected rewards at  the outset, or loses interest in what is available over time, he or she may be less motivated  to follow behavioral expectations. One of the difficulties that can arise when utilizing group-based rewards is that not  all of the students will likely find the rewards to be equally appealing. Other students may  habituate or grow tired of the reinforcer over time. One approach that addresses these  issues, as previously discussed in Chapter 6, is to randomize the reinforcement component  of the intervention. Rather than identifying a reward that students will work toward earning  at the outset, the reward is instead randomly selected from a pool of possibilities. The idea is  that when there exists the possibility that the randomly selected reward will be something 
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 that an individual student is very motivated to earn, that student is more likely to remain  invested in the intervention Popkin  Skinner, 2003. In contrast to interdependent and dependent group contingency interventions, fewer  reward-related problems tend to arise within a token economy system. This is because  rewards are earned and administered at the individual level. Nevertheless, it is possible  that the rewards originally selected may have changed in value over time. A student may  suddenly decide that he or she no longer likes playing educational games on the computer  or the student may satiate on a particular reward e.g., stickers such that it is no longer  appealing. For this reason, it is important to periodically readminister a reinforcement preference survey to participating students. As briefly discussed in Chapter 5, a reinforcement  preference survey includes a list of possible rewards that are available to the student and  have been approved by the classroom teacher see Table 10.1. Instead of presuming what a  student may find to be desirable, asking the student directly what he or she is interested in  ultimately avoids lost time and energy Cooper, Heron,  Heward, 2007. Typically, the student is asked to either 1 check yes or no to indicate whether he or she would be interested  in a particular reward or 2 rate how desirable he or she perceives the reward to be using a  Likert-type scale e.g., 0  not at all interested, 3  extremely interested. A user-friendly  tool for creating your own reinforcement survey is available through the Intervention Central website at www.interventioncentral.orgteacher-resourcesstudent-rewards-finder.  Another approach to identifying reinforcers is to use a forced-choice approach, whereby  a student is given pairs of reinforcers, and then chooses the one that is most reinforcing. An  example of a forced-choice assessment is available at www.pbis.orgCommonCmsfiles Forum15PresentationsB13Forced-Choice-Reinforcement-Menu.pdf. An example of how both the frequency and potency of rewards may be increased in  order to achieve stronger effects can be seen in a study by Safer, Heaton, and Parker 1981.  When a basic token economy system proved ineffective for a small group of junior high  TABLE 10.1.  Ideas for a Reinforcement Preference Survey Objects Responsibilities Activities Privileges Allowed to select  materials first Be line leader Draw on chalk whiteboard Eat special lunch  with teacher Keep a favorite toy on  desk Be teachers helper  for a day Extra computer time Receive a  no-homework pass Receive stickers Design class bulletin  board Free time at the end  of the day Receive positive call  home Select a prize from the  prize box Help in younger  classroom Go to library to get a  book Sit in special chair Wear a special badge Take note to main  office Leave to go to lunch recess early

Individualizing Intervention	 205 school students who had received multiple office referrals and suspensions for problem  behavior, intervention intensity was increased in order to meet their individual needs. Students could earn points every 15 minutes for engaging in appropriate behavior and completing their work, and if at least 90 of the possible points were earned within a day, the  student was able to earn an early release from school. In addition, students were also able  to earn privileges at home for having a good week at school. Students who participated in  this point system performed significantly better on a number of behavioral indicators e.g.,  expulsions, disciplinary issues than peers in a control group. Change the Role of the Interventionist Finally, it may be necessary to change the role of the interventionist. Although the primary  teacher typically maintains responsibility for implementation of a classwide behavioral  intervention, this individual may be spread too thin to provide additional instruction and  feedback to select students. In this case, it could be helpful to recruit a classroom aide or  paraprofessional to provide supplemental supports. Strategy 3: Change Aspects of the Environment A third option for intensifying intervention is to change aspects of the environment. By  environment, we mean those factors independent of the intervention itself that may have an  effect on student behavior. Context is incredibly important to consider when implementing  any intervention. Even if a well-supported plan is implemented precisely as intended, intervention effectiveness may be impeded by a number of environmental factors. Alter the Difficulty of the Task If a behavioral intervention is being implemented during academic instruction, one of the  first things to consider is whether behavior problems are the result of academic frustration. Several studies have investigated the interaction between assignment difficulty and  off-task behavior Burns  Dean, 2005; Gickling  Armstrong, 1978; Treptow, Burns,   McComas, 2007, and have identified significantly more off-task behavior when assignments were too difficult for students. For example, when Gickling and Armstrong 1978  worked with a group of first graders, they varied the difficulty of the tasks that the students  were asked to complete. When the task was too difficult for the students, the rate of off-task  behavior increased as did the number of disruptions. When the work was too easy, there  was also an increase in off-task behavior. It was only when the work was just at the right  level of challenge did the students off-task levels decrease. Finding this sweet spot is  not easy for a large group of students; however, particular students may benefit from slight  adaptations to their work whereby additional easy or difficult problems are added. For  some students, interspersing easier problems can help to promote a sense of self-efficacy,  meaning students may actually do more work with the addition of more problems Hulac   Benson, 2011.
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 Identify Competing Sources of Reinforcement In some cases, a student may not respond to an intervention as hoped despite the availability of preferred rewards. One possible explanation is that the reinforcement that the  student is already receiving for engaging in the problem behavior is more powerful than the  rewards being provided. The question that we must ask ourselves is whether it is worth it to  the student to give up engaging in the problem behavior in order to get what we are offering.  For example, consider a student, Omar, whose problem behavior involves turning around in  his seat and talking to classmates at inappropriate times. The classroom group contingency  intervention rewards students with 10 minutes of free time at the end of the day for meeting  the expectations of facing forward, sitting quietly, and taking notes. Although Omar likes  having the free time at the end of the day to talk with his friends, at present he is able to  talk to his friends throughout the entire day. As such, the free-time reward that will occur  later is not powerful enough to convince Omar that sitting quietly during the lecture now  is worth the wait. One way to reduce competing sources of reinforcement may therefore be to change  a students seat. Most often we think about moving a students seat away from peers who  are providing desired attention. This is probably a good time to talk about how David got  in trouble in Spanish class during the 12th grade. He was working in a small group while  his friend was working in another group across the room. Both David and his friend made  several off-task comments loudly enough for the other to hear, which only served to trigger a similar response though they were speaking Spanish, so it couldnt have been that  bad, could it?. The teacher responded by making it impossible for them to shout across the  room to each otherand instead having them work by themselves at a table separated from  everybody else. In this case, the teacher changed the environment by moving the students  closer to each other, so as to avoid disrupting the rest of the classroom. There are other ways to alter the classroom environment. These may include the use  of study carrels for students who need to complete work or increasing the amount of space  between students while they are working. Other teachers have used techniques whereby  the seating chart and the orientation of the seats have been changed suddenly if there are  broader classroom disruptions. Finally, many students benefit from the use of sound amplification whereby the teachers voice is broadcast via a microphone through speakers in the  ceiling. These systems have the benefit of allowing the teacher to be heard without using  a strained voice. There is some limited evidence to suggest that they may reduce off-task  behaviors for children with attention difficulties Cornwell  Evans, 2001. INCORPORATING ADDITIONAL INTERVENTION  COMPONENTS TO INTENSIFY CLASSWIDE SUPPORTS The strategies described above can be used to modify aspects of a classwide intervention  to better support the needs of struggling students see Box 10.1 for a case example. For 

Individualizing Intervention	 207 example, incorporating additional explicit instruction or increasing the amount of time  that the intervention is implemented may benefit not only an individual target student, but  the larger class as well. However, other strategies require that substantial modifications  be made for individual students see Coach Card 10.2. Making changes to the potency or  frequency of rewards, for example, is not a modification that would likely be made for the  entire class but rather one that would be applied to select students see Box 10.2 for a case  example. If there is only one student in a classroom for whom individualized intensification  of classwide supports is needed, it may be feasible for the classroom teacher to make these  modifications without significantly depleting classroom resources. However, as the number  of students with more intensive needs increases, the teachers ability to provide the appropriate level of support for each student can become challenging. For this reason, it may be  helpful to consider extending responsibility for implementation to other stakeholders. Specifically, implementation supports may be provided by an external interventionist, parent,  or guardian, or even the student himor herself. BOX 10.1.  Case Example: Making Classwide Modifications  to Intensify Intervention Delivery Mrs. Washington began implementing a tootling intervention last month in an effort to  improve the quality of interactions among her students on the playground. Students were  encouraged to look for instances in which their classmates were being kind or helpful during  recess, and to let Mrs. Washington know by submitting a tootle card. Each tootle card asked  the student to identify 1 who was observed doing something good, 2 what that person did,  and 3 for whom they did it. When the students returned from lunch, Mrs. Washington would  count up all of the tootles, read them aloud, and record the total number submitted on a  chart at the front of the room. The class was informed that they would receive an extra recess  period once they had reached a total of 100 tootles. Although Mrs. Washington has generally been impressed by the increased levels of prosocial behavior on the playground after a few weeks of implementation, there continues to  be interpersonal concerns in the classroom among a small group of girls. Specifically, she  has overheard name-calling and observed one of the students excluding particular classmates during small-group work. She decides to make a couple of modifications in order to  intensify intervention delivery. The first modification is to increase the dosage of the intervention. Because interpersonal problems are no longer confined to unstructured periods, Mrs.  Washington decides to extend implementation to the classroom as wellthat is, students  can now submit tootles whenever they observe prosocial behavior throughout the day. The  second modification is to increase the frequency of behavioral feedback. Rather than waiting  until the end of the day to read and count up all of the tootles, Mrs. Washington chose to  review them at two times each day: once before lunch and once before dismissal. She hoped  that having a midday review would both reinforce students for their appropriate behavior  and prompt those students who hadnt delivered as many tootles to be on the lookout in the  afternoon.
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 Option 1: Add a SelfMonitoring Component One of the first options that may be considered when individualized supports are needed  is to assign the target student increased responsibility for intervention implementation. As  described in Chapter 7, shifting responsibility for the assessment of behavior to the student  is what is referred to as self-monitoring. Typically, the student is provided with a monitoring  card and taught to self-assess his or her behavior. By asking the student to more deliberately reflect on his or her own behavior in this way, self-monitoring is believed to lead to  more enduring behavioral change. Although both token economies and group contingencies  have been shown to be highly effective in improving student behavior, one potential disadvantage is that the classroom teacher maintains sole responsibility for the assessment of  student behavior. Additionally, with interventions such as interdependent group contingencies, the student may not even receive needed feedback with regard to his or her individual  performance. Adding a self-monitoring component to an existing classwide intervention  may therefore provide the additional individualized support needed to bolster intervention  effects. BOX 10.2.  Case Example: Intensifying Classwide Supports   to Meet Individual Needs Jennifer is a 12-year-old student who frequently disrupts classes by cussing and yelling out  things like This is stupid! and When are we ever going to use this? Although Jennifer is  clearly the most disruptive, there are also several other students in the class who routinely  talk out of turn and engage their classmates in side conversations. The teacher and behavior  specialist therefore decide to implement the Good Behavior Game GBG classwide. All teams  begin each day with 10 points and point deductions are made if any member of the team disrupts classroom instruction by calling out, engaging in conversations unrelated to instruction,  or getting out of his or her seat without permission. At the end of the day, any team that still  has at least 7 points will be allowed to have free time on the computer for the last 15 minutes  before dismissal. After 1 week of implementation, the teacher and behavior specialist meet to discuss  how the intervention has been going. The teacher is very concerned about the fact that Jennifer has been ruining the game for everyone by acting out and causing the rest of her  team to lose points. The behavior specialist therefore suggests that they keep the existing  teams intact but put Jennifer on her own team so that she does not lose points for the other  students. After making this modification, Jennifers acting-out behavior quickly subsides, and  by the second day she has already earned computer time to herself. Although the teacher  and behavior specialist are very encouraged by this turnaround in Jennifers behavior, their  ultimate goal is for Jennifer to rejoin a team and participate in the intervention as the rest of  the class does. They therefore agree to a modification whereby Jennifer can choose whether  she wants to work for 15 minutes of computer time while being on a team or whether she  wants to remain on her own and work for only 5 minutes of computer time at the end of the  day. Jennifer decides that the 15 minutes sounds like a much better option and rejoins her  previous GBG team for the third week of implementation.

Individualizing Intervention	 209 As highlighted in Chapter 7, there are many ways in which self-management components may be implemented; however, three basic requirements should be met. First, the  student should be provided with a personalized monitoring form that lists the classwide  expectations and provides space for assessing how well each was met. Individualized expectations may also be added to the form if necessary; however, the total number of behaviors  should be kept small i.e., three to seven to ensure that proper monitoring can occur. Second, it is necessary to establish a schedule for conducting ratings. When implementing a  group contingency, it is most efficient to have the student rate his or her own behavior each  time that the teacher assesses the behavior of the larger group or class e.g., according to a  variable interval schedule. The teacher could therefore give the target student a discreet  prompt, such as a tap on the shoulder, to signal when it is time to self-assess. When implementing a token economy, however, in which reinforcers are distributed in a more continuous fashion, it may be necessary to establish an independent schedule for self-monitoring.  This may entail the student conducting independent ratings at predetermined intervals  or at the end of an instructional period see Chapter 7 for further discussion of options for  conducting ratings. Third, the classroom teacher must determine how and when he or she  will discuss self-ratings with the student. Debrief meetings with the student can be used  to 1 provide the student with feedback regarding the accuracy of ratings or level of performance, 2 administer applicable rewards, andor 3 discuss how to ensure maintenance  of a desired level of performance or what changes may be necessary in order to improve  future performance. An example of a self-monitoring card that could be used to supplement  classwide supports is provided in Figure 10.1. One example of how a self-management component may be added to an existing classwide intervention is provided by Wills et al. 2010. The Class-Wide Function-related Intervention Teams CW-FIT program is conceptualized as a Tier 2 classwide intervention,  which incorporates elements of both a group contingency and self-management intervention. First, explicit teaching is used to ensure that students know how to appropriately gain  the attention of the teacher, follow directions, and ignore peers engaging in inappropriate behaviors Kamps, Conklin,  Wills, 2015. Second, students are divided into small  teams. If all team members are observed engaging in the target behaviors when a timer  sounds every 23 minutes, the teacher awards a point to the team. Points can then be  exchanged for rewards at the end of the class period. For those students who do not demonstrate response to the CW-FIT intervention, a self-management component may also be  addedthat is, select students may be given more individualized instruction regarding  the behavioral expectations and then provided with a recording sheet. Each time that the  buzzer sounds, these students could mark a point on their sheet if they were meeting all  expectations. Points would then be exchanged in the same manner as they were for the class  at large. Option 2: Introduce an External Interventionist A second way in which to support individualization is to recruit implementation support  from outside of the classroom. If changes are needed in order to increase the intensity of 
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 intervention delivery, introducing an external interventionist can help to facilitate provision  of a more targeted level of support. Providing intervention supports outside of the classroom  may also help to avoid drawing unnecessary attention to the student. For example, if the  classroom teacher needed to provide the student with feedback much more frequently than  to his or her typical peers, this not only draws attention to the student but may also interfere  with the delivery of instruction. One popular example of a targeted intervention that incorporates an external interventionist is Check-In, Check-Out CICO; Crone et al., 2010. CICO was designed for use  within schools that have adopted an SWPBIS model and have effective Tier 1 supports in  place, including the teaching and systematic reinforcement of schoolwide behavioral expectations. Each participating student begins his or her day by meeting i.e., check-in with  a central CICO coordinator, who reminds the student of the behavioral expectations and  provides him or her with a Daily Progress Report DPR. Throughout the day, the DPR is  completed by the students teachers, who rate the degree to which the student met the  expectations. At the end of the day, the student then returns the DPR to the CICO coordinator, who reviews the ratings and provides performance feedback. If the student meets his  or her overall goal for the day e.g., 2027 points, the coordinator praises the student and  may provide him or her with a small reward. Interested readers are referred to Crone et al.  2010, which provides a detailed description of how CICO may be implemented. Name:  Asher	 Expectations:  Respect your neighbors space by keeping your hands and feet to yourself 	  Work on assignments without talking to neighbors	  Raise your hand to ask a question or obtain help	 Goal for today:  Earn 12 of 18 total points	 Time of Day How Well Did I . . . ? Rating  0  not at all, 1  somewhat,  2  moderately, 3  very well Morning Meeting Respect my neighbors space? 0 1 2 3 Work quietly?  0 1 2 3 Raise my hand to ask a question? 0 1 2 3 Literacy Respect my neighbors space?  0 1 2 3 Work quietly?  0 1 2 3 Raise my hand to ask a question? 0 1 2 3 Comments: FIGURE 10.1.  Self-monitoring form for classwide token economy.

Individualizing Intervention	 211 If we think about the classwide interventions that were described in Chapters 57, there  are several ways in which we might think about incorporating an external interventionist.  In the case of a token economy, the interventionist could review the classroom expectations  with the student at the start of the day and establish a goal for how many tokens he or she  will earn. The classroom teacher could then use a monitoring sheet to record the number  of tokens the student earned during different blocks of the day see Figure 10.2. At the end  of the day, the interventionist would then meet with the student to review the token data  and provide a special reward if the predetermined goal was met. One of the key potential  advantages of such a model is that it is possible to flexibly determine how often the students  data will be reviewed and rewards administered. For example, whereas some students may  respond to the chance to exchange tokens for a reward once at the end of each week, this  may be too long of a wait for other students. Shifting responsibility for rewards to the interventionist therefore allows the schedule of reinforcement to be tailored to the students  needs. FIGURE 10.2.  Individual monitoring form for classwide token economy. Name:  Benjamin	 Expectations:  Keep your eyes on the teacherlesson	  Raise your hand to be called on	  Stay seated	 Goal for today:  Earn 10 tokens throughout the day	 Time of Day Tokens  Earned Teacher Comments Morning Meeting Literacy Snack Math Language Arts Lunch ScienceSocial Studies Specials
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 As we discussed in Chapter 6, perhaps the most commonly used group contingency  is the interdependent group contingency. From a feasibility perspective, one of the main  advantages is that behavior is both monitored and reinforced at the grouprather than the  individuallevel. At the same time, however, one potential concern is that at-risk students  may not receive the level or frequency of feedback that they require. Additionally, although  we hope that group contingencies will invoke a motivating yet gentle level of peer pressure,  there is the potential for students to experience a diffusion of responsibility. By this we  mean that some students may feel less personal responsibility for behaving appropriately,  and exert less effort, knowing that whether or not they receive a reward is contingent on  factors outside of their control. To address these concerns, it may be possible to add an additional independent group contingency for select students that is managed by the external  interventionist. In order to avoid unnecessary complication, it would be important to align  the independent group contingency with the existing classwide expectations. The teacher  would therefore keep two separate but parallel records of behavior: one public record for  the class or teams and one more discreet record for the target student in particular see  Figure 10.3. The interventionist could then be provided with the individual student data  at the end of the day and supplemental, individually administered rewards delivered if the  goal or criterion was met. An interventionist could also be used to support implementation of a self-management  intervention. If all students in the classroom are simultaneously assessing their own behavior, it may become challenging for the teacher to provide feedback to individual students.  This is why many classwide self-management interventions incorporate group contingency  FIGURE 10.3.  Teacher monitoring form for managing multiple contingencies. Name:  Eleanor	 Expectations:  Use kind words	  Keep your hands and feet to yourself	  Listen when someone else is talking	 Time of Day Class Rule  Violations Student Rule  Violations Teacher Comments Morning Meeting

Difficulty keeping her hands to herself on the  carpet Literacy

Math

Talking to friends during lesson Language Arts ScienceSocial Studies

Grabbing science materials from classmates

Individualizing Intervention	 213 components see Chapter 7. One solution would be for the student to complete a selfmonitoring card during the class period and then bring the card to review during a meeting with the interventionist outside of the classroom. The interventionist can then provide  the student with more individualized feedback regarding his or her performance and even  administer rewards if appropriate. There are several reasons why incorporating an external interventionist may be beneficial. First, the interventionist can help to intensify intervention efforts by allowing you  to change aspects of the environment, increase the intervention dosage, and alter aspects  of intervention delivery, all at the same time. By meeting with the student outside of the  regular classroom and away from his or her classmates, instruction can be tailored to the  students needs. The student can also receive feedback more frequently, or in greater detail,  than is typical within the general classroom. Second, an interventionist can prompt and  reinforce the classroom expectations. Although it is important for the classroom teacher to  briefly review the behavioral expectations with the entire class on a regular basis, some  students may require more in-depth, and therefore time-intensive, review. The student  could therefore meet with the interventionist at the start of the day in order to review and even practicethe expectations, thereby setting the student up for greater success  from the start. Additionally, providing the student with performance feedback both within  and outside of the classroom can reinforce expectations, thereby promoting generalization  of skills. Finally, it can be easier to incorporate rewards that the student finds to be more  motivating if reinforcement is provided outside of the general classroom. After all, the  rewards that a particular student finds desirable may be more elaborate or intensive than  the rewards the rest of the class receives. One can only imagine the resentment that might  take place if the classroom teacher gives one student a big reward and the rest of the class  a smaller reward! One of the concerns that may arise when considering use of an external interventionist  relates to resources. When thinking about who in the school building would most naturally  fall into the role, we often default to someone who already works in a guidance capacity perhaps a school counselor or social worker. As we have seen in the literature, however,  an effective interventionist does not need an advanced degree or specialized credentials.  Instead, the individual must be able to connect with studentsboth effectively and consistently. By effectively, we mean that the individual should be someone who students enjoy  interacting with and look forward to seeing each day Crone et al., 2010. Just as adults  are more likely to accept constructive criticism from a respected supervisor, students are  much more likely to engage in the intervention process if they like the person responsible  for delivery. By consistently, we mean that it is critical that the interventionists schedule  accommodates meeting with the students every day. This consistency ensures that students receive regular feedback and establish a trusting relationship. As long as these basic  conditions are met, there are many different individuals who might be asked to serve in this  capacity. Paraprofessionals can be useful to serve in this role if their schedules permit sufficient flexibility. Alternatively, the school librarian, main office staff, or a specials teacher  may prove to be an effective interventionist. The key is to think openly as to who might have  both the personality and the flexibility to take on this task.
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 Option 3: Incorporate a HomeBased Component The two options we have discussed thus far involve recruiting help from either within i.e.,  self-monitoring or outside i.e., using an external interventionist of the classroom; however,  both components are carried out entirely within the regular school day. A third option for  intensification extends the scope of the intervention beyond school borders and incorporates the childs home. One successful example of a targeted intervention for which home  involvement serves as a key component is the Daily Report Card DRC; Volpe  Fabiano,  2013. Within a DRC intervention, students are rated throughout the school day on their  performance on a small number of individualized target behaviors. Although the classroom  teacher meets with the student periodically throughout the day to review DRC ratings  and provide performance feedback e.g., praise when students meet performance goals,  constructive feedback when goals are not met, the students parent or guardian maintains  primary responsibility for the delivery of reinforcementthat is, the DRC is sent home  at the end of the day for parents or guardians to review with their child, and rewards are  administered if performance goals were met during the school day. Interested readers are  referred to Volpe and Fabiano 2013, which provides a detailed description of how the DRC  may be implemented. A home-based component may be added to any of the interventions discussed in Chapters 57 by establishing a reliable system for sharing information across school and home  settings. When implementing a classwide token economy system or other group contingency, individual monitoring forms such as the ones shown in Figures 10.2 and 10.3 could  be used to document progress throughout the day and then sent home for the family to  review. Similarly, if a classwide self-management system is in place, the teacher could send  the student home with a self-monitoring form after reviewing the data at the end of the  day. To promote two-way communication, parents could also be provided with space on the  data sheet to comment on the students behavior at home or note any upcoming changes in  routineschedule that may impact the students behavior. Incorporating a home-based component may increase the effectiveness of a classwide  intervention for several reasons. First, implementing a home-based component increases  the degree of communication and collaboration between home and school. All too often,  the communication received by the families of those students demonstrating behavioral  problems is in one direction and negative in naturethat is, these families tend to hear  from school only when things have gone wrong and their input is not always solicited. In  contrast, when teachers and families communicate bidirectionally, sharing both successes  and challenges, they are able to work together to support student behavior. Many benefits  of effective homeschool partnerships have been noted within the literature, with regard to  both performance in school and beyond Reschly  Christenson, 2009. Second, involving families in intervention implementation can serve to support generalization across settings. When parents review behavioral expectations and provide reinforcement for achieved goals, this communicates to their children that the target behaviors are  also valued at home. Additionally, families may consider extending the rating of behavior to  the home setting as well see Figure 10.4 for an example of a homeschool rating form. In 

Individualizing Intervention	 215 this way, the student receives consistent behavioral feedback throughout all aspects of his  or her day. Third, families may be able to provide more powerful rewards for appropriate behavior  than can feasibly be provided in the school setting. If a student is not sufficiently motivated  by the available rewards, he or she may be less interested in the intervention. Because a  wider variety of rewards can be provided in the home setting than at school, there is a better  chance that the student will find available rewards motivating. Home-based rewards can  be classified as edible, tangible, activity, or social reinforcers see Table 10.2. Examples of  edible rewards delivered at home include a special after-school snack or getting to have ice  cream after dinner. Tangible rewards are objects that the child earns, such as a special toy  or game. Activity rewards that are unique to the home setting include being able to go on a  hike or bike ride, or being able to stay up late. Finally, home-based social reinforcers would  include playing a game with a parent, getting to chat on Skype with a friend, or having a  sleepover. FIGURE 10.4.  Example homeschool monitoring form for classwide token economy. Name:  Gus	 Expectations:  Be respectful of your classmatessiblings	  Be responsible for your belongings	  Start working without reminders	 Goal for today:  Earn three tokens during each time period	 Time of Day Tokens Earned TeacherParent Comments School Morning Afternoon Home After school Comments: TABLE 10.2.  Examples of Home-Based Reinforcers Edible reinforcers Tangible reinforcers Activity reinforcers Social reinforcers  After-school snack  After-dinner  dessert  Going out for ice  cream  Access to special  toys  Board games  Toys  Extended bedtime  Free time on the  computer  Going for a hike bike ride  Chatting on Skype  Having a friend  sleep over  Playing a game  with a parent
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS	 MATCHING THE RIGOR OF ASSESSMENT   TO THE RIGOR OF INTERVENTION One of the critical ideas when talking about multi-tiered systems of support is that there is  an increase in the intensity of both intervention and corresponding assessment as one moves  across tiers. As we discussed in Chapter 8, assessment is critically important to understanding whether or not the intervention was actually effective. Even though evidence-based  interventions are identified based upon documentation of their effectiveness in the research  literature, this does not mean that they will work for every student in every possible situation. Of the behavioral assessment measures available, we advocate for the use of either systematic direct observation e.g., frequency count, PLA-Check or teacher rating-based tools  e.g., DBR, performance-based behavioral recordings in order to monitor the progress of  individual students in response to intervention see Chapter 8 for a detailed discussion of  these methods. These data need to be collected only on a periodic basis e.g., once a month  when monitoring the effectiveness of a classwide intervention; however, as the intensity of  our efforts increase, so, too, should the intensity of our assessment. Therefore, when more  targeted, individualized supports are being put into place for one or more students, it may  be necessary to increase the frequency of monitoring from once a month to every other  week or even weekly. As we discussed in Chapter 8, it is important to collect outcome data across both baseline and intervention phases. When considering the introduction of individualized modifications, however, the question may arise of what constitutes baseline and intervention. Up  until this point, data have typically been collected only at the aggregate i.e., classwide level  and therefore a true baseline i.e., in the absence of any intervention estimate of behavior  for an individual student is not available. In this case, the students performance while the  standard classwide intervention is in place should be considered to represent the baseline phasethat is, individual-level data should be collected for the target student prior to  implementing any modifications. A phase-change line can then be drawn when any individualized changes are made to the intervention, such as adding a self-monitoring, coaching, or home-based component see Box 10.3 for a case example. CONCLUSIONS Throughout this book, we have presented a number of strategies and interventions that can  be used to promote appropriate student behavior. Although the use of these strategies is  supported by the research literature, even the best evidence-based interventions are not  expected to work for everyone. In other words, these interventions make classrooms better, but not perfect. There will always be students who continue to display behavior strugglesno matter what classwide supports we provide. When our initial efforts to implement  classwide supports do prove insufficient for one or more students, we often jump to considering available small-group interventions that can provide the students with more targeted 

Individualizing Intervention	 217 supports. What we have tried to make clear in this chapter, however, is the fact that there is  an often-overlooked step that can come between the provision of universal and secondarylevel behavioral supportsthat is, intensifying an existing classwide intervention may provide struggling students with the necessary level of support while also maintaining a higher  level of feasibility. Depending on the students needs, intensification may be achieved by  either changing aspects of the classwide intervention or incorporating additional components to provide individualized supports. BOX 10.3.  Case Example:   Evaluating the Effectiveness of Individualized Modifications Mr. Cohen has been implementing a classwide token economy system for the past month and  using daily DBR data to monitor the effectiveness of the intervention in reducing disruptive  behavior. Although results have been promising for the large majority of the classroom, Judy  continues to disrupt classroom instruction by getting out of her chair to talk to her friends.  After talking with the schools behavior specialist, Mr. Cohen decides to introduce a selfmonitoring component for Judy. At the end of each instructional block, Judy will be instructed  to assess how well she has 1 stayed in her seat, 2 faced the front of the room, 3 listened  quietly to instruction, and 4 taken notes. In order to obtain a baseline level of performance,  Mr. Cohen continues to complete the classwide DBR each day but then also completes a DBR  for Judy more specifically. After collecting these data for a week and finding that Judys level  of disruptive behavior was fairly stable over time, Mr. Cohen meets with Judy to introduce the  self-monitoring procedures. A phase line is drawn after the self-monitoring intervention is  implemented and Mr. Cohen continues to complete the individualized DBR on a daily basis.  The behavior specialist and Mr. Cohen decide to implement the intervention and collect outcome data for 3 weeks before they meet again to evaluate whether and how Judys behavior  has changed. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Disruptive Behavior DBR Day Classwide Token Economy TE  Self-Monitoring
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 10.1.    Intensifying Classwide Intervention When looking to intensify an existing classwide intervention, consider the following  options: 1.	 Increase dosage.

 Number of minutes in the day

 Number of days in the week 2.	 Alter intervention delivery.

 Provide more explicit instruction.

 Increase frequency andor explicitness of performance feedback.

 Consider whether rewards are adequately motivating.

 Recruit additional interventionists. 3.	 Change aspects of the environment.

 Ensure academic work is appropriately challenging.

 Work to reduce competing sources of reinforcement.
From Evidence-Based Strategies for Effective Classroom Management by David M. Hulac and Amy M. Briesch. Copyright   2017 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or  use with students see copyright page for details. Purchasers can download additional copies of this material see the box  at the end of the table of contents. COACH CARD 10.2.  Making Individualized  Modifications to a Classwide Intervention Individualized modifications may be made to classwide interventions when a more  intensive level of support is needed. 1.	 Add a self-monitoring component.

 Determine how the student will monitor how well he or she met classroom  expectations.

 Establish schedule for self-monitoring.

 Determine howwhen ratings will be discussed with the student. 2.	 Use an external interventionist.

 Have interventionist review teacher ratings with the student.

 Have interventionist manage an independent group contingency for the  student.

 Have interventionist review self-ratings with the student.

 Recruit additional interventionists. 3.	 Incorporate a home-based component.

 Establish reliable system for sharing information across home and school.

 Consider whether student behavior will also be rated in the home setting.

 Identify home-based rewards that are sufficiently motivating.
Abramowitz, A. J., OLeary, S. G.,  Futtersak, M. W. 1988. The relative impact of long and short  reprimands on childrens off-task behavior in the classroom. Behavior Therapy, 192, 243247. Abramowitz, A. J., OLeary, S. G.,  Rosn, L. A. 1987. Reducing off-task behavior in the classroom: A comparison of encouragement and reprimands. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 15, 153163. Acker, M. M.,  OLeary, S. G. 1987. Effects of reprimands and praise on appropriate behavior in  the classroom. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 15, 549557. Allday, R. A., Hinkson-Lee, K., Hudson, T., Neilsen-Gatti, S., Kleinke, A.,  Russel, C. S. 2012.  Training general educators to increase behavior-specific praise: Effects on students with EBD.  Behavioral Disorders, 37, 8798. Aloe, A., Amo, L.,  Shanahan, M. 2014. Classroom management self-efficacy and burnout: A multivariate meta-analysis. Educational Psychology Review, 261, 101126. Amato-Zech, N. A., Hoff, K. E.,  Doepke, K. J. 2006. Increasing on-task behavior in the classroom: Extension of self-monitoring strategies. Psychology in the Schools, 43, 211221. Ardoin, S. P., Martens, B. K.,  Wolfe, L. A. 1999. Using high probability instruction sequences  with fading to increase student compliance during transitions. Journal of Applied Behavior  Analysis, 32, 339351. Arlin, M. 1979. Teacher transitions can disrupt time flow in classrooms. American Educational  Research Journal, 161, 4256. Armendariz, F.,  Umbreit, J. 1999. Using active responding to reduce disruptive behavior in a  general education classroom. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 1, 152158. Axelrod, M. I.,  Zank, A. J. 2012. Increasing classroom compliance: Using a high-probability command sequence with noncompliant students. Journal of Behavioral Education, 212, 119133. Axelrod, S. 1973. Comparison of individual and group contingencies in two special classes. Behavior Therapy, 4, 8390. Axelrod, S., Hall, R. V.,  Tams, A. 1979. Comparison of two common classroom seating arrangements. Academic Therapy, 15, 2936. Baer, R., Ascione, F.,  Casto, G. 1977. Relative efficacy of two token economy procedures for  decreasing the disruptive classroom behavior of retarded children. Journal of Abnormal Child  Psychology, 52, 135145. References
References	 Ballard, K. D.,  Glynn, T. 1975. Behavioral self-management in story writing with elementary  school children. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 8, 387398. Barrish, H. H., Saunders, M.,  Wolf, M. M. 1969. Good Behavior Game: Effects of individual  contingencies for group consequences on disruptive behavior in a classroom. Journal of Applied  Behavior Analysis, 2, 119124. Barry, L. M.,  Messer, J. J. 2003. A practical application of self-management for students diagnosed with attention-deficithyperactivity disorder. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions,  5, 238248. Baskin, T. W., Slaten, C. D., Sorenson, C., Glover-Russell, J.,  Merson, D. N. 2010. Does youth  psychotherapy improve academically related outcomes?: A meta-analysis. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 573, 290. Beaman, R.,  Wheldall, K. 2000. Teachers use of approval and disapproval in the classroom.  Educational Psychology, 20, 431446. Becker, W. C., Madsen, C. H., Arnold, C. R.,  Thomas, D. R. 1967. The contingent use of teacher  attention and praise in reducing classroom behavior problems. Journal of Special Education,  1, 287307. Bennett, N.,  Blundell, D. 1983. Quantity and quality of work in rows and classroom groups.  Educational Psychology, 3, 93105. Berkel, C., Mauricio, A. M., Schoenfelder, E.,  Sandler, I. N. 2011. Putting the pieces together: An  integrated model of program implementation. Prevention Science, 12, 2333. Birnbrauer, J. S., Wolf, M. M., Kidder, J. D.,  Tague, C. E. 1965. Classroom behavior of retarded  pupils with token reinforcement. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 2, 219235. Blankenship, T.,  Bender, W. N. 2007, Winter. Widely used disciplinary options for aggressive  kids: Are the current approaches effective? Journal of the American Academy of Special Education Professionals, 533. Blaze, J. T., Olmi, D. J., Mercer, S. H., Dufrene, B. A.,  Tingstrom, D. H. 2014. Loud versus quiet  praise: A direct behavioral comparison in secondary classrooms. Journal of School Psychology,  52, 349360. Blondin, C., Skinner, C., Parkhurst, J., Wood, A.,  Snyder, J. 2012: Enhancing on-task behavior  in fourth-grade students using a modified Color Wheel system. Journal of Applied School Psychology, 28, 3758. Boegli, R. G.,  Wasik, B. H. 1978. Use of the token economy system to intervene on a school-wide  level. Psychology in the Schools, 15, 7278. Bohn, C. M., Roehrig, A. D.,  Pressley, M. 2004. The first days of school in the classrooms of two  more effective and four less effective primary-grades teachers. Elementary School Journal,  104, 269287. Bowers, F. E., McGinnis, C., Ervin, R. A.,  Friman, P. C. 1999. Merging research and practice:  The example of positive peer reporting applied to social rejection. Education and Treatment of  Children, 22, 218226. Bradshaw, C. P., Mitchell, M. M.,  Leaf, P. J. 2010. Examining the effects of schoolwide positive  behavioral interventions and supports on student outcomes. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 12, 133148. Brantley, D. C.,  Webster, R. E. 1993. Use of an independent group contingency management  system in a regular classroom setting. Psychology in the Schools, 30, 6066. Breyer, N. L.,  Allen, G. J. 1975. Effects of implementing a token economy on teacher attending  behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 8, 373380. Briesch, A. M.,  Briesch, J. M. 2016. A meta-analysis of behavioral self-management interventions  in single-case research. School Psychology Review, 45, 318. Briesch, A. M.,  Chafouleas, S. M. 2009. Defining behavioral self-management: A review and  analysis of the literature 19882008. School Psychology Quarterly, 24, 106118.

References	 223 Briesch, A. M., Hemphill, E. M.,  Daniels, B. 2013. Check your SLANT: Adapting self-management  for use as a class-wide intervention. School Psychology Forum, 72, 2939. Broden, M., Bruce, C., Mitchell, M. A., Carter, V.,  Hall, R. V. 1970. Effects of teacher attention  on attending behavior of two boys at adjacent desks. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 3,  205211. Broden, M., Hall, R. V., Dunlap, A.,  Clark, R. 1970. Effects of teacher attention and a token  reinforcement system in a junior high school special education class. Exceptional Children, 36,  341349. Brophy, J. 1981. Teacher praise: A functional analysis. Review of Education Research, 51, 532. Brossart, D. F., Parker, R. I., Olson, E. A.,  Mahadevan, L. 2006. The relationship between visual  analysis and five statistical analyses in a simple A-B single-case research design. Behavior Modification, 30, 531563. Bruhn, A., McDaniel, S.,  Kreigh, C. 2015. Self-monitoring interventions for students with behavior problems: A systematic review of current research. Behavioral Disorders, 40, 102121. Brulle, A. R.,  Repp, A. C. 1984. An investigation of the accuracy of momentary time sampling  procedures with time series data. British Journal of Psychology, 75, 481485. Brunsma, D. L.,  Rockquemore, K. A. 1998. Effects of student uniforms on attendance, behavior  problems, substance use, and academic achievement. Journal of Educational Research, 921,  5362. Burns, M. K.,  Dean, V. J. 2005. Effect of acquisition rates on off-task behavior with children  identified as having learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 284, 273281. Burns, M. K.,  Ysseldyke, J. E. 2008. Reported prevalence of evidence-based instructional practices in special education. Journal of Special Education, 43, 311. Busacca, M. L., Anderson, A.,  Moore, D. W. 2015. Self-management for primary school students  demonstrating problem behavior in regular classrooms: Evidence review of single-case design  research. Journal of Behavioral Education, 24, 373401. Campbell, S.,  Skinner, C. H. 2004. Combining explicit timing with an interdependent group  contingency program to decrease transition times: An investigation of the Timely Transitions  Game. Journal of Applied School Psychology, 20, 1127. Cancio, E.,  Johnson, J. W. 2007. Level systems revisited: An important tool for educating students with emotional and behavioral disorders. International Journal of Behavioral Consultation and Therapy, 3, 512527. Carnine, D. W. 1976. Effects of two teacher-presentation rates on off-task behavior, answering correctly, and participation. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 92, 199206. Carnine, D. 1997. Bridging the research-to-practice gap. Exceptional Children, 634, 513521. Cavanaugh, R. A., Heward, W. L.,  Donelson, F. 1996. Effects of response cards during lesson  closure on the academic performance of secondary students in an earth science course. Journal  of Applied Behavior Analysis, 29, 403406. Chafouleas, S. M., Briesch, A. M., Riley-Tillman, T. C., Christ, T. J., Black, A. C.,  Kilgus, S. P.  2010. An investigation of the generalizability and dependability of Direct Behavior Rating  Single Item Scales DBR-SIS to measure academic engagement and disruptive behavior of  middle school students. Journal of School Psychology, 483, 219246. Chafouleas, S. M., Hagermoser Sanetti, L. M., Jaffery, R.,  Fallon, L. M. 2012. An evaluation  of a classwide intervention package involving self-management and a group contingency on  classroom behavior of middle school students. Journal of Behavioral Education, 211, 3457. Chafouleas, S. M., Riley-Tillman, T. C.,  Sugai, G. 2007. School-based behavioral assessment:  Informing intervention and instruction. New York: Guilford Press. Chalk, K.,  Bizo, L. A. 2004. Specific praise improves on-task behaviour and numeracy enjoyment: A study of year four pupils engaged in the numeracy hour. Educational Psychology in  Practice, 204, 335351.
References	 Choate, S. M., Skinner, C. H., Fearrington, J., Kohler, B.,  Skolits, G. 2007. Extending the external validity of the Color Wheel procedures: Decreasing out-of-seat behavior in an intact rural  first-grade classroom. Journal of Evidence-Based Practices for Schools, 8, 120133. Cihak, D. F., Kirk, E. R.,  Boon, R. T. 2009. Effects of classwide positive peer tootling to reduce  the disruptive classroom behaviors of elementary students with and without disabilities. Journal of Behavioral Education, 18, 267278. Codding, R. S., Feinberg, A. B., Dunn, E. K.,  Pace, G. M. 2005. Effects of immediate performance feedback on implementation of behavior support plans. Journal of Applied Behavior  Analysis, 382, 205219. Cohen, J. 1988. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences 2nd ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Colvin, G., Sugai, G., Good, R. H., III,  Lee, Y. 1997. Using active supervision and precorrection to improve transition behaviors in an elementary school. School Psychology Quarterly, 12,  344363. Connell, M. C., Carta, J. J.,  Baer, D. M. 1993. Programming generalization of in-class transition  skills: Teaching preschoolers with developmental delays to self-assess and recruit contingent  teacher praise. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 26, 345352. Connell, M. C., Carta, J. J., Lutz, S., Randall, C., Wilson, J.,  Lamb, D. R. 1993. Building independence during in-class transitions: Teaching in-class transition skills to preschoolers with  developmental delays through choral-response-based self-assessment and contingent praise.  Education and Treatment of Children, 16, 160174. Conyers, C., Miltenberger, R., Maki, A., Barenz, R., Jurgens, M., Sailer, A., et al. 2004. A comparison of response cost and differential reinforcement of other behavior to reduce disruptive  behavior in a preschool classroom. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 37, 411415. Cook, B. G.,  Odom, S. L. 2013. Evidence-based practices and implementation science in special  education. Exceptional Children, 792, 135144. Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E.,  Heward, W. L. 2007. Applied behavior analysis. Upper Saddle  River, NJ: Pearson. Cornwell, S.,  Evans, C. J. 2001. The effects of sound-field amplification on attending behaviours.  Journal of Speech Language Pathology and Audiology, 253, 135144. Cothran, D. J., Kulinna, P. H.,  Garrahy, D. A. 2009. Attributions for and consequences of student  misbehavior. Physical Education and Sport Pedagogy, 14, 155167. Council for Exceptional Children. 2014. Council for Exceptional Children standards for evidencebased practices in special education. Arlington, VA: Author. Crone, D. A., Hawken, L. S.,  Horner, R. H. 2010. Responding to problem behavior in schools:  The Behavior Education Program 2nd ed. New York: Guilford Press. Dane, A. V.,  Schneider, B. H. 1998. Program integrity in primary and early secondary prevention: Are implementation effects out of control? Clinical Psychology Review, 18, 2345. Dart, E. H., Radley, K. C., Battaglia, A. A., Dadakhodjaeva, K., Bates, K. E.,  Wright, S. J. 2016.  The classroom password: A class-wide intervention to increase academic engagement. Psychology in the Schools, 534, 416431. Dart, E. H., Radley, K. C., Briesch, A. M., Furlow, C. M.,  Cavell, H. 2016. Assessing the accuracy  of classwide direct observation methods: Two analyses utilizing simulated and naturalistic data.  Behavioral Disorders, 413, 148160. Davies, S.,  Witte, R. 2000. Self-management and peer-monitoring within a group contingency to  decrease uncontrolled verbalizations of children with attention-deficit-hyperactivity disorder.  Psychology in the Schools, 37, 135147. De Martini-Scully, D., Bray, M. A.,  Kehle, T. J. 2000. A packaged intervention to reduce disruptive behaviors in general education students. Psychology in the Schools, 372, 149156. De Pry, R. L.,  Sugai, G. 2002. The effect of active supervision and pre-correction on minor 

References	 225 behavioral incidents in a sixth grade general education classroom. Journal of Behavioral Education, 11, 255267. Delquadri, J., Greenwood, C. R., Whorton, D., Carta, J. J.,  Hall, R. V. 1986. Classwide peer  tutoring. Exceptional Children, 52, 535542. Denune, H., Hawkins, R., Donovan, L., McCoy, D., Hall, L.,  Moeder, A. 2015. Combining selfmonitoring and an interdependent group contingency to improve the behavior of sixth graders  with EBD. Psychology in the Schools, 52, 562577. Dolan, L. J., Kellam, S. G., Brown, C. H., Werthamer-Larsson, L., Rebok, G. W., Mayer, L. S., et al.  1993. The short-term impact of two classroom-based preventive interventions on aggressive  and shy behaviors and poor achievement. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 14,  317345. Donaldson, J. M., Vollmer, T. R., Krous, T., Downs, S.,  Berard, K. P. 2011. An evaluation of the  Good Behavior Game in kindergarten classrooms. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 443,  605609. Drabman, R., Spitalnik, R.,  Spitalnik, K. 1974. Sociometric and disruptive behavior as a function  of four types of token reinforcement programs. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 7, 93101. Drege, P.,  Beare, P. L. 1991. The effect of a token reinforcement system with a time-out backup  consequence on the classroom behavior of EBD students. British Columbia Journal of Special  Education, 15, 3946. Dunlap, G., Clarke, S., Jackson, M., Wright, S., Ramos, E.,  Brinson, S. 1995. Self-monitoring  of classroom behaviors with students exhibiting emotional and behavioral challenges. School  Psychology Quarterly, 10, 165177. DuPaul, G. J., Eckert, T. L.,  Vilardo, B. 2012. The effects of school-based interventions for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: A meta-analysis 19962010. School Psychology Review,  414, 387412. Edwards, L., Salant, V., Howard, V. F., Brougher, J.,  McLaughlin, T. F. 1995. Effectiveness of  self-management on attentional behavior and reading comprehension for children with attention deficit disorder. Child and Family Behavior Therapy, 17, 117. Elliott, S. N., Turco, T. L.,  Gresham, F. M. 1987. Consumers and clients pretreatment acceptability ratings of classroom group contingencies. Journal of School Psychology, 252, 145153. Elwell, W. C.,  Tiberio, J. 1994. Teacher praise: What students want. Journal of Instructional  Psychology, 21, 322329. Embry, D. D. 2002. The Good Behavior Game: A best practice candidate as a universal behavioral  vaccine. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 5, 273297. Emmer. E. T. 1984. Classroom management: Research and implications. Austin, TX: Research and  Development Center for Teacher Education. Emmer, E. T., Evertson, C. M.,  Anderson, L. M. 1980. Effective classroom management at the  beginning of the school year. Elementary School Journal, 80, 219231. Epstein, M., Atkins, M., Cullinan, D., Kutash, K.,  Weaver, R. 2008. Reducing behavior problems  in the elementary school classroom: A practice guide NCEE 2008-012. Washington, DC:  National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved from http:ies.ed.govnceewwcpublications practiceguides. Ervin, R. A., Miller, P. M.,  Friman, P. C. 1996. Feed the hungry bee: Using positive peer reports  to improve the social interactions and acceptance of a socially rejected girl in a residential  placement. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 29, 251253. Everston, C. M.,  Emmer, E. T. 1982. Effective management at the beginning of the school year  in junior high classes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 744, 485. Every Student Succeeds Act. 2015. Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015, Pub. L. No. 114-95  114  Stat. 1177 20152016.
References	 Fabiano, G. A., Pelham, W. E., Jr., Gnagy, E. M.,  Burrows-MacLean, L. 2007. The single and  combined effects of multiple intensities of behavior modification and methylphenidate for children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in a classroom setting. School Psychology  Review, 362, 195. Fallon, L. M., Collier-Meek, M. A., Maggin, D. M., Sanetti, L. M.,  Johnson, A. H. 2015. Is performance feedback for educators an evidence-based practice?: A systematic review and evaluation based on single-case research. Exceptional Children, 812, 227246. Filcheck, H. A., McNeil, C. B., Greco, L. A.,  Bernard, R. S. 2004. Using a whole-class token  economy and coaching of teacher skills in a preschool classroom to manage disruptive behavior.  Psychology in the Schools, 41, 351361. Finkelhor, D., Turner, H., Ormrod, R.,  Hamby, S. L. 2009. Violence, abuse, and crime exposure  in a national sample of children and youth. Pediatrics, 1245, 14111423. Fishbein, J. E.,  Wasik, B. H. 1981. Effect of the Good Behavior Game on disruptive library  behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 14, 8993. Fixsen, D. L., Naoom, S. F., Blase, K. A., Friedman, R. M.,  Wallace, F. 2005. Implementation  research: A synthesis of the literature FMHI Publication 231. Tampa: University of South  Florida, Louis de la Parte Florida Mental Health Institute, National Implementation Research  Network. Floress, M. T.,  Jenkins, L. N. 2015. A preliminary investigation of kindergarten teachers use of  praise in general education classrooms. Preventing School Failure, 59, 253262. Forehand, R., Gardner, H.,  Roberts, M. W. 1978. Maternal response to child compliance and  noncompliance: Some normative data. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 7, 121124. Foster, S. L., Laverty-Finch, C., Gizzo, D. P.,  Osantowski, J. 1999. Practical issues in selfobservation. Psychological Assessment, 11, 426438. Freedman, D. H. 2012. The perfected self. The Atlantic, 3095, 4253. Fry, P. S. 1983. Process measures of problem and non-problem childrens classroom behaviour: The  influence of teacher behaviour variables. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 53, 7988. Fudge, D. L., Skinner, C. H., Williams, J. L., Cowden, D., Clark, J.,  Bliss, S. L. 2008. Increasing  on-task behavior in every student in a second-grade classroom during transitions: Validating  the Color Wheel system. Journal of School Psychology, 46, 575592. Fullerton, E. K., Conroy, M. A.,  Correa, V. I. 2009. Early childhood teachers use of specific  praise statements with young children at risk for behavioral disorders. Behavioral Disorders,  34, 118135. Gable, R. A., Hester, P. H., Rock, M. L.,  Hughes, K. G. 2009. Back to basics rules: Praise, ignoring, and reprimands revisited. Intervention in School and Clinic, 444, 195205. Gansle, K. A.,  McMahon, C. M. 1997. Component integrity of teacher intervention management behavior using a student self-monitoring treatment: An experimental analysis. Journal of  Behavioral Education, 7, 405419. George, C. L. 2010. Effects of response cards on performance and participation in social studies  for middle school students with emotional and behavioral disorders. Behavioral Disorders, 35,  200213. Gickling, E. E.,  Armstrong, D. L. 1978. Levels of instructional difficulty as related to on-task  behavior, task completion, and comprehension. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 11, 559566. Glynn, E. L.,  Thomas, J. D. 1974. Effect of cueing on self-control of classroom behavior. Journal  of Applied Behavior Analysis, 72, 299306. Glynn, E. L., Thomas, J. D.,  Shee, S. M. 1973. Behavioral self-control of on-task behavior in an  elementary classroom. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 61, 105113. Godfrey, S. A., Grisham-Brown, J., Schuster, J. W.,  Hemmeter, M. L. 2003. The effects of three  techniques on student participation with preschool children with attending problems. Education and Treatment of Children, 26, 255272.

References	 227 Gottman, J. M.,  McFall, R. M. 1972. Self-monitoring effects in a program for potential high  school dropouts: A time series analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 39,  273281. Greenberg, J., Putnam, H.,  Walsh, K. 2014. Training our future teachers: Classroom management. Retrieved from www.nctq.orgdmsViewFutureTeachersClassroomManagement NCTQReport. Greenwood, C. R., Hops, H., Delquadri, J.,  Guild, J. 1974. Group contingencies for group consequences in classroom management: A further analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis,  73, 413425. Greenwood, C. R., Horton, B. T.,  Utley, C. A. 2002. Academic engagement: Current perspectives  on research and practice. School Psychology Review, 31, 328349. Gresham, F. M. 2009. Evolution of the treatment integrity concept: Current status and future  directions. School Psychology Review, 38, 533540. Gresham, F. M., Gansle, K. A., Noell, G. H., Cohen, S.,  Rosenblum, S. 1993. Treatment integrity  of school-based behavioral intervention studies: 19801990. School Psychology Review, 222,  254272. Gresham, F. M.,  Gresham, G. N. 1982. Interdependent, dependent, and independent group  contingencies for controlling disruptive behavior. Journal of Special Education, 16, 101110. Grieger, T., Kaufman, J. M.,  Grieger, R. 1976. Effects of peer reporting on cooperative play and  aggression of kindergarten children. Journal of School Psychology, 14, 307313. Gross, A. M.,  Wojnilower, D. A. 1984. Self-directed behavior change in children: Is it selfdirected? Behavior Therapy, 155, 501514. Guttmann, J. 1982. Pupils, teachers and parents causal attributions for problem behavior at school.  Journal of Educational Research, 761, 1421. Hall, R. V., Lund, D.,  Jackson, D. 1968. Effects of teacher attention on study behavior. Journal of  Applied Behavior Analysis, 1, 112. Hallahan, D. P.,  Lloyd, J. W. 1987. Use of self-monitoring of attention with LD students: Research  and application. Learning Disability Quarterly, 102, 139151. Hansen, S. D.,  LignugarisKraft, B. 2005. Effects of a dependent group contingency on the verbal interactions of middle school students with emotional disturbance. Behavioral Disorders,  302, 170184. Happe, D. 1982. Behavioral intervention: It doesnt do any good in your briefcase. In J. Grimes  Ed., Psychological approaches to problems of children and adolescents pp.  1541. Des  Moines: Iowa Department of Public Instruction. Harris, K. R. 1986. Self-monitoring of attentional behavior vs. self-monitoring of productivity:  Effects on on-task behavior and academic response rate among learning disabled children.  Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 194, 417423. Harris, K. R., Friedlander, B. D., Saddler, B., Firzzelle, R.,  Graham, S. 2005. Self-monitoring  of attention versus self-monitoring of academic performance. Journal of Special Education, 39,  145156. Harris, K. R., Graham, S., Reid, R., McElroy, K.,  Hamby, R. S. 1994. Self-monitoring of attention  versus self-monitoring of performance: Replication and cross-task comparison studies. Learning Disability Quarterly, 17, 121139. Hastings, N.,  Schweiso, J. 1995. Tasks and tables: The effects of seating arrangements on task  engagement in primary classrooms. Educational Research, 37, 279291. Hattie, J. 2008. Visible learning: A synthesis of over 800 meta-analyses relating to achievement.  New York: Routledge. Hattie, J.,  Timperley, H. 2007. The power of feedback. Review of Educational Research, 77,  81112. Hawkins, R. O., Haydon, T., Denune, H., Larkin, W.,  Fite, N. 2015. Improving the transition 
References	 behavior of high school students with emotional behavioral disorders using a randomized interdependent group contingency. School Psychology Review, 44, 208223. Hawkins, S. M.,  Heflin, L. J. 2011. Increasing secondary teachers behavior-specific praise using  a video self-modeling and visual performance feedback intervention. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 132, 97108. Haydon, T., Conroy, M. A., Scott, T. M., Sindelar, P. T., Barber, B. R.,  Orlando, A.-M. 2010. A  comparison of three types of opportunities to respond on student academic and social behaviors. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 181, 2740. Heck, A., Collins, J.,  Peterson, L. 2001. Decreasing childrens risk taking on the playground.  Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 34, 349352. Heering, P. W.,  Wilder, D. A. 2006. The use of dependent group contingencies to increase ontask behavior in two general education classrooms. Education and Treatment of Children, 29,  459468. Heller, M.,  White, M. 1975. Rates of teacher approval and disapproval to higher and lower ability  classes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 67, 796800. Herrnstein, R. J. 1961. Relative and absolute strength of response as a function of frequency of  reinforcement. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 4, 267272. Hester, P. P., Baltodano, H. M., Hendrickson, J. M., Tonelson, S. W., Conroy, M. A.,  Gable, R. A.  2004. Lessons learned from research on early intervention: What teachers can do to prevent  childrens behavior problems. Preventing School Failure, 491, 510. Hoff, K. E.,  DuPaul, G. J. 1998. Reducing disruptive behavior in general education classrooms:  The use of self-management strategies. School Psychology Review, 27, 290303. Hoff, K. E.,  Ervin, R. A. 2013. Extending self-management strategies: The use of a classwide  approach. Psychology in the Schools, 502, 151164. Holland, M. L., Malmberg, J.,  Gimpel Peacock, G. 2017. Emotional and behavioral problems of  young children: Effective interventions in the preschool and kindergarten years 2nd ed. New  York: Guilford Press. Hollo, A.,  Hirn, R. G. 2015. Teacher and student behaviors in the contexts of grade-level and  instructional grouping. Preventing School Failure, 59, 3039. Horner, R. H., Sugai, G., Smolkowski, K., Eber, L., Nakasato, J., Todd, A. W., et al. 2009. A randomized, wait-list controlled effectiveness trial assessing school-wide positive behavior support  in elementary schools. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 113, 133144. Hosp, J. L., Howell, K. W.,  Hosp, M. K. 2003. Characteristics of behavior rating scales: Implications for practice in assessment and behavioral support. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 5, 201208. Hughes, D. C. 1973. An experimental investigation of the effects of pupil responding and teacher  reacting on pupil achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 10, 2137. Hulac, D. M.,  Benson, N. 2010. The use of group contingencies for preventing and managing  disruptive behaviors. Intervention in School and Clinic, 454, 257262. Hulac, D. M.,  Benson, N. 2011. Getting students to work smarter and harder: Decreasing off-task  behavior through interspersal techniques. School Psychology Forum, 51, 2936. Hulac, D., Benson, N., Nesmith, M. C.,  Shervey, S. W. 2016. Using variable interval reinforcement schedules to support students in the classroom: An introduction with illustrative examples. Journal of Educational Research and Practice, 61, 9096. IRIS Center. 2015. Intensive intervention Part 1: Using data-based individualization to intensify  instruction. Retrieved from http:iris.peabody.vanderbilt.edumoduledbi1. Iwata, B. A.,  Bailey, J. S. 1974. Reward versus cost token systems: An analysis of the effects on  students and teacher. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 7, 567576. Iwata, B. A., Pace, G. M., Kissel, R. C., Nau, P. A.,  Farber, J. M. 1990. Self-Injury Trauma SIT 

References	 229 Scale: A method for identifying surface tissue damage caused by self-injurious behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 23, 99110. Jenkins, L. N., Floress, M. T.,  Reinke, W. 2015. Rates and types of teacher praise: A review and  future directions. Psychology in the Schools, 525, 463476. Johnson, M. R., Turner, P. F.,  Konarski, E. A. 1978. The Good Behavior Game: A systematic replication in two unruly transitional classrooms. Education and Treatment of Children, 1, 2533. Johnson-Gros, K. N., Lyons, E. A.,  Griffin, J. R. 2008. Active supervision: An intervention to  reduce high school tardiness. Education and Treatment of Children, 311, 3953. Jones, K. M., Young, M. M.,  Friman, P. C. 2000. Increasing peer praise of socially rejected delinquent youth: Effects on cooperation and acceptance. School Psychology Quarterly, 15, 3039. Jones, M., Boon, R. T., Fore, C.,  Bender, W. N. 2008. Our Mystery Hero!: A group contingency  intervention for reducing verbally disrespectful behaviors. Learning Disabilities, 15, 6169. Jones, R. R., Weinrott, M. R.,  Vaught, R. S. 1978. Effects of serial dependency on the agreement  between visual and statistical interference. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 11, 277283. Joyce, B.,  Showers, B. 2002. Student achievement through staff development 3rd ed. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Kalis, T. M., Vannest, K. J.,  Parker, R. 2007. Praise counts: Using self-monitoring to increase  effective teaching practices. Preventing School Failure: Alternative Education for Children and  Youth, 513, 2027. Kamps, D., Conklin, C.,  Wills, H. 2015. Use of self-management with the CW-FIT group contingency program. Education and Treatment of Children, 38, 132. Kanfer, F. H. 1970. Self-monitoring: Methodological considerations and clinical applications. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 35, 148152. Kartub, D. T., Taylor-Greene, S., March, R. E.,  Horner, R. H. 2000. Reducing hallway noise: A  systems approach. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 2, 179182. Kazdin, A. E. 1980. Acceptability of alternative treatments for deviant child behavior. Journal of  Applied Behavior Analysis, 13, 259273. Kellam, S. G., Rebok, G. W., Ialongo, N.,  Mayer, L. S. 1994. The course and malleability of  aggressive behavior from early first grade into middle school: Results of a developmental  epidemiologically-based preventive trial. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 352,  259281. Kellam, S. G., Wang, W., Mackenzie, A. C. L., Brown, C. H., Ompad, D. C., Or, F., et al. 2014.  The impact of the Good Behavior Game, a universal classroom-based preventive intervention  in first and second grades, on high-risk sexual behaviors and srug abuse and dependence disorders into young adulthood. Prevention Science, 15Suppl. 1, 618. Kelshaw-Levering, K., Sterling-Turner, H. E., Henry, J. R.,  Skinner, C. H. 2000. Randomized  interdependent group contingencies: Group reinforcement with a twist. Psychology in the  Schools, 37, 523533. Kena, G., Musu-Gillette, L., Robinson, J., Wang, X., Rathbun, A., Zhang, J., et al. 2015. The condition of education 2015 NCES 2015-144. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education,  National Center for Education Statistics. Retrieved from http:nces.ed.govpubsearch. Killu, K., Sainato, D. M., Davis, C. A., Ospelt, H.,  Paul, J. N. 1998. Effects of high-probability  request sequences on preschoolers compliance and disruptive behavior. Journal of Behavioral  Education, 8, 347368. Kirk, E. R., Becker, J. A., Skinner, C. H., Fearrington, J. Y., McCane-Bowling, S. J., Amburn, C.,  et al. 2010. Decreasing inappropriate vocalizations using classwide group contingencies and  Color Wheel procedures: A component analysis. Psychology in the Schools, 47, 931943. Kleinman, K. E.,  Saigh, P. A. 2011. The effects of the Good Behavior Game on the conduct of  regular education New York City high school students. Behavior Modification, 35, 95105.
References	 Klimas, A.,  McLaughlin, T. F. 2007. The effects of a token economy system to improve social and  academic behavior with a rural primary aged child with disabilities. International Journal of  Special Education, 22, 7277. Kounin, J. S. 1970. Discipline and group management in classrooms. New York: Holt, Rinehart   Winston. Kowalewicz, E. A.,  Coffee, G. 2014. Mystery Motivator: A Tier 1 classroom behavioral intervention. School Psychology Quarterly, 29, 138156. Krasch, D.,  Carter, D. R. 2009. Monitoring classroom behavior in early childhood: Using group  observation data to make decisions. Early Childhood Education Journal, 36, 475482. Kratochwill, T. R., Hitchcock, J., Horner, R. H., Levin, J. R., Odom, S. L., Rindskopf, D. M., et al.  2010. What Works Clearinghouse: Single-case design technical documentation Version 1.0.  Retrieved from http:ies.ed.govnceewwcpdfwwcscd.pdf. Kratochwill, T. R.,  Levin, J. R. 2014. Single-case intervention research: Methodological and  statistical advances. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Kritchevsky, S.,  Prescott, E. 1969. Planning environments for young children: Physical space.  Washington DC: National Association for the Education of Young Children. Lambert, A. M., Tingstrom, D. H., Sterling, H. E., Dufrene, B. A.,  Lynne, S. 2015. Effects of tootling on classwide disruptive and appropriate behavior of upper-elementary students. Behavior  Modification, 393, 413430. Lambert, M. C., Cartledge, G., Heward, W. L.,  Lo, Y. 2006. Effects of response cards on disruptive behavior and academic responding during math lessons by fourth-grade urban students.  Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 8, 8899. Lane, K. L., Menzies, H. M., Ennis, R. P.,  Bezdek, J. 2013. School-wide systems to promote positive behaviors and facilitate instruction. Journal of Curriculum and Instruction, 7, 631. Lane, K. L., Wehby, J. H., Robertson, E. J.,  Rogers, L. A. 2007. How do different types of high  school students respond to schoolwide positive behavior support programs?: Characteristics  and responsiveness of teacher-identified students. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 151, 320. Lannie, A. L.,  McCurdy, B. L. 2007. Preventing disruptive behavior in the urban classroom:  Effects of the Good Behavior Game on student and teacher behavior. Education and Treatment  of Children, 30, 8598. Lee, D. L. 2005. Increasing compliance: A quantitative synthesis of applied research on highprobability requests. Exceptionality, 13, 141154. Lee, S., Simpson, R. L.,  Shogren, K. A. 2007. Effects and implications of self-management for  students with autism: A meta-analysis. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities,  22, 213. Levendoski, L. S.,  Cartledge, G. 2000. Self-monitoring for elementary school children with  serious emotional disturbances: Classroom applications for increased academic responding.  Behavioral Disorders, 25, 211224. Lewis, T. J., Colvin, G.,  Sugai, G. 2000. The effects of precorrection and active supervision on  the recess behavior of elementary students. Education and Treatment of Children, 23, 109121. Ling, S., Hawkins, R. O.,  Weber, D. 2011. Effects of a classwide interdependent group contingency designed to improve the behavior of an at-risk student. Journal of Behavioral Education,  20, 103116. Litow, L.,  Pumroy, D. K. 1975. A brief review of classroom group-oriented contingencies. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 8, 341347. Little, S. G., Akin-Little, A.,  ONeill, K. 2015. Group contingency interventions with children19802010: A meta-analysis. Behavior Modification, 392, 322341. Lloyd, J. W., Bateman, D. F., Landrum, T. J.,  Hallahan, D. P. 1989. Self-recording of attention  versus productivity. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 22, 315323.

References	 231 Lloyd, M. E.,  Hilliard, A. M. 1989. Accuracy of self-recording as a function of repeated experience with different self-control contingencies. Child and Family Behavior Therapy, 11, 114. Long, A. C. J., Sanetti, L. M. H., Collier-Meek, M. A., Gallucci, J., Altschaefl, M.,  Kratochwill, T.  R. 2016. An exploratory investigation of teachers intervention planning and perceived implementation barriers. Journal of School Psychology, 55, 126. Ludlow, B. 2014. Intensifying intervention: Kicking it up a notch. Teaching Exceptional Children,  4, 4. Lutzker, J. R.,  White-Blackburn, G. 1979. The Good Behavior Game: Increasing work performance in a rehabilitation setting. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 12, 488. Maag, J. W. 2001. Rewarded by punishment: Reflections on the disuse of positive reinforcement in  schools. Exceptional Children, 672, 173186. Maag, J. W., Reid, R.,  DiGangi, S. A. 1993. Differential effects of self-monitoring attention, accuracy, and productivity. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 26, 329344. Maag, J. W., Rutherford, R. B.,  DiGangi, S. A. 1992. Effects of self-monitoring and contingent  reinforcement on on-task behavior and academic productivity of learning-disabled students: A  social validation study. Psychology in the Schools, 29, 157172. Mackay, S., McLaughlin, T. F., Weber, K.,  Derby, K. M. 2001. The use of precision requests  to decrease noncompliance in the home and neighborhood: A case study. Child and Family  Behavior Therapy, 23, 4150. Madaus, M. R., Kehle, T. J., Madaus, J.,  Bray, M. A. 2003. Mystery Motivator as an intervention  to  promote homework completion and accuracy. School Psychology International, 24,  369377. Madsen, C. H., Becker, W. C.,  Thomas, D. R. 1968. Rules, praise, and ignoring: Elements of  elementary classroom control. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 12, 139150. Maggin, D. M., Johnson, A. H., Chafouleas, S. M., Ruberto, L. M.,  Berggren, M. 2012. A systematic evidence review of school-based group contingency interventions for students with  challenging behavior. Journal of School Psychology, 50, 625654. Mahar, M. T., Murphy, S. K., Rowe, D. A., Golden, J., Shields, A. T.,  Raedeke, T. D. 2006. Effects  of a classroom-based program on physical activity and on-task behavior. Medicine and Science  in Sports and Exercise, 38, 20862094. Maheady, L., Michielli-Pendl, J., Mallette, B.,  Harper, G. F. 2002. A collaborative research project to improve the academic performance of a diverse sixth grade science class. Teacher Education and Special Education, 251, 5570. Main, G. C.,  Munro, B. C. 1977. A token reinforcement program in a public junior high school.  Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 10, 9394. Martens, B. K., Witt, J. C., Elliott, S. N.,  Darveaux, D. X. 1985. Teacher judgments concerning  the acceptability of school-based interventions. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 16, 191198. Mastropieri, M. A., Jenne, T.,  Scruggs, T. E. 1988. A level system for managing problem behaviors in a high school resource program. Behavioral Disorders, 13, 202208. Mavropoulou, S.,  Padeliadu, S. 2002. Teachers causal attributions for behavior problems in relation to perception of control. Educational Psychology, 22, 191202. Mayer, M. J.,  Leone, P. E. 1999. A structural analysis of school violence and disruption: Implications for creating safer schools. Education and Treatment of Children, 22, 333356. McCurdy, B. L., Lannie, A. L.,  Barnabas, E. 2009. Reducing disruptive behavior in an urban  school cafeteria: An extension of the Good Behavior Game. Journal of School Psychology, 471,  3954. McFall, R. M. 1970. Effects of self-monitoring on normal smoking behavior. Journal of Consulting  and Clinical Psychology, 35, 135142. McGoey, K. E.,  DuPaul, G. J. 2000. Token reinforcement and response cost procedures: Reduc232	 References	 ing the disruptive behavior of preschool children with attention-deficithyperactivity disorder.  School Psychology Quarterly, 15, 330343. McHugh, M. B., Tingstrom, D. H., Radley, K. C., Barry, C. T.,  Walker, K. M. 2016. Effects of  tootling on classwide and individual disruptive and academically engaged behavior of lowerelementary students. Behavioral Interventions, 314, 332354. McKissick, C., Hawkins, R. O., Lentz, F. E., Hailley, J.,  McGuire, S. 2010. Randomizing multiple  contingency components to decrease disruptive behaviors and increase student engagement in  an urban second-grade classroom. Psychology in the Schools, 47, 944959. McLaughlin, T.,  Malaby, J. 1972. Reducing and measuring inappropriate verbalizations in a  token classroom. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 53, 329333. McNeely, C. A., Nonnemaker, J. M.,  Blum, R. W. 2002. Promoting school connectedness: Evidence from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. Journal of School Health,  72, 138146. Medland, M. B.,  Stachnik, T. J. 1972. Good Behavior Game: A replication and systematic analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 5, 4551. Melnick, S. A.,  Meister, D. G. 2008. A comparison of beginning and experienced teachers concerns. Educational Research Quarterly 313, 4056. Mendham, R. P.,  Thorne, M. T. 1984. A description and evaluation of a levelled token economy  operating within the school day in a residential school for junior maladjusted boys. Behavioural  Psychotherapy, 12, 151162. Merrett, F.,  Blundell, D. 1982. Self-recording as a means of improving classroom behavior in the  secondary school. Educational Psychology, 2, 147157. Merrett, F.,  Wheldall, K. 1987. Natural rates of teacher approval and disapproval in British primary and middle school classrooms. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 571, 95103. Merriam-Webster. 2017. Retrieved March 15, 2017, from www.merriam-webster.com. Metcalf, T. n.d. Whats your plan?: Accurate decision making within a multi-tier system of supports: Critical areas in Tier 2. Retrieved from www.rtinetwork.orgessentialtieredinstruction tier2whats-your-plan-accurate-decision-making-within-a-multi-tier-system-of-supportscritical-areas-in-tier-2. Miller, L. J., Strain, P. S., Boyd, K., Jarzynka, J.,  McFetridge, M. 1993. The effects of classwide  self-assessment on preschool childrens engagement in transition, free play, and small group  instruction. Early Education and Development, 4, 162181. Mischel, W., Shoda, Y.,  Rodriguez, M. L. 1989. Delay of gratification in children. Science, 244,  933938. Mitchem, K. J.,  Young, K. R. 2001. Adapting self-management programs for classwide use:  Acceptability, feasibility, and effectiveness. Remedial and Special Education, 22, 7588. Mitchem, K. J., Young, K. R., West, R. P.,  Benyo, J. 2001. CWPASM: A classwide peer assisted  self-management program for general education classrooms. Education and Treatment of Children, 242, 111140. Morrison, J. Q.,  Jones, K. M. 2007. The effects of positive peer reporting as a class-wide positive  behavior support. Journal of Behavioral Education, 162, 111124. Murphy, G.,  Goodall, E. 1980. Measurement error in direct observation: A comparison of common recording methods. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 18, 147150. Murphy, K. A., Theodore, L. A., Aloiso, D., Alric-Edwards, J. M.,  Hughes, T. L. 2007. Interdependent group contingency and mystery motivators to reduce preschool disruptive behavior.  Psychology in the Schools, 44, 5363. Musser, E. H., Bray, M. A., Kehle, T. J.,  Jenson, W. R. 2001. Reducing disruptive behaviors in  students with serious emotional disturbance. School Psychology Review, 30, 294304. Myers, D., Simonsen, B.,  Sugai, G. 2011. Increasing teachers use of praise with a response-tointervention approach. Education and Treatment of Children, 34, 3559.

References	 233 Nafpaktitis, M., Mayer, G. R.,  Butterworth, T. 1985. Natural rates of teacher approval and disapproval and their relation to student behaviour in intermediate school classrooms. Journal of  Educational Psychology, 77, 363367. Narayan, J. S., Heward, W. L., Gardner, R., III, Courson, F. H.,  Omness, C. K. 1990. Using  response cards to increase student participation in an elementary school classroom. Journal of  Applied Behavior Analysis, 23, 483490. National Center on Intensive Intervention. 2014. So what do I do now?: Strategies for intensifying intervention when standard approaches dont work. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of  Education, Office of Special Education Programs, National Center on Intensive Intervention. Neff, N. A., Shafer, M. S., Egel, A. L., Cataldo, M. F.,  Parrish, J. M. 1983. The class specific  effects of compliance training with do and dont requests: Analogue analysis and classroom  application. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 161, 8199. Nelson, R. O.,  Hayes, S. C. 1981. Theoretical explanations for reactivity in self-monitoring.  Behavior Modification, 5, 314. New Teacher Project. 2013. Perspectives of irreplaceable teachers. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from  http:tntp.orgassetsdocumentsTNTPPerspectives2013.pdf. Noell, G. H. 2007. Research examining the relationships among consultation process, treatment  integrity, and outcomes. In W. P. Erchul  S. M. Sheridan Eds., Handbook of research in  school consultation: Empirical foundations for the field pp. 315334. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Noell, G. H., Gansle, K. A., Mevers, J. L., Knox, R. M., Mintz, J. C.,  Dahir, A. 2014. Improving  treatment plan implementation in schools: A meta-analysis of single subject design studies.  Journal of Behavioral Education, 23, 168191. Noell, G. H., Gresham, F. M.,  Gansle, K. A. 2002. Does treatment integrity matter?: A preliminary investigation of instructional implementation and mathematics performance. Journal of  Behavioral Education, 11, 5167. Noell, G. H., Witt, J. C., Slider, N. J., Connell, J. E., Gatti, S. L., Williams, K. L., et al. 2005.  Treatment implementation following behavioral consultation in schools: A comparison of three  follow-up strategies. School Psychology Review, 34, 87106. OLeary, K. D.,  Becker, W. C. 1967. Behavior modification of an adjustment class: A token reinforcement program. Exceptional Children, 33, 637642. OLeary, K. D., Becker, W. C., Evans, M. B.,  Saudargas, R. A. 1969. A token reinforcement  program in a public school: A replication and systematic analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior  Analysis, 2, 313. OLeary, K. D.,  Drabman, R. 1971. Token reinforcement programs in the classroom: A review.  Psychological Bulletin, 75, 379398. OLeary, K. D., Drabman, R.,  Kass, R. E. 1973. Maintenance of appropriate behavior in a token  program. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 1, 127138. OLeary, K. D., Kaufman, K. F., Kass, R. E.,  Drabman, R. S. 1970. The effects of loud and soft  reprimands on behavior of disruptive students. Exceptional Children, 372, 145155. Oliver, R.,  Skinner, C. H. 2002. Applying behavioral momentum theory to increase compliance:  Why Mrs. H. RRRevved up the elementary students with the hokey-pokey. Journal of Applied  School Psychology, 191, 7594. Oliver, R. M., Wehby, J. H.,  Reschly, D. J. 2011. Teacher classroom management practices:  Effects on disruptive or aggressive student behavior. Campbell Systematic Reviews, 20114,  155. ONeill, S. C.,  Stephenson, J. 2011. The measurement of classroom management self-efficacy:  A review of measurement instrument development and influences. Educational Psychology,  313, 261299. Ottenbacher, K. J. 1990. Visual inspection of single-subject data: An empirical analysis. Mental  Retardation, 28, 283290.
References	 PACER Center. 2011. Evidence-based practices at school: A guide for parents. Retrieved January  11, 2017, from www.pacer.orgpublicationsall-68.pdf. Parker, R. I., Brossart, D. F., Vannest, K. J., Long, J. R., Garcia De-Alba, R., Baugh, F. G., et al.  2005. Effect sizes in single case research: How large is large? School Psychology Review, 34,  116132. Parker, R. I., Hagan-Burke, S.,  Vannest, K. 2007. Percentage of all non-overlapping data PAND:  An alternative to PND. Journal of Special Education, 40, 194204. Partin, T. C. M., Robertson, R. E., Maggin, D. M., Oliver, R. M.,  Wehby, J. H. 2009. Using  teacher praise and opportunities to respond to promote appropriate behavior. Preventing  School Failure, 54, 172178. Patrick, C. A., Ward, P.,  Crouch, D. W. 1998. Effects of holding students accountable for social  behaviors during volleyball games in elementary physical education. Journal of Teaching in  Physical Education, 17, 143156. Peterson, L. D., Young, K. R., Salzberg, C. L., West, R. P.,  Hill, M. 2006. Using self-management  procedures to improve classroom social skills in multiple general education settings. Education  and Treatment of Children, 29, 121. Pipkin, C., Vollmer, T. R.,  Sloman, K. N. 2010. Effects of treatment integrity failures during  differential reinforcement of alternative behaviors: A translational model. Journal of Applied  Behavior Analysis, 43, 4770. Planty, M., Hussar, W., Snyder, T., Kena, G., KewalRamani, A., Kemp, J., et al. 2009. The condition  of education 2009 NCES 2009-081. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. Plavnick, J. B., Ferreri, S. J.,  Maupin, A. N. 2010. The effects of self-monitoring on the procedural  integrity of a behavioral intervention for young children with developmental disabilities. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 43, 315320. Pokorski, E. A., Barton, E. E.,  Ledford, J. R. 2017. A review of the use of group contingencies in  preschool settings. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, 364, 230241. Popkin, J.,  Skinner, C. H. 2003. Enhancing academic performance in a classroom serving students with serious emotional disturbance: Interdependent group contingencies with randomly  selected components. School Psychology Review, 32, 282295. Powell, J., Martindale, A.,  Kulp, S. 1975. An evaluation of time-sample measures of behavior.  Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 84, 463469. Powell, J., Martindale, B., Kulp, S., Martindale, A.,  Bauman, R. 1977. Taking a close look: Time  sampling and measurement error. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 102, 325332. Prater, M. A, Hogan, S.,  Miller, S. R. 1992. Using self-monitoring to improve on-task behavior  and academic skills of an adolescent with mild handicaps across special and regular education  settings. Education and Treatment of Children, 151, 4355. Prater, M. A., Joy, R., Chilman, B., Temple, J.,  Miller, S. R. 1991. Self-monitoring of on-task  behavior by adolescents with learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 14, 164177. Prout, S. M.,  Prout, H. T. 1998. A meta-analysis of school-based studies of counseling and psychotherapy: An update. Journal of School Psychology, 362, 121136. Rafferty, L. A.,  Raimondi, S. L. 2009. Self-monitoring of attention versus self-monitoring of  performance: Examining the differential effects among students with emotional disturbance  engaged in independent math practice. Journal of Behavioral Education, 18, 279299. Raspa, M. J., McWilliam, R. A.,  Maher Ridley, S. 2001. Child care quality and childrens engagement. Early Education and Development, 122, 209224. Redd, W. H., Morris, E. K.,  Martin, J. A. 1975. Effects of positive and negative adultchild  interactions on childrens social preference. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 19,  153164.

References	 235 Reed, D. D.,  Martens, B. K. 2011. Temporal discounting predicts student responsiveness to  exchange delays in a classroom token system. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 44, 118. Reid, R. 1996. Research in self-monitoring with students with learning disabilities: The present,  the prospects, the pitfalls. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29, 317331. Reid, R.,  Harris, K. H. 1993. Self-monitoring of attention versus self-monitoring of performance:  Effects on attention and academic performance. Exceptional Children, 60, 2940. Reid, R., Trout, A. L,  Schartz, M. 2005. Self-regulation interventions for children with attention  deficithyperactivity disorder. Exceptional Children, 71, 361377. Reilly, E., Buskist, C.,  Gross, M. K. 2012. Movement in the classroom: Boosting brain power,  fighting obesity. Kappa Delta Pi Record, 482, 6266. Reinke, W. M., Herman, K. C.,  Stormont, M. 2013. Classroom-level positive behavior supports in  schools implementing SW-PBIS: Identifying areas for enhancement. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 151, 3950. Reinke, W. M., Lewis-Palmer, T.,  Martin, E. 2007. The effect of visual performance feedback on  teacher use of behavior-specific praise. Behavior Modification, 313, 247263. Reinke, W. M., Lewis-Palmer, T.,  Merrell, K. 2008. The classroom check-up: A classwide teacher  consultation model for increasing praise and decreasing disruptive behavior. School Psychology  Review, 373, 315. Reinke, W. M., Stormont, M., Herman, K. C., Puri, R.,  Goel, N. 2011. Supporting childrens  mental health in schools: Teacher perceptions of needs, roles, and barriers. School Psychology  Quarterly, 26, 113. Reschly, A. L.,  Christenson, S. L. 2009. Parents as essential partners for fostering students  learning outcomes. In M. J. Furlong, R. Gilman,  E. S. Huebner Eds., Handbook of positive  psychology in schools pp. 257272. New York: Routledge. Reynolds, C. R.,  Kamphaus, R. W. 2015. Behavior Assessment System for Children 3rd ed.  Bloomington, MN: Pearson. Rhode, G., Jenson, W. R.,  Reavis, H. K. 1992. The tough kid book: Practical classroom management strategies. Longmont, CO: Sopris West. Rhode, G., Morgan, D. P.,  Young, K. R. 1983. Generalization and maintenance of treatment gains  of behaviorally handicapped students from resource rooms to regular classrooms using selfevaluation procedures. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 16, 171188. Riley-Tillman, T. C.,  Burns, M. K. 2009. Evaluating educational interventions: Single-case  design for measuring response to intervention. New York: Guilford Press. Riley-Tillman, T. C., Methe, S. A.,  Weegar, K. 2009. Examining the use of Direct Behavior Rating on formative assessment of class-wide engagement: A case study. Assessment for Effective  Intervention, 34, 224230. Ringer, V. M. J. 1973. The use of a token helper in the management of classroom behavior problems and in teacher training. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 64, 671677. Risley, T.,  Cataldo, M. 1973. Evaluation of planned activities: The PLA-Check measure of classroom participation. Lawrence, KS: Center for Applied Behavior Analysis. Robichaux, N. M.,  Gresham, F. M. 2014. Differential effects of the Mystery Motivator intervention using student-selected and mystery rewards. School Psychology Review, 43, 286298. Rock, M. L.,  Thead, B. K. 2007. The effects of fading a strategic self-monitoring intervention on  students academic engagement, accuracy, and productivity. Journal of Behavioral Education,  16, 389412. Rogers, E. M. 2003. Diffusion of innovations 5th ed. New York: Free Press. Rooney, K. J., Hallahan, D. P.,  Lloyd, J. W. 1984. Self-recording of attention by learning disabled  students in the regular classroom. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 17, 360364. Rosn, L. A., OLeary, S. G., Joyce, S. A, Conway, G.,  Pfiffner, L. J. 1984. The importance of pru236	 References	 dent negative consequences for maintaining the appropriate behavior of hyperactive children.  Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 124, 581604. Rubie-Davies, C. M. 2007. Classroom interactions: Exploring the practices of high? and  low?expectation teachers. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 772, 289306. Russell, A.,  Lin, L. G. 1977. Teacher attention and classroom behavior. The Exceptional Child,  24, 148155. Safer, D. J., Heaton, R. C.,  Parker, F. C. 1981. A behavioral program for disruptive junior high  school students: Results and follow-up. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 9, 483494. Saigh, P. A.,  Umar, A. M. 1983. The effects of a Good Behavior Game on the disruptive behavior  of Sudanese elementary school students. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 16, 339344. Sainato, D. M., Goldstein, H.,  Strain, P. S. 1992. Effects of self-evaluation on preschool childrens  use of social interaction strategies with their classmates with autism. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 25, 127141. Sainato, D. M., Strain, P. S., Lefebvre, D.,  Rapp, N. 1990. Effects of self-evaluation on the independent work skills of preschool children with disabilities. Exceptional Children, 56, 540549. Salend, S. J., Reynolds, C. J.,  Coyle, E. M. 1989. Individualizing the Good Behavior Game across  type and frequency of behavior with emotionally disturbed adolescents. Behavior Modification, 13, 108126. Salzberg, R. S.,  Greenwald, M. A. 1977. Effects of a token system on attentiveness and punctuality in two string instrument classes. Journal of Music Therapy, 14, 2738. Sanetti, L. M. H.,  Kratochwill, T. R. 2009. Toward developing a science of treatment integrity:  Introduction to the special series. School Psychology Review, 38, 445459. Sanford, J. P.,  Evertson, C. M. 1981. Classroom management in a low SES junior high: Three  case studies. Journal of Teacher Education, 32, 3438. Santogrossi, D. A., OLeary, K. D., Romanczyk, R. G.,  Kaufman, K. F. 1973. Self-evaluation by  adolescents in a psychiatric hospital school token program. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 62, 277287. Sargeant, J. 2012. Prioritising student voice: Tween childrens perspectives on school success.  Education 313, 422, 190200. Saudargas, R. A.,  Zanolli, K. 1990. Momentary time sampling as an estimate of percentage time:  A field validation. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 23, 533537. Schanding, G. T., Jr.,  Sterling-Turner, H. E. 2010. Use of the Mystery Motivator for a high school  class. Journal of Applied School Psychology, 261, 3853. Schuldheisz, J. M.,  Mars, H. 2001. Active supervision and students physical activity in middle  school physical education. Journal of Teaching in Physical Education, 211, 7590. Scruggs, T. E.,  Mastropieri, M. A. 1998. Summarizing single-subject research: Issues and applications. Behavior Modification, 223, 221242. Scruggs, T. E.,  Mastropieri, M. A. 2013. PND at 25: Past, present, and future trends in summarizing single-subject research. Remedial and Special Education, 34, 919. Sharp, S. R.,  Skinner, C. H. 2004. Using interdependent group contingencies with randomly  selected criteria and paired reading to enhance class-wide reading performance. Journal of  Applied School Psychology, 20, 2945. Shearer, D. D., Kohler, F. W., Buchan, K. A.,  McCullough, K. M. 1996. Promoting independent  interactions between preschoolers with autism and their nondisabled peers: An analysis of selfmonitoring. Early Education and Development, 7, 205220. Simonsen, B., Fairbanks, S., Briesch, A. M., Myers, D.,  Sugai, G. 2008. Evidence-based practices  in classroom management: Considerations for research to practice. Education and Treatment  of Children, 31, 351380. Simonsen, B., MacSuga, A. S., Fallon, L. M.,  Sugai, G. 2013. The effects of self-monitoring on  teachers use of specific praise. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 151, 515.

References	 237 Sindelar, P. T., Bursuck, W. D.,  Halle, J. W. 1986. The effects of two variations of teacher questioning on student performance. Education and Treatment of Children, 9, 5666. Skiba, R. J.,  Knesting, K. 2001. Zero tolerance, zero evidence: An analysis of school disciplinary  practice. New Directions for Youth Development, 200192, 1743. Skinner, B. F. 1966. Contingencies of reinforcement in the design of a culture. Behavioral Science,  11, 159166. Skinner, C. H., Cashwell, T. H.,  Skinner, A. L. 2000. Increasing tootling: The effects of a peermonitored group contingency program on students reports of peers prosocial behaviors. Psychology in the Schools, 37, 263270. Skinner, C. H., Neddenriep, C. E., Robinson, S. L., Ervin, R.,  Jones, K. 2002. Altering educational environments through positive peer reporting: Prevention and remediation of social  problems associated with behavior disorders. Psychology in the Schools, 39, 191202. Skinner, C. H., Scala, G., Dendas, D.,  Lentz, F. E. 2007. The Color Wheel: Implementation  guidelines. Journal of Evidence-Based Practices for Schools, 8, 134140. Skinner, C. H.,  Skinner, A. L. 2007. Establishing an evidence base for a classroom management  procedure with a series of studies: Evaluating the Color Wheel. Journal of Evidence-Based  Practices for Schools, 8, 88101. Skinner, C. H., Skinner, C. F., Skinner, A. L.,  Cashwell, T. H. 1999. Using interdependent contingencies with groups of students: Why the principal kissed the pig. Educational Administration Quarterly, 35, 806820. Skinner, C. H., Williams, R. L.,  Neddenriep, C. E. 2004. Using interdependent group-oriented  reinforcement to enhance academic performance in general education classrooms. School Psychology Review, 33, 384397. Soodak, L. C.,  Podell, D. M. 1994. Teachers thinking about difficult-to-teach students. Journal  of Educational Research, 88, 4451. Stage, S. A., Jackson, H. G., Jensen, M. J., Moscovitz, K. K., Bush, J. W., Violette, H. D., et al. 2008.  A validity study of functionally-based behavioral consultation with students with emotional behavioral disabilities. School Psychology Quarterly, 233, 327. Stage, S. A.,  Quiroz, D. R. 1997. A meta-analysis of interventions to decrease disruptive classroom behavior in public education settings. School Psychology Review, 26, 333368. Stahmer, A. C.,  Schreibman, L. 1992. Teaching children with autism appropriate play in unsupervised environments using a self-management treatment package. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 25, 447459. Stanley, P.,  Simmons, G. 1975. Rock and roll all nite. On Dressed to kill Record. New York:  Casablanca Records. Steege, M. W., Davin, T.,  Hathaway, M. 2001. Reliability and accuracy of a performance-based  behavioral recording procedure. School Psychology Review, 30, 252261. Steege, M. W.,  Watson, T. S. 2009. Conducting school-based functional behavioral assessments:  A practitioners guide 2nd ed. New York: Guilford Press. Sterling-Turner, H. E.,  Watson, T. S. 2002. An analog investigation of the relationship  between treatment acceptability and treatment integrity. Journal of Behavioral Education, 11,  3950. Sterling-Turner, H. E., Watson, T. S.,  Moore, J. W. 2002. The effects of direct training and treatment integrity on treatment outcomes in school consultation. School Psychology Quarterly, 17,  4777. Sterling-Turner, H. E., Watson, T. S., Wildmon, M., Watkins, C.,  Little, E. 2001. Investigating  the relationship between training type and treatment integrity. School Psychology Quarterly,  16, 5667. Stormont, M.,  Reinke, W. 2008. The importance of precorrective statements and behaviorspecific praise and strategies to increase their use. Beyond Behavior, 183, 2632.
References	 Stormont, M., Reinke, W. M., Herman, K. C.,  Lembke, E. S. 2012. Academic and behavioral  supports for at-risk students. New York: Guilford Press. Strain, P. S., Kohler, F. K., Storey, K.,  Danko, C. D. 1994. Teaching preschoolers with autism to  self-monitor their social interactions: An analysis of results in home and school settings. Journal  of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 2, 7888. Suitts, S., Barba, P.,  Dunn, K. 2015. A new majority: Low income students now a majority in the  nations public schools. Atlanta, GA: Southern Education Foundation. Sutcliffe, K., Thomas, J., Stokes, G.,  Bangpan, M. 2015, October 29. Intervention Component  Analysis ICA: A pragmatic approach for identifying the critical features of complex interventions. Systematic Reviews, 4, 140. Sutherland, K. S., Alder, N.,  Gunter, P. L. 2003. The effect of varying rates of opportunities to  respond to academic requests on the classroom behavior of students with EBD. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 11, 239248. Sutherland, K. S., Wehby, J. H.,  Copeland, S. R. 2000. Effect of varying rates of behavior-specific  praise on the on-task behavior of students with EBD. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral  Disorders, 81, 28. Swain, J. J., Allard, G. B.,  Holborn, S. W. 1982. The Good Toothbrushing Game: A school-based  dental hygiene program for increasing the toothbrushing effectiveness of children. Journal of  Applied Behavior Analysis, 15, 171176. Tanol, G., Johnson, L., McComas, J.,  Cote, E. 2010. Responding to rule violations or rule following: A comparison of two versions of the Good Behavior Game with kindergarten students.  Journal of School Psychology, 48, 337355. Theodore, L. A., DioGuardi, R. J., Hughes, T. L., Aloiso, D., Carlo, M.,  Eccles, D. 2009. A classwide intervention for improving homework performance. Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation, 194, 275299. Thomas, J. D., Presland, I. E., Grant, M. D.,  Glynn, T. 1978. Natural rates of teacher approval  and disapproval in grade 7 classrooms. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 11, 9194. Thompson, M. T., Marchant, M., Anderson, D., Prater, M. A.,  Gibb, G. 2012. Effects of tiered  training on general educators use of specific praise. Education and Treatment of Children, 35,  521546. Thorndike, E. L. 1898. Animal intelligence: An experimental study of the associative processes in  animals. Psychological Review:Monograph Supplements, 24, i109. Tingstrom, D. H., Sterling-Turner, H. E.,  Wilczynski, S. M. 2006. The Good Behavior Game:  19692002. Behavior Modification, 30, 225253. Turkewitz, H., OLeary, K. D.,  Ironsmith, M. 1975. Generalization and maintenance of appropriate behavior through self-control. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 434, 577. Treiber, F. A.,  Lahey, B. B. 1983. Toward a behavioral model of academic remediation with  learning disabled children. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 162, 111116. Treptow, M. A., Burns, M. K.,  McComas, J. J. 2007. Reading at the frustration, instructional, and  independent levels: The effects on students reading comprehension and time on task. School  Psychology Review, 361, 159. Trevino-Maack, S. I., Kamps, D.,  Wills, H. 2015. A group contingency plus self-management  intervention targeting at-risk secondary students class-work and active engagement. Remedial  and Special Education, 36, 347360. Trice, A. D.,  Parker, F. C. 1983. Decreasing adolescent swearing in an instructional setting. Education and Treatment of Children, 6, 2935. Ttofi, M. M.,  Farrington, D. P. 2012. Risk and protective factors, longitudinal research, and bullying prevention. New Directions for Youth Development, 2012133, 8598. U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences. 2003. Identifying and implementReferences	 239 ing educational practices supported by rigorous evidence: A user friendly guide. Washington,  DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. 20002001. Teacher follow-up survey Questionnaire for current teachers and Questionnaire for former teachers.  Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration on Children, Youth, and Families.  2007. Child maltreatment 2005. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. Van Acker, R., Grant, S. H.,  Henry, D. 1996. Teacher and student behavior as a function of risk  for aggression. Education and Treatment of Children, 193, 316334. Van Houten, R., Nau, P. A., MacKenzie-Keating, S. E., Sameoto, D.,  Colavecchia, B. 1982. An  analysis of some variables influencing the effectiveness of reprimands. Journal of Applied  Behavior Analysis, 151, 6583. Vollmer, T. R., Iwata, B. A., Zarcone, J. R., Smith, R. G.,  Mazaleski, J. L. 1993. The role of attention in the treatment of attention-maintained self-injurious behavior: Noncontingent reinforcement and differential reinforcement of other behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis,  261, 921. Volpe, R. J.,  Briesch, A. M. 2012. Generalizability and dependability of single-item and multipleitem Direct Behavior Rating scales for engagement and disruptive behavior. School Psychology  Review, 41, 246261. Volpe, R. J.,  Fabiano, G. A. 2013. Daily behavior report cards: An evidence-based system of  assessment and intervention. New York: Guilford Press. Wannarka, R.,  Ruhl, K. 2008. Seating arrangements that promote positive academic and behavioural outcomes: A review of empirical research. Support for Learning, 23, 8993. Wehby, J. H.,  Hollahan, M. S. 2000. Effects of high-probability requests on the latency to initiate  academic tasks. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 33, 259262. Weiner, B. 1993. On sin versus sickness: A theory of perceived responsibility and social motivation.  American Psychologist, 48, 957965. West, R. P.,  Sloane, H. N. 1986. Teacher presentation rate and point delivery rate effects on  classroom disruption, performance accuracy, and response rate. Behavior Modification, 103,  267286. Wheldall, K., Houghton, S.,  Merrett, F. 1989. Natural rates of teacher approval and disapproval  in British secondary school classrooms. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 59, 3848. Wheldall, K.,  Lam, Y. Y. 1987. Rows versus tables II: The effects of two classroom seating  arrangements on classroom disruption rate, on-task behaviour and teacher behaviour in three  special school classes. Educational Psychology, 7, 303312. Wheldall, K., Morris, M., Vaughan, P.,  Ng, Y. Y. 1981. Rows versus tables: An example of the use  of behavioural ecology in two classes of eleven-year-old children. Educational Psychology, 1,  171184. White, M. A. 1975. Natural rates of teacher approval and disapproval in the classroom. Journal of  Applied Behavior Analysis, 8, 367372. Wickstrom, K. F., Jones, K. M., LaFleur, L. H.,  Witt, J. C. 1998. An analysis of treatment integrity in school-based behavioral consultation. School Psychology Quarterly, 13, 141154. Wiley, A. L., Tankersley, M.,  Simms, A. 2012. Teachers causal attributions for student problem  behavior: Implications for school-based behavioral interventions and research. In B. G. Cook,  M. Tankersley,  T. J. Landrum Eds., Advances in learning and behavioral disabilities Vol.  25, pp. 279300. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group. Williamson, B. D., Campbell-Whatley, G. D.,  Lo, Y. 2009. Using a random dependent group contingency to increase on-task behaviors of high school students with high incidence disabilities.  Psychology in the Schools, 46, 10741083.
References	 Wills, H. P., Kamps, D., Hansen, B., Conklin, C., Bellinger, S., Neaderhiser, J., et al. 2010. The  classwide function-based intervention team program. Preventing School Failure, 54, 164171. Winter, S. 1990. Teacher approval and disapproval in Hong Kong secondary school classrooms.  British Journal of Educational Psychology, 60, 8892. Witmer, J. M., Bornstein, A. V.,  Dunham, R. M. 1971. The effects of verbal approval and disapproval upon the performance of third and fourth grade children on four subtests of the Wechsler  Intelligence Scale for Children. Journal of School Psychology, 93, 347356. Witt, J. C.,  Martens, B. K. 1983. Assessing the acceptability of behavioral interventions used in  classrooms. Psychology in the Schools, 20, 510517. Witt, J. C., VanDerHeyden, A. M.,  Gilbertson, D. 2004. Troubleshooting behavioral interventions: A systematic process for finding and eliminating problems. School Psychology Review,  33, 363383. Wood, C. L., Mabry, L. E., Kretlow, A. G., Lo, Y.,  Galloway, T. W. 2009. Effects of preprinted  response cards on students participation and off-task behavior in a rural kindergarten classroom. Rural Special Education Quarterly, 28, 3947. Wood, S. J., Murdock, J. Y.,  Cronin, M. E. 2002. Self-monitoring and at-risk middle school students. Behavior Modification, 26, 605626. Wright, R. A.,  McCurdy, B. L. 2011. Class-wide positive behavior support and group contingencies: Examining a positive variation of the Good Behavior Game. Journal of Positive Behavior  Interventions, 143, 173180. Yarborough, J. L., Skinner, C. H., Lee, Y. J.,  Lemmons, C. 2004. Decreasing transition times in a  second grade classroom: Scientific support for the Timely Transitions Game. Journal of Applied  School Psychology, 20, 85107. Yawkey, T. D. 1971. Conditioning independent work behavior in reading with seven-year-old children in a regular early childhood classroom. Child Study Journal, 2, 2334. Zaghlawan, H. Y., Ostrosky, M. M.,  Al-Khateeb, J. M. 2007. Decreasing the inattentive behavior of Jordanian children: A group experiment. Education and Treatment of Children, 303,  4964. Zifferblatt, S. M. 1972. Architecture and human behavior: Toward increased understanding of a  functional relationship. Educational Technology, 128, 5457.
Academic achievements, 136 Academic routines, 42, 43t. See also Routines Acceptability of interventions, 194. See also Interventions Action bias, 7273 Active engagement, 8. See also Engagement Active supervision, 5051, 51t, 56 Activity reinforcers. See also Rewards group contingencies and, 111 home-based intervention components and, 215t overview, 88, 88t Age factors, 70, 94, 143 Aggression, 65 Anxiety, 6465, 70 Appropriateness of an intervention, 195. See also  Interventions Assessment, 216. See also Evaluation Attention monitoring, 134136, 135f. See also Monitoring;  Self-monitoring Attention seeking, 65, 7475 Attention-deficithyperactivity disorder ADHD self-management techniques and, 130 self-monitor attention SMA techniques and, 136 token economy and, 90, 9192 Attribution theory, 1316, 14t Autism spectrum disorder ASD, 130131 B Behavioral assessment, 216. See also Evaluation Behavioral problems addressing serious problem behaviors and, 62 Big Five classroom management strategies and, 8 evidence-based classroom management, 79 group contingencies and, 116 importance of classroom management and, 34 limitations of teachers and, 1213 negative verbal feedback and, 6165, 64t of other students, 41 overview, 10 rules regarding how students should respond to  classmates behavior, 41 self-management techniques and, 129131 teacher attribution theory and, 1416, 14t Behavioral science overview, 1213, 16 principles of, 1727, 20t, 21t, 23f, 24t, 26f teacher attribution theory, 1316, 14t Behavior-specific praise. See Praise; Specific praise Big Five classroom management strategies, 8 Bullying behavior, 6 C Caught Being Good Game, 120t Check-In, Check-Out CICO procedure, 210 Checklists. See Forms Classroom environment. See also Environment intensifying classwide interventions and, 205206 prevention strategies and, 3435 structuring the classroom, 3536, 36t Classroom management in general evidence-based classroom management, 79, 35,  195196 importance of, 34 overview, 46, 5f, 911 Classwide data collection. See also Evaluation classifying and recording behaviors, 158172, 159t,  160f, 162f, 164f, 165f, 166f, 169f, 171f determining intervention effectiveness and, 173179,  174f, 176f, 179f forms for, 160f, 161163, 162f, 163, 164f, 165, 165f, 166,  166f, 170171, 171f, 181185 overview, 155, 180 target of measurement, 155156 Index Note. f  or t following a page number indicates a figure or a table.
Index	 Class-Wide Function-related Intervention Teams  CW-FIT program, 209 Classwide interventions. See also Group contingencies;  Self-management of behavior; Token economies coach cards for, 218219 incorporating additional intervention components,  206215, 210f, 211f, 212f, 215f intensifying, 201206, 204t overview, 216217 Classwide peer tutoring management CWPASM  program, 141142 Classwide system of reinforcement, 83. See also Group  contingencies Coach cards feedback and, 73, 7678 group contingencies and, 121125 individualized intervention and, 207, 218219 overview, 11 prevention strategies and, 44, 5356 self-management techniques and, 146148 token economy and, 89, 99101 treatment integrity and, 199 Color Wheel intervention, 3839, 39t Communication techniques, 4551, 47t, 49t Consequences, 17t, 1819 Context, 195, 205 Contingency. See also Group contingencies feedback as a part of, 5861 forms for, 212, 212f response cost and, 9093, 91f, 92t types of, 103111, 103t, 105t, 108t109t Continuous reinforcement schedules, 21, 21t. See also  Reinforcement; Schedules of reinforcement Control, 1213, 14, 14t Cueing intensifying classwide interventions and, 202203 self-monitor performance SMP techniques and, 135 treatment integrity and, 196197 D Daily Progress Report DPR, 210 Daily Report Card DRC, 214 Data collection. See also Classwide data collection evaluating data, 175179, 176f, 179f methods of, 173174, 174f Dead-man test, 157158 Dependent group contingencies. See also Group  contingencies coach cards for, 121 intensifying classwide interventions and, 204 Mystery Motivator intervention and, 113 overview, 103t, 105t, 106109, 108t109t self-management techniques and, 141 Depression, 70 Deprivation, 17t, 2526, 26f Developmental delays, 143 Didactic instruction, 196 Differential reinforcement of an alternative behavior  DRA, 74. See also Planned ignoring Direct Behavior Rating DBR scale, 140, 168, 169f, 170 Direct observation. See Observation Discriminative stimulus, 17t, 2627 Disruption, 62 Drift, 198 E Edible reinforcers. See also Rewards group contingencies and, 110111 home-based intervention components and, 215t overview, 88, 88t Education programs, teacher. See Teacher education  programs Embarrassment, 6465 Emotionalbehavioral disorders EBDs praise and, 68, 70 self-management techniques and, 141 token economy and, 90 Engagement, 8. See also Active engagement; Instruction Environment. See also Classroom environment behavioral techniques and, 30 home environment, 15, 34 intensifying classwide interventions and, 205206 overview, 3334 Evaluation. See also Classwide data collection;  Observation; Self-monitoring feedback and, 6061 matching assessment to intervention, 216 overview, 11 self-management techniques and, 136137, 140142 Event behaviors overview, 158159, 159t rating-based tools for assessing, 166168, 166f, 169f recording, 159163, 160f, 162f Every Student Succeeds Act 2015, 7 Evidence-based classroom management overview, 79 prevention strategies and, 35 treatment integrity and, 195196 Expectations. See also Rules Big Five classroom management strategies and, 8 coach cards for, 53 feedback and, 5960 overview, 10 teaching to students, 3644, 39t, 43t token economy and, 8486, 86t Explicit instruction. See Instruction Extant data, 169172, 171f External interventionists, 209213, 211f, 212f, 218 External reinforcement, 8182. See also Reinforcement;  Rewards; Token economies Extinction overview, 2324 planned ignoring and, 73, 74 principles of behavior and, 17t

Index	 243 F Fading the intervention. See also Interventions group contingencies and, 117118 self-management techniques and, 144145 token economy and, 9798 Fairness, 116117 Fear, 63 Feasibility of interventions, 194. See also Interventions Feedback. See also Praise; Reprimands coach cards for, 73, 7678 comparing positive and negative feedback, 72 group contingencies and, 105 intensifying classwide interventions and, 203 negative verbal feedback, 6165, 64t noncontingent attention, 7475 overview, 11, 5761, 75 planned ignoring and, 7274 positive verbal feedback, 6572, 67t, 69t token economy and, 81, 8788, 97 treatment integrity and, 197 Fixed reinforcement schedules, 21t, 6061. See also  Reinforcement Focused supports, 5. See also Multi-tiered system of  support MTSS Forms. See also Monitoring; Self-monitoring classwide data collection and, 160, 160f, 161163,   162f, 164f, 165, 165f, 166, 166f, 170171, 171f,  181185 event recording and, 160, 160f, 161163, 162f home-based intervention components and, 214215,  215f individualized intervention and, 209, 210f, 211, 211f,  212, 212f, 214215, 215f performance-based behavioral recording and, 170171,  171f, 185 self-monitoring and, 131136, 132f, 133f, 134f, 135f,  149152 token economy and, 211, 211f treatment integrity and, 189, 190f, 195 G Goals, 136137. See also Target behaviors Good Behavior Game GBG coach cards for, 125 overview, 6, 111113, 120t self-management techniques and, 141 treatment integrity and, 188189, 188t, 192 Good Behavior Game GBG with reinforcement, 120t Group contingencies. See also Classwide interventions;  Contingency; Interdependent group contingencies;  Token economies coach cards for, 121125, 146148 fading the intervention, 117118 incorporating additional intervention components,  212213 overview, 11, 102, 104, 118119, 120t self-management techniques and, 140141, 146148 troubleshooting, 115117 types of contingencies, 103111, 103t, 105t,   108t109t variations on, 111115 H High-probability requests, 4648. See also Requests Home environment, 15, 34. See also Environment Home-based intervention components, 214215, 215f,   218 I Ignoring, planned, 7274, 78 Impulsivity, 96 Independent group contingencies, 103t, 104106, 105t,  113. See also Group contingencies Individual behavior plan, 62 Individualized intervention. See also Interventions coach cards for, 218219 forms for, 209, 210f, 214215, 215f incorporating additional intervention components,  206215, 210f, 211f, 212f, 215f intensifying classwide interventions, 201206,   204t matching assessment to intervention, 216 overview, 200201, 216217 Instruction. See also Engagement; Teacher behavior Big Five classroom management strategies and, 8 classroom management and, 5 intensifying classwide interventions and, 202203 prevention strategies and, 4551, 47t, 49t rules regarding, 41 teaching rules and routines, 4445 Integrity of interventions. See Treatment integrity Intellectual disabilities, 90 Intensive supports, 5, 200201, 218. See also Multi-tiered  system of support MTSS Interdependent group contingencies. See also Group  contingencies coach cards for, 121 Good Behavior Game GBG and, 111113 intensifying classwide interventions and, 204 Mystery Motivator intervention and, 113 overview, 103t, 105t, 108t109t, 109111 self-management techniques and, 140141 troubleshooting, 115116 Intermittent reinforcement schedules, 21t, 2223,  196197. See also Reinforcement Interval recording procedures, 163165, 164f, 182.  See also Monitoring Interval reinforcement systems, 21t, 22. See also  Reinforcement Intervention integrity. See Treatment integrity Intervention support, 196
Index	 Interventions. See also Individualized intervention;  Treatment integrity determining intervention effectiveness and, 173179,  174f, 176f, 179f development of, 29 fading, 9798, 117118, 144145 incorporating additional intervention components,  206215, 210f, 211f, 212f, 215f intensifying, 201206, 204t matching assessment to intervention, 216 overview, 216217 Intrinsic motivation, 30 L Lapses, 198 Law of effect, 17t, 1819, 27 Learned helplessness, 96 Learning, 5, 5f, 63 Learning disabilities, 90, 135136 Level system, 9394, 93t, 98 Limitations of teachers, 1213 Locus of control, 14, 14t M Matching law, 17t, 2425, 28 Modeling the interventions, 196, 202. See also  Interventions Momentary time sampling, 163165 Monitoring. See also Attention monitoring; Evaluation;  Forms; Performance monitoring; Self-monitoring event recording, 159163, 160f, 162f state recording, 163168, 164f, 165f, 166f, 169f Motivating operations noncontingent attention and, 7475 overview, 2526, 26f, 28 principles of behavior and, 17t token economy and, 82 Movement, 41 Multi-tiered system of support MTSS. See also  Prevention strategies; Tiered approach to supports individualized intervention and, 200201 overview, 5 praise and, 7172 token economy and, 84 Mystery Hero intervention, 114 Mystery Motivator, 113 Mystery Reward intervention, 114 N Negative punishment, 23, 24t. See also Punishment Negative reinforcement, 1920, 20t. See also  Reinforcement Nonacademic routines, 42, 43t. See also Routines Noncontingent attention, 7475 O Observation. See also Evaluation matching assessment to intervention, 216 state recording and, 165166, 165f treatment integrity and, 189 Operational definitions, 156158, 157t, 187189, 188t Opportunities to respond OTRs, 4850, 49t P Partial-interval sampling, 163165 Peer-assisted self-management, 141142. See also Selfmanagement of behavior Peer-delivered praise, 7071. See also Praise Percentage of all nonoverlapping data PAND, 177, 178, 179f Percentage of nonoverlapping data PND, 177178 Performance monitoring. See also Monitoring; Self-monitoring observational data and, 167168, 169f overview, 172 self-monitor performance SMP techniques, 134,  134136, 135f Performance-based behavioral recording, 167168, 169f,  170171, 171f, 185. See also Monitoring Permanent products, 169172, 171f, 189 Personal space, 4041 Planned Activity Check PLA-Check, 166, 166f, 183184 Planned ignoring, 7274, 78 Point systems. See also Token economies coach cards for, 122 group contingencies and, 106107, 122 overview, 8789, 98 self-management techniques and, 138 Positive peer-reporting approach, 7071. See also Praise Positive praise, 8. See also Praise Positive punishment, 23, 24t, 63. See also Punishment Positive reinforcement, 1920, 20t. See also Reinforcement Poverty, 34 Practice, 4445, 196 Praise. See also Feedback; Positive praise; Specific praise Big Five classroom management strategies and, 8 Check-In, Check-Out CICO procedure and, 210 coach cards for, 77 overview, 6572, 67t, 69t, 75, 81 planned ignoring and, 74 token economy and, 8182, 8788 treatment integrity and, 189 as a type of contingency, 103t Precision requests, 46, 55. See also Requests; Teacher  behavior Prevention strategies. See also Multi-tiered system of  support MTSS coach cards for, 5356 effective teaching behaviors, 4551, 47t, 49t, 51t importance of, 3435 overview, 78, 10, 5152 rules and routines, 4445 structuring the classroom, 3536, 36t teaching expected behavior, 3644, 39t, 43t

Index	 245 Problem identification, 156158, 157t. See also Target  behaviors Prompts, 202203 Punishment. See also Self-punishment feedback and, 61 group contingencies and, 105106 intrinsic motivation and, 30 overview, 2324, 23f, 24t, 28 principles of behavior and, 17t Q Quantitative analysis, 177178 R Randomized contingencies, 113114, 117, 120t. See also  Contingency Rating systems. See also Token economies event and state behaviors and, 166168, 166f, 169f overview, 8789 self-management techniques and, 131138, 132f, 133f,  134f, 135f, 142143 troubleshooting, 142143 Ratio reinforcement systems, 21t, 2223. See also  Reinforcement Reactivity, 127 Reentry plan, 62 Reinforcement. See also Schedules of reinforcement; Selfreinforcement coach cards for, 123 compared to punishment, 23, 23f discriminative stimulus and, 2627 feedback and, 6061 group contingencies and, 106107, 123 home-based intervention components, 214215, 215f intensifying classwide interventions and, 203205, 204t intrinsic motivation and, 30 motivating operations and, 2526, 26f overview, 2425, 2728, 75 planned ignoring and, 7273 principles of behavior and, 17t, 1923, 20t, 21t self-management techniques and, 140 token economy and, 8182 types of, 1920, 20t Reprimands, 6365, 64t, 75, 76. See also Feedback Requests, 4648, 47t, 55 Respect, 6163 Responding, student, 4850, 49t Response cards, 49 Response cost coach cards for, 121 Good Behavior Game GBG and, 111113 group contingencies and, 121 overview, 98 token economy and, 9093, 91f, 92t Retaliation, 116 Reward preference survey, 89 Rewards group contingencies and, 110111 home-based intervention components and, 214215, 215f incorporating additional intervention components, 211 intensifying classwide interventions and, 203205, 204t intrinsic motivation and, 30 planned ignoring and, 74 self-management techniques and, 137138 token economy and, 81, 8889, 88t, 96 Risk factors, 34 Routines Big Five classroom management strategies and, 8 coach cards for, 54 establishing, 4244, 43t teaching to students, 4445 RTI Action Network, 174 Rules Big Five classroom management strategies and, 8 coach cards for, 53, 54 teaching to students, 3742, 39t, 4445 S Sabotage, 116 Safety of students, 62 Satiation overview, 2526, 26f principles of behavior and, 17t token economy and, 82, 96 Scatterplot, 161163, 162f, 181 Schedules of reinforcement. See also Reinforcement feedback and, 6061 incorporating additional intervention components, 211 overview, 2023, 21t treatment integrity and, 196197 Schoolwide positive behavioral interventions and supports  SWP-BIS, 84, 8586, 210 Schoolwide system of reinforcement, 8384 Seating arrangements, 3536. See also Classroom environment Self-management of behavior classwide data collection and, 170 classwide implementation of, 139142 coach cards for, 146148 fading the intervention, 144145 forms for, 131136, 132f, 133f, 134f, 135f, 149152 implementation, 127138, 129t, 132f, 133f, 134f, 135f incorporating additional intervention components,  208209, 210f, 212213 overview, 11, 119, 126127, 145 treatment integrity and, 189 troubleshooting, 142144, 143f Self-monitor attention SMA techniques, 134136, 135f.  See also Self-monitoring Self-monitor performance SMP techniques, 134136,  135f. See also Self-monitoring Self-monitoring. See also Evaluation; Monitoring; Selfmanagement of behavior classwide implementation of, 139142 coach cards for, 218
Index	 Self-monitoring cont. forms for, 149152 incorporating additional intervention components,  208209, 210f overview, 127, 131136, 132f, 133f, 134f, 135f treatment integrity and, 197 Self-punishment, 127. See also Punishment Self-reinforcement, 127. See also Reinforcement Self-report, 189 Serious problem behaviors, 62. See also Behavioral problems Shaping, 9394, 93t Social reinforcers, 88, 88t, 215t. See also Rewards Specific praise, 8, 6668, 67t, 81. See also Praise Stability, 14, 14t State behaviors overview, 158159, 159t rating-based tools for assessing, 166168, 166f, 169f recording, 163168, 164f, 165f, 166f, 169f Stranger test, 157158 Supervising the classroom, 5051, 51t, 56 T Tangible reinforcers. See also Rewards group contingencies and, 110111 home-based intervention components and, 215t overview, 88, 88t Target behaviors. See also Goals classwide data collection and, 156158, 157t feedback and, 5961 group contingencies and, 118, 120t self-management techniques and, 136137 token economy and, 8486, 86t Task analysis, 188 Teacher Approval and Disapproval Observation Record  TAD, 66 Teacher attribution theory, 1316, 14t Teacher behavior. See also Instruction; Treatment integrity intensifying classwide interventions and, 205 intervention strategies and, 126 praise and, 7172 prevention strategies and, 4551, 47t, 49t token economy and, 95 Teacher education programs, 89, 195196 Teacher-directed instruction, 41. See also Instruction Technology, 49 Temporal discounting, 9596 Threat level, 62 Tiered approach to supports. See also Multi-tiered system  of support MTSS individualized intervention and, 200201 overview, 5 token economy and, 84 treatment integrity and, 192 Time of behavior, 60 Timely Transitions Game TTG, 114115 Token economies. See also Group contingencies coach cards for, 89, 99101 fading, 9798 forms for, 211, 211f home-based intervention components and, 214215,  215f implementation, 8390, 85t, 86t, 88t, 97, 99100 incorporating additional intervention components, 208,  211, 211f overview, 11, 8182, 98, 104105 self-management techniques and, 138 treatment integrity and, 194195 troubleshooting, 9597 as a type of contingency, 103t variations on, 9094, 91f, 92t, 93t Tootling intervention, 103t, 207 Training programs for teachers, 89, 195196 Transitions, 42, 44, 114115 Trauma, 63 Treatment integrity. See also Interventions assessing, 187193, 188t, 190f coach cards for, 199 forms for, 189, 190f measurement methods and, 189193, 190f overview, 186187, 198 promoting, 193198 Treatments. See Interventions Trend, 175 U Understanding of interventions, 195196. See also  Interventions Universal supports, 5. See also Multi-tiered system of  support MTSS V Variable reinforcement schedules, 21t, 61. See also  Reinforcement; Schedules of reinforcement Verbal feedback. See also Feedback comparing positive and negative feedback, 72 negative verbal feedback, 6165, 64t overview, 61 positive verbal feedback, 6572, 67t, 69t token economy and, 81, 8788, 97 Violence, exposure to, 34 Visual analysis, 175177, 176f W Whole-class contingency, 120t. See also Group  contingencies Whole-interval sampling, 163165 Y Yelling at students, 6163. See also Feedback