Exciting Classrooms

The internal teacher is born within you and does not need to be seen. The external  teacher shows up to remind you of the inward path. Stephanie Russell Everyday Zen

Exciting Classrooms Practical Information to  Ensure Student Success Frank Thoms ROWMAN  LITTLEFIELD Lanham  Boulder  New York  London

Published by Rowman  Littlefield  A wholly owned subsidiary of The Rowman  Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc. 4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706 www.rowman.com Unit A, Whitacre Mews, 26-34 Stannary Street, London SE11 4AB Copyright  2015 by Frank Thoms All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any  electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,  without written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote  passages in a review. British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Thoms, Frank, 1938 Title: Exciting classrooms : practical information to ensure student success   Frank Thoms. Description: Lanham : Rowman  Littlefield, 2015  Includes bibliographical  references and index. Identifiers: LCCN 2015026436  ISBN 9781475823028 cloth : alk. paper   ISBN 9781475823035 pbk. : alk. paper  ISBN 9781475823042 electronic Subjects: LCSH: Reflective teaching.  Classroom environment. Classification: LCC LB1025.3 .T532 2015  DDC 371.102dc23 LC record available  at http:lccn.loc.gov2015026436   The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American  National Standard for Information SciencesPermanence of Paper for Printed Library  Materials, ANSINISO Z39.48-1992. Printed in the United States of America

v Meet Dan Hilliard vii Preface ix Introduction xiii PART I: WHAT CAN WE DO IMMEDIATELY? 1 1	 Implement 10-2 Thinking 3 2	 Instill Skills 13 3	 Teach Literacy 19 4	 Design Invitations 25 5	 Make Meaning 31 PART II: HOW CAN WE EXPAND OUR TEACHING PRACTICE?43 6	 See the Big Picture 45 7	 Search for Wisdom 55 8	 Stay Current 63 9	 Seek the Higher Road 73 PART III: WHAT MUST WE CHANGE? 81 10	 Abolish Tracking 83 11	 Abandon the Crabs in the Cage 93 Contents

vi	 Contents 12	 Stop the Interruptions 103 13	 End One-Size-Fits-All Teaching 111 PART IV: WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM BEYOND  THE CULTURE OF SCHOOLS? 119 14	 Become a Gadfly 121 15	 Leverage Tipping Points 127 16	 Teach As If 135 17	 Take the Long View 141 18	 Imagine the Ideal 147 19	 Invoke the Cosmos 153 PART V: HOW DO WE FIND OUR CALLING? 159 20	 Grow Our Seeds 161 21	 Rethink Our Philosophy 167 22	 Achieve Our Dreams 173 23	 Become Stakeholders 179 24	 Begin at the End 189 CODA: Make a Difference 197 Epilogue: Hidden Expectations 201 Appendix: Teaching Manifesto 205 Acknowledgments 209 Index 211 About the Author 223

vii Meet Dan Hilliard Dan Hilliard has been teaching for more than ten years. He is good at itat  least thats what his students tell him. They like his quirky qualities and sense  of humor, especially his bad puns. His colleagues respect his ideas in the  faculty room and at department meetings. His classroom is arranged much as  he found it, desks in neat rows and columns facing his desk and a whiteboard. He arrives early and leaves late every dayexcept Fridays. He prepares  his lessons to engage minds. While he would not call himself a lecture-style  teacher, he orchestrates discussions, rarely hesitating to jump in to offer  elaborate explanations. His students enjoy his involvement. They rarely fail  to pay attention. Time passes quickly in Mr. Hilliards class. He loves teaching, no doubt about it. He looks forward to Mondays. Yet,  he yearns for something more, something different. He has tried role-plays  and simulations. Once, he and his students published a Soviet newspaper  proclaiming the wisdom of Lenin and Stalin. In that same year, he arranged for  a Latin American festival in his classroom, complete with a live goat. He was  doing his best, but he sensed a longing to move beyond his comfort zone. One day as he is taking attendance, he notices that Sam, who sits in the  middle of the middle row, is absent. Sam never misses class. A streak of  sunlight crosses Sams desk. Slowly, Dan steps forward, hesitates, and  then moves toward Sams seat. He sits down, remaining still and pensive.  His students shift in their seats and begin to whisper to each other but soon  become quiet. As he slowly looks around, he sees them looking at himand at each  other. He senses those behind him, as well. Occasionally, he has moved  his desks into a horseshoe arrangement, but his students are used to seeing  his face. Except for those sitting in the front row, they also see only the backs  of the heads of peers. Now they are looking at one another, puzzled about 

viii	 Meet Dan Hilliard what their teacher is about to dohe has surprised them before. Dan remains  quiet and pensive. He asks a question. Later, when telling the story, he could not remember  the question, but it was one to encourage discussion. After a long minute,  Juanita responds. Dan remains quiet. After some silence, Peter comments  on Juanitas point, which alerts several others. After a few minutes, Rebecca  asks Mr. Hilliard for his thoughts. As he is about to launch forth, he hesitates.  He asks another question. The discussion resumes and soon breaks up into  small-group conversations. Normally positioned in the front of the room, Dan usually would ask  students to stop talking among themselves and pay attention to whoever  is talking. This time, he lets the process play itself out. The room becomes  noisier than usual, and somewhat chaoticsurely not a time for his principal  to walk in. He looks at the clock and sees that about five minutes are left. Normally, he  makes his last one or two points; he often speaks beyond the bell, hoping his  students will remember his words. Today, he gives them time to absorb what  they have been discussing. He wants to know whats on their minds, as he  does not know the content of the small-group conversations, except of those  students nearer to him. He raises his hand to get their attention and asks them  to take out a piece of paper and write on the following topics: 1.	 a big idea they discovered today 2.	 how they plan to pursue their learning at home 3.	 a question they would like to focus on in class tomorrow For the next few moments, he could hear a pin drop. The bell rings, he dismisses them, they stand up, put their responses in the  outbox, and leave. Dan remains in Sams seat for a moment. I think Im on  to something, he says to himself. Something exciting!

ix One October day ten years ago, I observed fourteen ninth-grade teachers  talking nonstop at their students. These were the same young, energetic teach ers who, in a three-day workshop before the opening of school, expressed  impatience with our discussions on interactive teaching techniques. They were  eager to set up their small learning communitiesan innovation I admired in preparation for their first days and weeks. I agreed to give over my third  workshop day for this purpose. However, I cautioned them that the most  important ingredient in their success would be the quality of their teaching.  My contract included returning to the school to coach and provide  workshops. I was eager to observe them in their respective classrooms, par ticularly to see how they designed lessons, engaged students, formed relation ships, and activated thinking. The coordinators of the program did not tell  them when I would be observing. I was unprepared for what I saw. In each classroom I observed students  sitting passively at desks in rows looking at the teacher or whispering to one  another. Teachers did virtually all the talking. None of them pursued ques tions or encouraged student interaction. Not once. By the end of the day,  I imagined the students as seated bronzed figures carried from class to class.  Several teachers told me later that day that they wished they had known I was  coming so they could have prepared better. After all, the idea of delivering a  dog-and-pony show when it counts resides deep in the profession.  The next day, I composed a six-page letter to the teachers, which became  the foundation for my becoming a writer. As a lifelong teacher, Ive written Exciting Classrooms: Practical Information  to Ensure Student Success as an invitation for teachers to embrace change.  Teachers are frustrated by a double-edged predicament. Reformers plead for  Preface

x	 Preface them to teach critical thinking skills, creativity, and effective communication  to meet the challenges of a global world. At the same time, school officials  insist that they meet the tireless demands of annual state and federal testing.  In addition, teachers face expanding curriculums, larger classes, and  smaller budgets. Its no wonder they retreat into the cocoons of their class rooms, which remain the same private, isolated worlds of their childhood  classrooms. I empathize with our professions successful resistance to the reform  efforts of the past century. We have never been invited to participate as  decision-makers or leaders. So, we feign compliance, and as we have, we  unfortunately persist to teach as our teachers taught us. The evidence is  obvious by the continuing prevalence of whole-class lessons that we deliver  talking at students from the front of the room. At the same time, some of us initiated changes at the classroom level but  failed to make much headway. In the 1970s, for example, I participated in the  open-education movement. My colleagues and I implemented an exemplary  open-education classroom with strong parent support that was based on my  teaching at a progressive primary school in Oxfordshire, England. Before the  end of the decade, however, our alternative program was reabsorbed into a  traditionally structured middle school. So much for change. I sense that todays teachers feel like frustrated mail carriers with mailbags  overstuffed with the demands of No Child Left Behind and Race to the Top.  These federal mandates combined with the pressure of raising state standards,  demands by local boards, and ever-expanding curriculums require them to  teach more in less time. The more theyre required to teach, the more they feel  pressure to deliver as much as they canand as quickly as they can. Many teachers have told me that they prefer administrators to take the ini tiative to undo what is no longer working. Others indicate that they want to  be included at the decision-making table. And, some take it upon themselves  to make changes in their classrooms. In schools that support professional  learning communities, teachers work closely with administrators to reform  teaching. However, most of them still remain in isolated classrooms. When  they want help, often they are afraid to ask for fear of being judged. Staying  in their rooms, not causing a stir, keeps them safeand preserves their  contracts. Ironically, teachers are the deciders in their classrooms. They spend every  day alone with their students. Exciting Classrooms invites them to choose  to stop doing what no longer works, start to use better practices, and nurture  what they already do well. They do not have to wait for leadership to initi ate changes. They do not have to act out of fear. Except for those who are  required to execute scripted lessons, they decide how to teach.

Preface xi Teachers can find the courage to take creative steps to meet the needs of  their students. They can design effective lessons with honest content, relevant  skills, and enduring understandings. They can commit to exciting classrooms.  They can make the difference between an education geared toward the past  and one headed for the future. The emphasis on academic abilitiesverbal and mathematical reasoning represents only two forms of intelligence. Schools must incorporate all forms  at equal levels, including the creative and emotional, if they are to serve  students well. When the arts are cut to make more room to teach academics often replaced by drill and kill sessions to prepare for assessmentsthey  deprive children of the right and opportunity to discover and develop their  gifts. When physical education and recess are eliminated, it sends the  message that exercise is not necessary for a healthy life. Read Exciting Classrooms: Practical Information to Ensure Student Success  to find ways to let go of what no longer works in your school and classroom.  Discover innovations, new strategies, and wisdom to guide you to better prac tice. Find your gifts. Become free to be the real teacher you are. 

xiii Dan Hilliards story at the front of this book illustrates the conundrum facing  teachers. Dan is well-respected and works hard, but he senses something is  missing. Standing at the front of the room limits his options. By sitting in  Sams seat he discovers new possibilities. Dan made this decision on his own. Had he been told to make this move,  he may well have resisted and held on to his own ways, ones he practiced  daily. Instead, he accepted the invitation of the empty desk. Hes accepted  other invitations, such as one from his colleague, Allegra Bernardi, to return  homework without grading to see if students would continue to do it. He and  his colleagues are open to new ideas and often try them. However, when the  administration insists they use a new approach, they often feign to use it and  continue with their own practices. Real change comes best from invitations,  not from edicts. Students are different today. They hardly spend time outdoors without adults  where my friends and I used to spend hours using our imaginations. Now  they are alone watching TV, plying the Internet, playing video games, text  messaging, sexting, tweeting, and conversing on cellphones. They have less  time to think and absorb, less time to spend time in their minds. They are  becoming conduits of information without reflectionwithout ownership.  The digital culture holds their attention by demanding immediate responses  with hardly any concern for content; not to respond immediately means,  youre not my friend. They feel this anxiety. Multitaskingas good as  students may claim they can do it and as much as we may admire itmeans  to dart in and out of different media without taking ownership of any part.  The mind attends to one cognitive task at a time. Introduction

xiv	 Introduction Childrens brains become wired through their upbringing. Had they grown  up learning to do chores, to engage in free play, and to postpone gratification,  they would be better suited to learn as previous generations have. Already  children spend only four-to-seven minutes a day relating to nature and from  seven-to-ten hours in front of screens.1 They are not us. Theyve not had opportunities to learn frustration tolerance, because they  get instant gratification from electronic devices and from overindulgent,  anxiety-ridden, helicopter parents. Few children have free time with peers, as  their lives are closely supervised and heavily scheduled. Increasing numbers  live in single-family households without extended family support.  As Marc Prensky stridently identified nearly fifteen years ago, Our  students have changed radically. Todays students are no longer the people our  educational system was designed to teach.2 Given the overwhelming social  upheavals that children facecombined with their digitally wired brains teachers have little choice but to respond to them in new and innovative ways. Exciting Classrooms: Practical Information to Ensure Student Success  directly addresses the conundrum facing teachers. Already, they report they  may have lost the allegiance of children. They feel it every day as they  scramble to reel them in, to win their attention, to have them listen. As they  ratchet up traditional methods, they see students drifting further away. Reach ing students, however, remains the challenge, more than having to cope with  overloaded curriculums and state and federal assessments.  At the same time, teachers cannot succumb to the relentless insistence  of electronic media. If they do, they too will become conduits for content  prepared by others, of Big Brother if you will. Teachers would then become  clay in the hands of the media conglomerates, such as Disneys manipulation  of princesses and fairies in the lives of little girlsand more recently, Disney  XD, aimed at boys from ages six to fourteen. They also could become subject  to the global surveillance of social medias Twitter. Exciting Classrooms points out that teachers have an opportunity to make  a significant impact on students and their families. They can begin by relin quishing strict classroom control from the front. When they let go of this  delivery mode, they are able to interact better with students. They invite  students to become more receptive. In deciding to meet them halfway perhaps more than halfwaythey make learning more possible. They can shift from delivering knowledge and skills and concentrate  instead on what students are learning in their classrooms. The intention of  teaching, after all, is to cause learning. Its not what teachers teachessen tial as it may seembut what students learn that counts. When teachers  make this shift, they mentally leave the front of the room to teach alongside 

Introduction xv students. They interact with them and enrich their thinking, creativity, assess ment, and communication. They create exciting and engaged classrooms.  When teachers commit to this shift, students will learn how to teach them selves. Schools should listen to the oft-quoted wisdom of Albert Einstein:  We cant solve problems by using the same kind of thinking we used when  we created them. Having an education today means to learn and to learn how  to learn. Teachers are instrumental in this process. They make it possible for  students not only to learn from them and but also to learn with them. Students  play a key role in this process when their minds become engaged and com mitted to worthwhile pursuits. Otherwise, they will waste their time.

Exciting Classrooms is structured to meet the needs of readers, who include  teachers, professors, administrators, and others interested in what happens  in classrooms. Each chapter concludes with a Reflection in which Dan  Hilliard offers relevant insights. It is followed by Points to Pursue to inspire  readers further thinking and discussion. Each chapter also stands alone, so  readers can select the ones that interest them.  For example, if you want to examine the role of classroom lecturing, you  could begin with chapter 1, Implement 10-2 Thinking. Those of you who  wish to explore issues facing teachers might begin with chapter 6, See the  Big Picture. If you want explore an issue that interferes with successful  teaching, read chapter 10, Abolish Tracking. Or, if you like a broader per spective, read chapter 19, Invoke the Cosmos. And, if you want to begin  with a personal story, read Coda, Make a Difference. Reading the whole  book, however, provides a rich perspective on teaching and life. In addition, teachers and professors in particular are encouraged to exam ine the Teaching Manifesto in the Appendix before andor after reading the  book. The Teaching Manifesto provides guidelines for making classrooms  exciting and engaging. Teachers are invited to sign the Manifesto to indicate  their commitment to follow its principles. Other interested readers might  want to read the Manifesto to gain perspective on whats possible to make  learning happen in the classroom. In essence, Exciting Classrooms serves as a friend, companion, and mentor.  It nurtures true collegiality, through which the whole becomes greater than  the sum of its parts. Teachers at all levels who read this bookespecially with  colleagueswill become better teachers. Because of its eclectic approach,  administrators should make it a faculty read to encourage conversation about  what matters in teaching. 

xvi	 Introduction Schools of Education will find it to be an engaging resource in a wide range  of courses. Parents, superintendents, board members, and interested citizens  who read it will be better able to help teachersand future teachers create exciting classrooms. Ultimately, everybody has a vested interest in  educationand in this book. NOTES 1.	 Scott Sampson, How to Raise a Wild Child: The Art and Science of Falling in  Love with Nature New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2015 speaking on On Point with  Tom Ashbrook, March 26, 2015. 2.	 Marc Prensky, Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants. 2001. http:www.marc prensky.com.

Part I WHAT CAN WE DO IMMEDIATELY? When teachers learn about specific, doable strategies, they modify their  teaching skills and create exciting classrooms. Part I offers five immediate strategies to improve students learning. Teachers have extraordinary skills. They instruct, organize, analyze,  synthesize, create, articulate, observe, evaluate, write, initiate, study, plan,  communicate, persuade, motivate, process, prioritize, problem-solve, meet  deadlines, use technologies, negotiate, relate, listen, remember, reflect, adapt,  diagnose, advise, counsel, coach, empathize, follow through. . . . They call on any and all of these skills throughout the day. It is common  knowledge that in the number of mental tasks teachers perform in a given  dayup to three thousandthey are second only to air-traffic controllers.  Teachers keep an eye on the big picture and pay attention to minute details at  the same time. And, they do it for the most part alone. No wonder, then, teachers balk when they are told to drop what they are  doingand may be doing welland change to a new approach, or a new  curriculum, or new method. The act of being told what to do and when to  do it signals that they are inadequate decision-makers and builds resentment.  A basic premise, then, of this book rests on respect for the hard work teachers  do, and at the same time invites them to reconsider their practices in light of  the needs and demands of todays students, culture, and global world. Part I asks teachers to build on what they know that they already do well.  It invites them to reframe, restructure, and reorient common practices in new  directions to make their classrooms exciting. This shift will have a powerful 
Part I effect on the motivation, involvement, and success of studentsand will  deepen the satisfaction of teachers and students alike. Each chapter in Part I offers accessible and proven ways to teach well.  These methods represent a small sample of what teachers can do immediately.  Implementing them will bring the teachers closer to their students minds and  allow them have more success in todays rapidly changing world.
Dennis . . . Peter . . . Mary . . . Sebastian . . . Jos . . . OK, all here except  Miranda and Natasha. A reminder: Tomorrow I will review this weeks material for the test you will  take on Friday. Be sure to go over your notes and reread Chapter 12 in your  textbook. Which chapter, Ms. Bernardi? Chapter 12, Ellie. Now for todays lecture. We will continue discussing Lincolns presidency prior  to the outbreak of the Civil War. Yesterday, I spoke about the LincolnDouglas  debates. Today, I will begin explaining the results of those seven debates. Please  take out your notebooks and copy down the quotations Ive put on the board. Weve all been here. As students, we quickly learn classroom routines.  The longer we are in school, the more consistent they appear. When we  become teachers, we continue the pattern. Taking attendance, collecting  homework, setting the lesson, delivering material, winding down, assigning  homework, dismissing the class. . . . We know the drill. What keeps Allegra Bernardi lecturing in her American History class day  after day? She began doing it in her first year, because she was nervous about  letting her students interrupt her lessons with questions and comments. As a  young teacher, she figured if she kept talking she would maintain better con trol. She would also keep pace with her colleagues. And, covering as much  material as possible is essential if she is to meet the pressures of federal and  state assessments.  After all, talking to students is the way teachers have always taught.  Besides, her students are used to this approach. Parents also expect her to do  Chapter 1 Implement 10-2 Thinking
Chapter 1 it, as it is the approach they know. And, some of Allegras colleagues have  told her she might not keep her contract if she deviates from this embedded  norm, since it is the way teachers teach. But, does Allegra recognize the impact of all her talking? Is she aware of  whats happening in her students minds when she delivers information class  after class, day after day? What if she steps back for a moment to witness  her students sitting at desks taking notes for the period? Then, visualize those  same students repeating the same pattern in at least three other classes every  day? Four classes a day, one hundred eighty minutes, over five hundred hours  in a year! Or, what about elementary children who sit at their desks listening to multiple  series of instructions, followed by seatwork with workbooks and repetitive  worksheets? Whats happening in their minds? How are they processing their  lessons? What values are they internalizing? What are they actually learning? Unfortunately, Allegra and her colleagues rarely take time to find outnor  do they feel that they have the time. Yet, many complain that more and more  of their students do not relate to lectures and whole-class lessons. Fewer of  their students are willing to do homework and seem not to care about quizzes  and tests. What, then, might encourage Allegra and her colleagues to stop  talking so much? What might convince them to reframe their teaching and  create more exciting classrooms?  They could begin by visualizing themselves sitting at a students deskas  Dan Hilliard didand choosing to activate and engage students minds  instead of asking them to take notes.  They could acknowledge that copying notes or filling out worksheets has  hardly any relevance to digitally wired children who live in a globally  connected world. Passive learning sends the wrong message.  They could recall their teachers who deferred from talking to the whole  class and instead invited the class to respond to provocative questions,  creative ideas, and rigorous projects. Evidence is building in research, journals, and literature for developing and  implementing engaged teaching. One example, the Partnership for Twentyfirst Century Skillsa leading coalition of teachers, industry, library groups,  educational providers, and government groupsadvocates skills that adults  will need to succeed in the decades ahead:1  Information and communication skills, including media literacy  Thinking and problem-solving skills, including critical thinking; systems  thinking; problem identification, formulation, and solution; creativity and  intellectual curiosity  Interpersonal and self-direction skills: collaboration, self-direction, account ability, adaptability, and social responsibility

Implement 10-2 Thinking 5  Global awareness  Financial, economic, and business literacy; entrepreneurial skills to  enhance workplace productivity and career options  Civic literacy None of these skills can be learned by sitting and listening. Instead, teachers  might heed the words of the Spanish proverb, What one does, one becomes,  or the wisdom of the Buddha, We are what we practice. If students practice  sitting at desks half-listening, what will they become? How well will they  know themselves? What will they care about? What skills will they have to  prosper in the twenty-first century?

Where can teachers begin? Vincent Roberts, now in his second year, has been struggling. He comes  well prepared every day. He tries to make every class interesting. He works  hard and cares for each and every one of his students and often leaves school  exhausted. He believesas some research confirmsteachers are the most  important factor in student success. Yet, his sophomore History students often  nod off during his lectures. How, then, can he make his classes more engaging? One evening, he ponders, How can I take advantage of my conversational  skills and make learning exciting in my classroom? Maybe I could say less  and listen more. Maybe I could allow students more time to talk and learn  from what they are sayingand so they too may learn from each other. For the next several weeks, Vincent makes this shift. He starts to discover  a deeper satisfaction in his teaching as more students retain more. He enjoys  this new energy. Suddenly, there is no turning back. I no longer have to be  stuck in my past practice. I no longer need to stay in what I now see as the  trash heap of repetitive delivery. If a teacher, like Vincent, is to complete this essential shift, he needs tools.  One of the best and most accessible tools Vincent learned about at a Social  Studies conference is 10-2, which Mary Budd Rowe developed over thirty  years ago.2 Rowes 10-2 innovation provides a natural pathway for turning  talking skills into student involvement and learning. For every ten minutes  of delivering information, knowledge, or skills, 10-2 provides students two  minutes to process. Some examples of implementing and assessing the principle of 10-2 that  Vincent learned about at the conference are:  In math, after introducing improper fractions for about ten minutes, ask  students to work alone or in pairs or in groups for two minutes to create  problems using these fractions.
Chapter 1  In history, after taking ten minutes to discuss slavery as a cause of the Civil  War, ask students to take two minutes to create a graphic organizer to dem onstrate their understanding.  In Language Arts, tell students not to take notes while giving a mini-lecture  on the complexities of a Shakespearean plot. Then ask them to write down  in two minutes what they understood. Vincent is eager to try this approach. First, he takes time to familiarize  himself with Rowes idea. As students process during the two minutes, he  will have to walk around the room and listen. When he lectures nonstop, he  doesnt know what students are absorbing. He likes Rowes idea to allow  students five minutes to ask questions after the final ten minutes of his lecture.  First, it provides an opportunity for them to review their understandings of  the lesson, and second, it will give him feedback to indicate where to take  the next lesson. Instead of taking notes continuously, as Vincents students usually do,  the opportunity to process intermittently has them leaving class retaining  moremuch morethan when he lectures for the whole period. He assigns  homework directly related to what his students are learning in class. This is  home-practice that makes sense! The choice to implement 10-2 Thinking is particularly important for those  who lecture. The age-old format deriving from medieval times requires  students to take notes throughout the period. But, when a teacher commits  to 10-2 Thinking, he reshapes his lectures into ten-minute segments and  plans for the two-minute activities. At first, he and his students find this shift  challenging. But with persistence, as Vincent discovered, it works. The most significant value of 10-2 Thinking is its focus on learning.  Students participate, mirroring their interactive lives. When a teacher only  lectures, he does not know whether or not students are learning until the test,  which is way too late. When he uses 10-2 Thinking, on the other hand, each  processing segment provides him immediate feedback. Any time his students  are not there, everyone is wasting time! In the words of Dylan Wiliam: If students left the classroom before teachers have made adjustments to their  teaching on the basis of what they have learned about the students achievement,  then they are already playing catch-up. If teachers do not make adjustments  before students come back the next day, it is probably too late.3 These are profound words worth rereading, Vincent says to himself. The principle of 10-2 Thinking also applies at the elementary level.  Teachers often speak at some length when introducing a topic. It behooves  them, then, to break up instructions into segments to allow students to process 

Implement 10-2 Thinking 7 and ask questions. Teachers at all levels express concern that students will  gossip if given time to talk with each other. On the contrary, the two minutes  lets teachers listen in. Students welcome opportunities to talk with their peers  rather than sit quietly all period. When teachers claim that the 10-2 Thinking principle is irrelevant, they  should heed the words of Sheila Webb, a kindergarten teacher in Athol,  Massachusetts, who uses it consistently. I love it! The students benefit so  much from working with each other. The conversations are appropriate and  relative to the lesson. Oftentimes, the reluctant students are right in the group  talking about their own experiences or interpretations.  When teachers lecture, they often act as conduits. But when they choose  10-2 Thinking, they invoke the interactivity of language, the power of  dialogue. Vincent also discovered at the conference that he could apply wait  time to his lessonsanother of Mary Budd Rowes innovative ideas. After  asking a question, allow time for students to think before speaking. As Rowe  advocated more than thirty years ago, teachers should wait for three seconds  before calling on students, instead of the 0.5 seconds that most do. By waiting  three seconds, Vincent learned to  invite students who usually hesitate to participate,  encourage full-sentence answers rather than one or two words,   invite higher-order thinking,   and make it more likely for students to respond and comment on each  others answers.4  Vincent also learned to wait another four-to-five seconds after his students  responded to indicate his respect for their thinkingan idea suggested by  Laura Reasoner Jones.5 No more quick responses. Instead, pauses invite  deeper thinking to seek deeper answers. Sometimes, he assigns one-minute  writing intervals to allow his students time to search for clarifications and  understandings. He feels that he is beginning to create a community of learn ers rather than acting as a knowledge-dispensary center. Many of his colleagues who lecture, however, argue that since some  students do well lectures should work for the restif only they would put in  more effort. But, Vincent is convinced that lectures reach fewer and fewer  digitally wired students. And those with learning disabilitiessuch as ADD,  ADHD, and autismcannot listen and take notes at the same time. In years  past, those students who did not do well in academics were considered less  smart and steered into the workforce. Vincent understands that all students  deserve every opportunity to succeed. Yet some of his colleagues hesitate to cross this threshold. They fear that  to implement 10-2 Thinking will take time away from coverage. In a fortyfive minute lecture, Vincent tells them, 10-2 costs about ten minutes. 
Chapter 1 Those minutes, however, are crucial, as they provide students time to learn  before they leave class.  However, one kind of lecture fascinates Vincent, one he uses occasionally.  Hes seen on YouTube popular professors he had one in college engage  a lecture hall of three-hundred students. The professor takes about ten-tofifteen minutes to set up a scenario, then steps in front of the lectern and with  a microphone asks for students to offer their opinions about the situation he  described. He listens closely, reframes the issue, and invites them to consider  their own thinking before the next class. This is the perfect format for popular teachers, Vincent says to himself.  Theyre experts in their field and know how to engage students in a large  lecture hall. I like that they present material much like I do in my class but  they take a longer time to process it. Perhaps I should try that. When teachers commit to 10-2 Thinking, they do not have to be wedded  to its framework. They can vary the ratio, for example, 7-3, 15-3, and so on.  It would depend upon the students, the context of the material, and purpose  of the lesson. Whatever the ratio, Vincent is convinced that the 10-2 Thinking  approach ensures that learning happens in class.  Eventually, Vincent discovers that his lessons are moving toward greater  processing times. When learning becomes central, the ratio, for example, can  shift from 10-2 to 2-10. Given the abundance of resources at their fingertips including cellphones and tabletsstudents can seek information on their own  in class and at home. The research makes clear that depth is more important for learning than  breadth. Delving into material opens learning potential more than rush ing through it. Teaching for understanding activates the mind to think  intelligently when confronting new concepts. Teaching for rote memory, on  the other hand, can stymie long-term retention. By invoking 10-2 Thinking,  as Vincent has, teachers step out from under the explanation umbrella and  engage in conversation. As they teach for understanding, they talk less, stu dents learn moreand so do they. REFLECTION Dan Hilliard and Allegra Bernardi often discuss the impact of lecturing.  Why do we do it when we were often bored listening to lectures day after  day? Dan shares his intention to move away from being the prime talker in  his classroom. I am trying Mary Budd Rowes 10-2 to see if it improves  chances for my students to learn. My students and I struggled with it at  first but soon found it workableand satisfying. In fact, 10-2 Thinking has 

Implement 10-2 Thinking 9 changed my perspective on teaching. I now include frequent in-class process ing and assessments. Checking in and listening has become essential.  If every teacher who lectures or talks a lot uses 10-2 Thinking, Allegra  replies, what a difference it would make throughout the school! Each student  would leave class having worked with the materialand would go home with  something with which to practice! That evening Dan recalls the time he sat in Sams seat. Instead of assign ing homework that day he had asked his students how they planned to pursue  their learning at home. I will try to give them more opportunities to have  input. Maybe I can flip the process and have them learn something new at  home before coming to class. I wonder how that will work? The next day he finds Allegra in the faculty room. Allegra, would you  observe me and give me feedback about my use of 10-2 Thinking? I want to  explore how I can increase the amount of time my students talk and I listen.  Im thinking about moving closer to 2-10 Thinking. Im even thinking of  flipping some of my lessons. I think you have some good ideas, Dan, but we must be careful not to  become stuck in either-or thinking. Sometimes, as you well know, we can  talk to students for as long as twenty or twenty-five minutes and have their  full attention. These times, what I call engaged talking, sometimes happen  by surprise. Students become eager to take in what we have to say. Its like  theyre hungry for our words and hang on to every one. I do not want to give  up those times. Neither do I. POINTS TO PURSUE Use a Timer Allegra Bernardi took Dan Hilliards idea and decided to get a timer. She  thought that it would help her become more disciplined with her talking.  She determined a prescribed amount of time to talk on a topicand set the  timer. After a few times, she told her students why she was doing thisand  asked them to participate more than they were used to in her class. Her teach ing has become more efficient. If you want to become more efficient, try this  timer strategy. Try 10-2 Thinking Vincent Rogers became a better teacher after he introduced 10-2 Thinking into  his teaching. While he struggled at times, his persistence paid off. He knew  that Mary Budd Rowe was right. 
Chapter 1 If you lecture or talk a lot, assess the possibility of using 10-2 Thinking.  Take time to introduce the process, as Vincent did, knowing that it will take  time to convert you and your students to use it. Be patient. Be flexible setting  the proportions between input and process. Pay attention to their reactions.  It will be worth it. Try Wait Time When you feel compelled to cover material, you often teach quickly. Ask one  question, collect an answer quickly, then on the next question. Take time,  then, to examine the potential of Mary Budd Rowes wait time. Try it for  several weeks to see if the quality of student participation improves. Also,  extend the time during which you wait to respond to students comments, as  Laura Reasoner Jones suggests. Be patient, as this process takes time to work.  See if students notice how youve changed your behavior. When they seem  to know, take time to explain what youve done and why. Reduce the Amount of Teacher Talk If you know that you do most of the talking to students, consider ways to  reduce that time. Invite students to make suggestions about how they may  become more involved. If you are willing to try 10-2 Thinking, take your time  to get to using it. It will be hard for your studentsand youto break old habits. If you find successful ways to reduce your talking to increase time for  learning, make a point to share itor teach itto colleagues. If you know  of a colleague who has reduced the amount of talking in her teachingshe  perhaps uses 10-2 Thinkingobserve her to find out what she does. Share 10-2 Thinking Find a colleague who insists on lecturing every day. Invite her to observe you  using 10-2 Thinking with a definite plan to meet and discuss her observations.  If she is willing to try 10-2, agree to observe her and offer help. See if you can  convince her to let go of lecturing. This could be a real challenge, as again,  old habits are difficult to break.  NOTES 1.	 Richard Selfe and Cynthia Selfe, Convince Me! Valuing Multimodal Litera cies and Composing Public Service Announcements, Theory Into Practice, vol. 47,  no. 2, Spring 2008, 8392, in Marshall Memo 325, May 19, 2008, 5.

Implement 10-2 Thinking 11 2.	 John Saphier and Robert Gower, The Skillful Teacher: Building Your Teaching  Skills, 5th ed. Carlisle, MA: Research for Better Teaching, Inc., 1997, 219. 3.	 Dylan Wiliam 2007, quoted by Kim Marshall at a Teachers21 Retreat,  Insights from Research and Practice, June 11, 2008. 4.	 John Saphier and Robert Gower, The Skillful Teacher, 309. 5.	 This application of wait time came from Laura Reasoner Jones in Teacher  Magazine, September 3, 2008.
Chapter 2 Instill Skills Can you believe it? When I ask students to highlight, some highlight a whole  paragraphand even a whole page! Where do they get that idea? We remember how we fended for ourselves when learning how to do school.  We figured out how to do homework, study for tests, take notes, write papers,  complete projects, and organize, organize, organize. Those classmates who  did these things well turned out to be the good students, which may have  helped teachers sort us out into ability groups. When we think about it, parents and pupils share a surprising similarity:  Each learns how to do what he has to do on his own. We expect preparation  for parenting to be uneven, as we have no parent-instruction institutionsand  more families are living apart from one another. But schools are institutions  with a defined structure, run by teachers and support staff who guide students  for thirteen years or longer. Yet, results belie their effectiveness. More than fifty years ago, Del Goodwin, Social Studies department chair at  Hanover High School in New Hampshire, spent an extraordinary amount of  time teaching students how to approach schoolwork: how to take effective  lecture notes not outlining, write essays beyond only five paragraphs, and  prepare research papers analytical answers to questions. His A Manual  for the Writing of Research Papers1 was exemplary. In those prerubric,  preformativeassessment days, he spent an inordinate amount of time defining  skills and procedures and provided feedback to students as they were learning. Today, the emphasis on testing has teachers prepping students on how  to take them. But, as the comment on highlighting above indicates, teach ers need to do more with everyday skills. As pupils move through school,  teachers often assume they know how to do basic skills and procedures from 
Chapter 2 previous teachers. Once students leave primary school, teachers spend less  time on skills and procedures and more on content.  Since almost everyone assigns homework, teachers think students know  how to do it. When asking them to read a chapter for homework, they assume  students know how. After all, students have had years of reading already.  And, surprisingly, when teachers say, Take out your notebook, they may  take it for granted that students know how to take notes. With so much  content to cover, teachers want to focus on delivery, not process. If teachers took time to interview students about their skills, they would dis cover different levels of competency. A student who does poor homework, for  example, may not have a clue as to what to do, not because of his unwillingness  to try. When a student takes poor notes, teachers sometimes think he doesnt  try rather than he may not know how. Students often are unwilling to ask for  help in class to for fear of appearing stupid. And, when teachers see them  highlighting whole paragraphs and pages, they, too, ask Can you believe it? Abraham Mezzo teaches, because he loves being with kids. Sometimes  his sense of humor supersedes his teaching. He loves playing with his  name. On different days he is Mr. Mezzotint, or Mr. Mezzonine,  Mr. Mezzosoprano, and even Mr. Mezzotov. Each time he would stay  in character as long as he could. He wants his students to know that despite  his high standards and rigorous lessons, a sense of humor makes life more  bearable. Needless to say, most of his students love his irreverence but some  do not. He has to be careful. Abraham cares about making school better for everyone. He remembers in  the 1970s when highlighters started becoming commonplace. He noticed then  that his seventh graders had them in their pencil cases. Instead of using pens  or pencils, some of themand he toostarted using them in place of under lining. Of course, no one used highlighters in textbooks, as the books were  owned by the school. None of his colleagues paid much attention to them  either. Highlighters functioned in a manner similar to pens and pencils. Yet,  when he noticed how poorly his Language Arts students were using them, he  knew that he had to do something. He did. Now, many years later, highlighters come in a myriad of stylesand are  ubiquitous. They have even more potential to redefine how students access  informationand their own understandings of material. Abraham asks his  principal if he could lead the faculty on how they might use highlighters.  He prepared the following handout for his presentation: 1.	 Create or find a thoughtful and provocative one-page piece of writing that  will hook your students.

Instill Skills 15 2.	 Give each student two highlighters, one yellow and one blue. 3.	 Put a question on the board and ask them to use the yellow highlighter to  search for information that answers the question. Tell them to highlight  only words or phrases and not sentences or paragraphs. 4.	 Have them take two minutes to compare their highlighting with a partner  in preparation for a class conversation. 5.	 Process this exercise with the whole class. Allow students to ask ques tions and offer comments. Seek a consensus about what should have been  highlighted. Then, do the following: 6.	 Put a different question on the board and ask students to use the blue  highlighter to underline words and phrases in the same article. When they  highlight the same words as they did with yellow marker, those words will  appear green, which will stimulate further conversation.2 7.	 An option at this point would be to have students meet in groups to discuss  their underlining and write a common statement in response.  8.	 Another option is to have them compare their highlighting with that of  a partner. Before reconvening the class, have partners meet with another  pair and try to find agreement among the four as to what should have been  highlighted.  9.	 Again, regather the class and answer questions. To check their understand ing, you can have students write a paragraph on their understandings of  how to use a highlighter. Abraham then summarizes his presentation: A student who highlights whole paragraphs is wasting his time. He is making no  attempt to sort out key ideas or terms. A teacher who takes time to teach students  how to use this remarkable tool will not only stimulate interest in the material  but will also improve their retention. After several repetitions of the process,  students will have acquired a valuable skill that will improve their opportunities  to retain what they read.  After the meeting, several colleagues came up to him to thank him for  taking the time to share his ideas.  Later in the week, Abraham put the following information into faculty  mailboxes: Heres another one-page exercise that uses two highlighters:
Chapter 2 Ask students to use one color to mark what they think is important; use the other  for what they find confusing. Again, you will be focusing on teaching how to  use a highlighter as a specific tool. By having students work with highlighters in  the classroom, you provide an effective tool for practicing literacy skills. Using  highlighters well activates close, purposeful reading and rereading, improves  thinking and conversation, and opens up opportunities to discuss and argue  concepts using new-found evidence. You can create similar exercises when introducing Post-it Notes and Flags.  For example, ask your students to search through a textbookwhich they are  not allowed to markand Flag answers to specific questions. You can have  them use a different color Flag to answer a different question. Or ask you can ask students to search for particular examples, opinions, or  ideas. Set up a scenario like the highlighter examples above. Have students  either work alone, with a partner, or with the whole class. Invite them to use  different colored Flags for different purposes. The goal is to teach students to  use tools they find appealing to develop essential skills. One final thought: those of you who use iPads in class can do the same exer cises, except you cannot combine a yellow highlight with a blue highlight to get  green 6 in my handout. Maybe some day. 

Whenever teachers, like Abraham, take time to teach students how to learn,  they find satisfaction. Devoting time to teach skills, however, may appear to  interfere with meeting the demands of ever-increasing amounts of curricula  and outside testing. Yet, without the skills necessary to succeed in school,  students will flounder. As carpenters need to learn how to use the tools of the  trade, so, too, do students. Teachers have the obligation to teach them how to  use these tools well. REFLECTION In his early years as a teacher, Dan Hilliard underlined books with pens and  wrote notes in the margins. Now he uses highlighters, Post-it Notes, and  Flags. He particularly likes having students use Flags to indicate key ideas  and pages in textbooks. When he first saw that his students were not using  highlighters properly, he created lessons to teach them how to use them.  He also taught them to use Post-it Notes and Flags. Because his students  use these tools to help them focus on their reading, they have become more  curious. They retain more as well. He shared his thinking with Allegra Bernardi, who also had been paying  more attention to the use of these tools. Together, they brainstormed different 

Instill Skills 17 approaches. When introducing these skills to their students, they have been  sure to integrate good content. They want students to see the value of apply ing good skills to enable them to learn better. POINTS TO PURSUE Survey Students Del Goodwin never took for granted the skill levels of his students. Instead,  he made sure that they had the skills necessary for any project he assigned  them to. If you want to know what your students know about how they learn,  you will need to ask them.  Periodically survey your students knowledge and understandings of how  you conduct your classroom. For example, how they prepare for tests, do their  homework, write their papers, take notes, use highlighters, etc. Chances are  you will discover misconceptions that you can correct. Try Two Highlighters Abraham Mezzo may have his quirks, but he knew a good idea when he  found it. His creative use of highlighters with his students is instructive.  If youve never approached your students about using highlighters,  find a one-page topic that would appeal to them. Introduce Abrahams  two-highlighter approach described in this chapter, or your own variation. Do  the exercise several times until students understand how to use the technique  well. Follow up with home-practice for reinforcement. Try Post-Its and Flags Do similar activities using Post-it Notes and Flags. Have students create their  own Post-it Notes and Flags assignments.  Connect with Colleagues Faculties become better when colleagues share good ideas. Instead of relying  on administration to set the agendas for faculty meetings, take the initiative  to bring up topics.  For example, ask your principal if you can introduce teaching students  how to use highlighters, Post-it Notes, and Flags in classes. Take Abraham  Mezzos ideas from this chapteror your ownabout how to use these valu able tools. The school will be better off. Students will retain more. 
Chapter 2 NOTES 1.	 Delmar W. Goodwin, A Manual for the Writing of Research Papers, Hanover  Junior-Senior High School, Hanover, New Hampshire, 1964. 2.	 Thanks to Chuck Emery of Powder Mill Middle School, Southwick, MA, for  suggesting the use of primary-color markers.
Chapter 3 Teach Literacy Okay class, for tonight I want you to begin our study of organelles by reading  sections 1 and 2 of chapter 15 in the textbook. Answer the first five questions at  the end. I will collect them before class. See you tomorrow. Children are taught to read during their first years in school. By the time they  reach middle school, teachers assume they know how. On the surface, this  appears true for most of them. If teachers assume children are able to read for  meaning and understanding, they may have to think again.  Comprehending textbooks, for example, is a challenge for many. Part of  this challenge is answering the questions at the end of chapters. Most students  attempt to read the text first and then try to answer the assigned questions.  Others turn immediately to the questions then look for the answers in the  text. Some struggle with other ways, hoping they will get it right. And others  simply give up. If teachers expect students to dissect and comprehend a textbookor any  bookthey should not simply assign pages; they should first be sure students  know how to read it. It is common practice, for example, for Language Arts  teachers to teach students how to read books in every genre. Poetry is not the  only challenge. Most teachers recognize that textbooks are especially difficult to read.  They are constructed in a series of mention sentences, that is, a series of  disconnected sentences, each correct in themselves but not well-connected  and coherent. They rarely express narrative. Jim Grant, founder of Staff  Development for Educators, shared this point of view at a workshop.  He based his conclusions on close analysis of textbooks and attributed their  cleaned-up quality to the Texas textbook review committee.1 So, what can a teacher do with textbooks?
Chapter 3 1.	 Commit as much time as necessary to teach your students how to be  students of the text. Recognize that todays digitally oriented students may  find reading textbooks particularly difficult. Make sure they understand  that they will not only learn how to read the text but will also learn its  content at the same time.  2.	 Use a jigsaw method: Assign a different section of a chapter to each  student or to pairs. Each personpair focuses on a small part of a chapter.  Ask them to read their section closely; invite them to use Post-it Notes or  Flagsonly if they know howandor take brief notes. Provide questions  to help them focus. 3.	 Group togetherup to five in a groupthose who have read the same sec tion and have them discuss their findings. Once they agree on the content,  have them write a common statement to indicate their understanding.  Move about the room to check common statements to be sure they under stand their section before they share it with classmates. 4.	 Place students into mixed groups to report findings to each other. Their  common statements assure consistency and help them focus. By the time  they finish sharing, everyone will have a good idea about what the text book chapter was aboutand will be able to answer the questions at the  end of the chapter. 5.	 For reinforcement, assign a jigsaw for home-practice. Encourage them to  use cellphones or instant messaging to help each other.  6.	 Repeat this practiceor its variationsuntil students understand how to  read and learn from your textbook. The net result of these in-classhome-practice efforts teaches students how  to become more fluent both in reading and writing. Their newfound literacy  skills will give them a better chance for future success. However, when teach ers fail to take this time, reading the text becomes moot.  When schools neglect to incorporate the rigor of literacynot only for  textbooksthey deprive students of an important tool for the twenty-first  century. Literacy skills are essential in fields that demand higher-order  thinking. They are necessary for accessing thinking about what matters.  Where else but in the classroom will students have opportunities to develop  essential literacy skills of how to read with pen in hand, how to write and  rewrite, and how to discuss and argue effectively with evidence?2 Without  these skills, they will fall prey to the sound-bite media that bombards them  every day. Isaiah Peterson agrees to observe his colleague Ron Schultz as he lectures to  his sixth-grade students about the role of historians. Ron stands at front of the  room, asks them to take notes, and answers questions toward the end of the 

Teach Literacy 21 class. He appears well-prepared and enjoys his studentsand they appear to  enjoy him. He has a gentle yet authoritative manner. At the end of his lesson,  he assigns for homework a one-page sheet that describes Sherlock Holmess  detective skills. He wants his students to locate and highlight passages about  Holmess skills and relate those passages to the tools of historians. After the students leave, Isaiah says, Your connecting Sherlock Holmes  to historians is clever. Why did you give it as a homework assignment?  Ron immediately admits, I know that it will be way over their heads, but  I decided to do it anyway. So, Ron, again why did you give the assign ment? After some conversation, Ron realizes that the Holmes piece would  have been better taught in class. For one, because they like Sherlock Holmes  it would have engaged his students in the historical process. But, more impor tantly, because the assignment is challenging, Ron would have been available  to work alongside them. His conversation with Isaiah leads him to consider other ways he could  use the Sherlock Holmes sheet in class. He could group students into pairs or  triads and ask them to connect the relationship between Holmess tools as a  detective with the tools of historians. Once they made their connections, each  group would share with the class in an attempt to reach a consensus.  In the process, he could encourage them to use their cellphones to text  message other groups or to seek the advice and opinion of people beyond  the classroom. He could list higher-order questions on the board to stimulate  their thinking. The lesson might well have turned into one of those magical  hubbub classes, full of energy, focused noise, and engagement, rather than  one characterized by the restless behavior that often occurs during his lecturestyle teaching. Ron thinks of other options. He could ask students to create a play casting  detectives as historians. Or have them to make pamphlets or posters connect ing Holmes to historians. Or he could ask them to draft a letter to convince  their textbook publisher to include Holmes in the section, What is History?  And, he could ask them to write reflective essays and then take time to help  them edit and rewrite in class. Eventually, the essays could be made into a  class book, The Historian as Detective. Then he has another idea. Once his students master the material and  complete the class book, he could invite them to create public service  announcements PSAs to persuade other students in the school to appreci ate studying the past as detectives. The level of technology to produce the  PSA would depend on the sophistication of his students. It might include  Microsoft Word, PowerPoint, iMovie and Movie Maker, and digital still cam eras, digital video cameras or smartphones. How exciting for my students to  use their media rather than exclusively paper and pencil! And, to use their  newfound knowledge in a creative way!
Chapter 3 These examples demonstrate how Ron could implement a myriad of possi bilities available to engage his students in literacy learning in his classroom.  If, on the other hand, he assumes that his students have tools necessary for  learning, he would miss the opportunity to develop all-important literacy  skills, a necessary prerequisite for success in the future. And, he would miss  engaging with their minds.  REFLECTION  Teachers have to be vigilant about the literacy levels of students. They cant  assume how well students read and write at any grade level. While they may  appear able to read proficiently, some may be sliding along, concealing that  they are not real readers. Dan Hilliard was surprised to hear in his first year  of teaching from a former good student that she really learned to read in her  senior American Studies class from his veteran colleague, Marty Goodfellow! When teachers do not assume about what skills students possess, they pro vide opportunities for them to demonstrate proficiencies. After introducing  a literacy skill, they reinforce it throughout the year. In fact, teachers now  have to teach traditional literacy and twenty-first-century skills see chapter  1, Implement 10-2 Thinking. Dan has become aware of this imperative  and spends increasing amounts of time putting both sets of skills at the center  of his teaching. His students will become capable of teaching themselves,  perhaps the most important gift he can give them.  POINTS TO PURSUE Assess Your Students Skills Take time to learn what students know about reading and writing. Pre-assess  by passing around a short, one-page, provocative reading material relevant  to your subject or grade level. Ask students to study it and observe how they  approach it. Do they simply read it? Do they use highlighters? Underline?  Write in the margins? Ask clarifying questions? Seek help from classmates?  Allow time for them to think-pair-share. Give them time to reflect alone,  then discuss their perceptions with a partner, and then share with the whole  class. This is a useful technique, as it involves everyone. Take Time for Metacognitive Discussions If you only plow through lesson after lesson, you miss opportunities to  process student thinking. Take time, then, to have thinking-about-thinking 

Teach Literacy 23 discussions. Discuss with them about their mental processes and their aware ness of how they think and use strategies. Discuss the importance of com prehension, as well as how to generate questions that lead to further learning.  Such metacognitive discussions can put teacher and students on the same  page.  Include Narratives with Textbooks After his conversation with Isaiah Peterson, Ron Schultz discovered many  ways he could incorporate Sherlock Holmess thinking into his students  assignments. Ron recognizes that textbooks are bereft of stories. He sees that  the Sherlock Holmes piece can bring life to his lessons.  If you use a textbook, particularly in the humanities, make every effort to  incorporate narrative material whenever possible. Use good questions to help  students make connections and provoke evidentiary thinking. Assess Twenty-First-Century Skills in Your Curriculum Do you agree that the twenty-first century demands that schools teach  twenty-first-century skills? Given the expanding requirements of the literacy  curriculum, how would you justify teaching these skills so as not to water  down the academic curriculum? How can you convince others that teaching  these skills is every bit as important? These are vital questions. Seek Colleagues Who Teach Both Literacy and Twenty-FirstCentury Skills Take time to reassess your priorities. Do you teach both traditional literacy  and twenty-first-century skills? How effective are you? Find other colleagues  who claim that they do and agree to observe each other. Try each others  ideas and insist on feedback. You will learn from one another. NOTES 1.	 See also A Glossary of Banned Words, Usages, Stereotypes, and Topics  thirty-five pages!, in Appendix 1 in Diane Ratvitch, The Language Police: How  Pressure Groups Restrict What Students Learn New York: Vintage, 2003, 2004. 2.	 Michael Schmoker, Results Now: How We Can Achieve Unprecedented  Improvement in Teaching and Learning Alexandria, VA: ASCD, 2006, for literacy;  and Tony Wagner, The Global Achievement Gap New York: Basic Books, 2008, for  twenty-first century skills.
Chapter 4 Design Invitations Steve Thomass students arrive at his classroom door and find all the desks at  the edge of the room. They hesitate . . . Come on in and find a spot on the floor! Ive put an intriguing problem on  the board and large posters on the walls that are designed to raise your curios ityand take you away from your desks. I wonder what you will discover!  You have the whole period to begin work on this problem. You can work  alone or with anyone youd like. You can use any resources from the bookshelf  and computers in the room or in the library. You can ask me any questions.  Forty minutes later . . . For homework, I want you to explain to someone at home or in your neigh borhood what you did today in class. Then come to class tomorrow prepared  to discuss and write about what you did, how you shared it, and how you felt  about the process. No lecture. No notes. No roll call.  Steve had wanted to do this ever since a colleague suggested that he see Dead  Poets Society over Christmas break. He became fascinated watching John  Keating played by Robin Williams take his students to the trophy room on  the first day of school. He was intrigued with Keatings ability to appeal to  their intellect and emotions. Known for creating surprises in his classroom,  Steve promised himself he would try something as radical with his middle  school social studies students upon returning to school in the New Year. Steves yearning to intrigue his students illustrates a fundamental  responsibility of teachers. As the digital universe surrounds their lives,  students arrive in class with less interest in desk learning. Steve has heard  colleagues complain, These kids dont care; If parents cared, then our  students would; Boys hide inside baggy clothes and girls dress as if theyre  going to a party; All they want to do is use their cellphones and iPods; 
Chapter 4 Few of them do their homework. Steve hears colleagues claim that they are  teaching in a different world, certainly different from when they grew up. He  agrees with their sentiments but is open to the challenge. Teachers are responsible for initiating learning in their classrooms. Unmo tivated students are their responsibility. They cannot give up on any of them  until theyve done everything possible to engage their brains. Some students  arrive already defeated, having given up hope, believing they are less than  smart. They slink through the door and sit as far back as possible. When  teachers give up on them, they put another nail in their coffin, instill yet  another confirmation of their inadequacy, and add another step on their trip  to the street. And, rather than appear stupid, these students often misbehave. Every beginningevery lesson, every unit, every yearneeds to be an  invitation to learn. Invitations, despite claims to the contrary, are a teachers  most powerful tool. Threats and coercion have no effect on a student who is  convinced that learning in school has no value.  In addition to the surprise of going to the trophy room on the first day,  Keating chooses Robert Herricks To the Virgins, to Make Much of Time  as his text. Herricks poem allows Keating to address the deeper lessons of  life that he wants students to pursue in his literature class. He concludes by  pointing to old photos of former students and says, You, too, will soon be  pushing up daisies. Carpe Diem, boys. Seize the day!1  Keatings students want to return to class the next day, and the next, and  the next. His invitations let them know of his commitment to them and to  what they will learn. Steves invitation after the holidays as well aims to  stimulate his students. He wants them to see the value of open-ended creative  problem solving and to trust their own initiativetwo of his long-term goals.  He invites them to search ancient eastern philosophies of Confucius, Lao Tzu,  and the Buddha on their own and decide which is the most significant. Steve  opens the door to weeks of stimulating research, conversation, and writing.  Teachers love John Keatings foray into the trophy room, but few emulate  him. Invitations to learn, after all, take time and require creative juices.  Given the pressures to cover material as fast as possible, invitations can cut  into teaching timeand losing time creates anxiety. Bariyyah Lawrence,  a veteran teacher devoted to her students, stopped teaching fourth grade  because she could not escape the anxieties that she and her students were feel ing every day about the MCAS Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment  System, the states high stakes test. She feels safer now that shes teaching  first grade. So do her children. Judging from research and classroom observations, most teachers prefer  daily routines, which assures them of being able to cover required material.  Yet, some take John Keating and Steve Thomass path. They value novelty. 

Design Invitations 27 Steves favorite metaphor to describe his view of novelty relates to perfume:  the scent of perfume quickly recedes shortly after one senses its aroma. So,  in school without novelty, boredom encroaches. When teachers vigorously  engage students, their lessons often linger after the bell. 

When teachers invite, they treat students as honored guests. They move away  from acting as authorities who direct from the front of the room. They recall  teachers who every day told them where to sit, what to do, when to do it, and  how. Everyone complied because this was the way to do school. However,  choosing the power of invitations, teachers no longer espouse compliance. Viewing students as honored guestsdespite having been assigned them allows teachers to see them as who they are and who they can become. They  become partners in learning with students rather than purveyors of knowledge  to them. They act as hosts serving smorgasbords of ideas, questions, reflec tions, materials, skills, information, and understandings. Classes become acts  of exchanging rather than one-way telling. What can I do every day to invite  students to learn in my classroom? The decision to extend invitations, however, is the first half of the equation.  How students and families respond is the other half. Invitations, like gifts,  only succeed when accepted. John Keatings invitation worked because his  students accepted his challenge to seize the day. If an invitation fails, try  another. Be willing, confident, and persistent. Invitational classrooms respect learners with an agreementan equation in which teachers engage in a learning exchange with students and their fami lies. When teachers talk and deliver, they distort the equation; what students  receive requires them to regurgitate what theyve learned if they are to  get a passing grade, let alone get an A. No opportunity to process, think, or  choose. No opportunity to complete the equation. Its no surprise, then, as students move into middle and high school they  feel increasingly dissatisfied sitting detached in delivery classrooms. Fewer  do homework or study for tests. Mary McGillis, a new, energetic ninth-grade  Biology teacher, was astonished to learn from her colleagues that students  in her school do not study for exams. They told her that unless she assigns  a review project, none of the students will bother. Mary recalls that she and  her classmates took exams seriously. As she thinks more about it, she real izes that despite her best efforts her science students are not willing to work  as hard as she did.  When a teacher implements a balanced-equation classroom, she commits not  only to bring material to students but also to bring students to the material. 
Chapter 4 Instead of handing information to her students as truth, she treats content as  a lump of clay. She shapes opportunities to engage and invite her students  to reform it in relationship to their understandings. Together, she and her  students complete the shaping through a deeply creative process.  Not only does she develop an understanding of her teaching, but her  students also develop understandings that they can take into future learnings.  No more studying for tests, striving to pass them, and then forgetting every thing the next day. Creating a classroom culture centered on invitations takes patience, time,  and persistence. When, for instance, choosing to apply discipline through  consequences rather than punishments, a teacher builds trust and confidence.  She lets students and parents know that her classroom is personal, active, and  student-centered, not impersonal, inactive, and passive. When she teaches for  learning, she is released from the tyranny of teaching-as-talking. Colleagues  might put pressure on her to abandon such thinking by saying, This is not  how we do things around here. But once she commits to this process, she  cannot turn back. We all remember our great teachers. Whatever their teaching styles, we  felt invited. Even when they lectured, we felt privy to their minds. We felt  included in their world. We learned. We too know weve succeeded when we  wake up at the end of class as if in a dream. Where did the time go? we ask.  Where did it go? say our students. REFLECTION Unless we are willing to take responsibility for motivating students, we may  not get much from them. Choosing not to motivate sets up a cycle. Students  come to class each day less and less interested. We raise our voices, ratchet  up our delivery, repeatedly call out for their attentionbut to no avail. The  cycle is set. Students see us as not caring; we see them as lazy and unwilling  to learn. If a teacher looks inward at her role and responsibility, she will recognize  what she may need to change. She is the adult, after all. While she might  consider John Keatings carpe diem or Steve Thomass moving desks to  the side as extreme, she certainly can begin by designing invitational lessons.  Dan Hilliards first direct experience inviting his students to learn came on  the day he sat in Sams seat in the middle of the room. Later, when he saw  Dead Poets Society, he vowed someday that he would take such a radical step  with his students. But, he wants to be sure that hes not tempted to do it just  for show. He wants his teaching to be integral to what he intends students to 

Design Invitations 29 know, understand, and be able to do. Some day he will know the time when  to try his carpe diem. POINTS TO PURSUE Go for It! Have you thought about trying something radically different with your  students? Have you wanted to try a John Keatings trophy-room lesson or a  Steve Thomass emptying-the-desks lesson?  Devise your own radical step. Dont worry about its success, just give it  your all. Whether it works or not, you will have a provocative, metacognitive  discussion afterward. Who knows what it will lead to? Your willingness to  take a risk will encourage your students to do the same.  Make Motivation Central to Your Teaching Keating and Thomas took radical steps to motivate their students. How  important do you think it is to motivate your students? What responsibility do  you think students have for their own motivation? What is the balance point  between the efforts of teacher and students? What can you do to reach this  balance point? Should you involve parents?  Students As Honored Guests Are you willing to see your students as honored guests? If you did, what  differences do you think it would it make in your teaching? Take time to  assess your attitude.  If you think that youd like to shift your classroom toward a more  respectful relationship between you and your students, how would you go  about it? What would you do to let them know? How would your classroom  be different?  Remake Old Lessons As Invitations After learning about better techniques, sometimes teachers think that lessons  designed the old way need to be thrown out. Before you do, take a close at all  of the work you did to develop your old lessons. Pick one of them and use as  much of it as you can when you decide to convert it into an invitation-to-learn  lesson. Use the Taps Template for Teacher Planning see chapter 5 Make  Meaning to flesh it out. 
Chapter 4 When you reteach the lesson, pay attention to the differences you discover.  Were you able to lure more students into wanting to work? Was it successful  with all your students? What would you do differently? Consult Colleagues You know colleagues who have reputations for stimulating students. Some  are flamboyant, others introversive. You often hear students talking about  them. Ask if you can observe. If you like what she does, ask if you can try  some of her ideasand share yours. Through such exchanges, more students  in your school will receive the benefits of innovative teaching. Include Student Ideas Students are great as a resource. They sit in class after class and know what  they like and dont like. If youve never discussed with them about their  impressions of your classroom, invite them to suggest ways to make it excit ing. Listen. Try their ideas to let them know you are listening, and are willing  to learn from them. Move Your Desks The physical arrangement of your room speaks volumes about you and your  intentions. Desk in rows versus in a horseshoe each gives its own message.  A room with desks, soft chairs, and couches sends yet another message.  Consider establishing different room arrangements to meet different learn ing expectations. With a stopwatch, teach your students how to move desks  and chairs efficiently. Do it more than once. Be sure to have a worthwhile  purpose for whatever arrangement you use.  NOTE 1.	 Peter Weir, Dead Poets Society, Touchstone Pictures, 1989.
Chapter 5 Make Meaning Heres an index card for each of you. On one side please write three ideas you  learned from our discussion today. On the other, please write a question we  should pursue tomorrow to better understand what we are learning. You do not need to put your name on the card. I will use them to assess what  we accomplished and where we might take our work from here.  When a teacher shifts from talking at students to talking with them, they  perk up. She keeps an open mind. She listens. She sees them engaged. She  pays attention to what works. Her success leads to other strategies. She  searches the Internet and studies educational publications. She read books.  She rearranges her room. She asks colleagues for their ideas and practices. Envision a piano teacher. She invites her pupil to play alongside her. She  plays, then he plays. Back and forth. Back and forth. An interactive process.  What if during the lesson she only shows him how the keys strike the sound board, how to identify the notes she plays, points to the score, and so on?  He would leave for home without having tried any of the techniques. How  could he practice? A teacher who emulates a piano teacher engages, connects, and supports.  If, on the other hand, she only delivers information, she puts the onus of  learning on her students. Some of students who are good at taking down notes  might be able to learn at home. Others probably not. A teacher who lectures  often feels satisfied. If I present a well organized lecture, students should be  able to learn. After all, I am responsible for covering the curriculumand  theres too much already!so delivery is the most efficient way. However, if a teacher wants to engage more students and improve their  chances for success, that is, is willing to emulate the piano teacher, she can try  the four strategies in this chapter. Each brings her closer to her students. Each  brings her students closer to the material. And each helps to shut down the 
Chapter 5 gap between teacher delivery and student sitting. Exit Cards, Recap Cards,  and Give OneGet One are interactive and instructional. The fourth strategy,  the TAPS Template for Teacher Planning, assures that lessons and units are  designed within a coherent and sensible format. EXIT CARDS Every day, teachers face lots of students. Most of the time they are concerned  with keeping pace with the curriculum. Secondary teachers set pacing goals  with one another at department meetings. Elementary teachers feel pressure to  cover the necessary material in all subjects within specific time frames. As a  result, teachers spend less and less time assessing. And because they work  alone and their schedules are full, they have little time to observe and provide  feedback to one another. Many ask only for end-of-the-year evaluations from  their pupils on the last daytoo late to use to improve their teaching. Exit Cards help teachers alleviate this lack of effective feedback. They  are simple to use: near the end of class, pass around index cards, ask for  comments or questions, and collect them as students leave. Exit cards can be  used after a lesson, at the end of a unit of study, or even in the middle of a  block periodany time thats appropriate. Peter Macon has been teaching math to seventh graders for five years.  He loves his job but worries that some of his students are falling behind.  Learning math is a cumulative process. Hes noticed, however, that at any  one time up to a third of his students fail to keep up. At a math conference,  he learned about Exit Cards and started to use them. He tried different types of Exit Cards to determine which ones worked best.  The first time he asked, Please tell me whats bothering you about this class?  He received mixed messages, few of them very helpful. The next time, he tried  a more direct approach. He wrote two phrases on the board, I like . . ., I wish  . . . He thought his students would provide clues as to what helped them during  class and what else they would like from him. He was pleased. He then offered  other pairs including I want . . ., I need . . ., and I heard . . ., I said . . . Later, he took a different approach. He framed two questions: What  worked for you today? and What question do you need an answer to? He  liked this approach, as the responses were specific and he could apply them to  his next days lesson. When he tried asking negative questions, such as What  didnt you like? or What didnt work for you? he found answers less help ful. Positive questions generate better ideas both for him and for his students. Later, he asked them a question pertaining to himself. Is there anything  I need to know to teach you better? His students took the question seriously. 

Make Meaning 33 He tried several of their ideas. Other times, he asked direct content questions,  such as What do you think was the big idea of todays lesson? and What  question do you have about what you learned? He found that these types of  questions also worked well. Occasionally, Peter asked students to sign their  names, particularly when he wanted to know individual preferences.  Peter likes Exit Cards, because theyre immediate and anonymous. They  take little time away from his lessons, yet provide him with valuable informa tion about his teaching and about what his students are learning. Without Exit  Cards Peter could only ascertain their body language and guess the success  of his teaching. Now that he has instant and valuable feedback, he is able to  plan better, teach betterand, of course, assess better.  Once he became a committed user, Peter began to ascertain patterns as  to whats working do more of the same and to whats troublesome make  changes, and used these patterns to gain insights discover new ideas. Peter  thought of organizing his Exit Cards, so he now uses a specific color for each  class. Then, he has the proper context when reading them. Being one of the more gregarious members of his faculty, Peter couldnt  wait to share his epiphanies about Exit Cards. If others start to use them he  would learn new ways to use them. He figures he is only at the tip of the  iceberg as to their effectiveness. From a conversation with Megan Stoddard,  a third-grade colleague, he learned that she not only uses Exit Cards but also  uses a different color for each subject in her classroom.  Given that it takes about two minutes of class time for Peters students to  fill them out and not much longer to read, Exit Cards have been a wise invest ment. They make assessment a daily practice. No more waiting for quizzes  and tests to tell Peter how his students have been doing.  RECAP CARDS Exit Cards provide instant feedback. Peter later discovers Recap Cards, which  give his students opportunities to test their knowledge, skills, and understand ing during the last ten minutes of class.1 Instead of him relying on Thumbs  up; thumbs down, or asking, How many of you think you know . . .? or  calling on a few students for a quick assessment, Peter discovered that Recap  Cards allow every student to process the days lesson and receive immediate  feedback.  Peter outlines his procedure for using Recap Cards as follows:2 1.	 With about ten minutes of class time remaining, I give each student in his  cooperative learning group a standard-lined index card 46 inches, 5   8 inches.
Chapter 5 2.	 I have them recap the most important points in the lesson or solve the  assessment problem of the day. I make sure they put their name on the  card. 3.	 After they have finished writing, I instruct students to pass the cards to a  peer in their group. I ask peers to rate the recap according to a predeter mined rubric for good communication see below. Then, the reviewers  place their initials against the rating. Later, I record the peer evaluation  values. 4.	 The students return the reviewed recaps to their owners. One or two  students who scored three stars highest rating from their peers share their  responses. If time permits, we discuss the ratings and how the recaps can  be made stronger. Periodically I post examples of excellent recaps or place  them on an overhead next to the rubric. 5.	 I change the cooperative learning groups biweekly to ensure that each  student receives a wide range of opinions. The rubric Peter uses is as follows:3  Three stars for a recap that is clear, accurate, grasps the main ideas of the  lesson, and shows how the problem was solved.  Two stars for the satisfactory job of getting the main idea, but the response  is either unclear to the reader or has several errors. The response shows  only a basic understanding of the ideas involved.  One star for an attempt at the problem; response is hard to read, not very  clear, or has several errors. It shows only a basic understanding of the ideas  involved.  Zero stars reflect major errors in understanding the ideas. Peter uses Recap Cards to learn how well everyone has learned his lesson.  The cards are comprehensive and provide immediate feedback both to him  and his students. Peer assessment provides direct feedback and often solidi fies the lesson.4 Peter often sees students who struggle during his lesson begin  to pick up the material during this review process. Peers teaching peers  works better sometimes than my teaching!

Exit Cards and Recap Cards are invaluable. Simple to use, they provide  teachers and students immediate feedback. These are only samples of sum marizers that can provide valuable formative feedback. Among others are the  following:

Make Meaning 35  Envelope Please and Crumple and Toss: These are similar to Exit Cards but  with a twist. Ask students the same types of questions and either put the  cards into an envelope or toss them into a basket. Using the Envelope, like  we use Exit Cards, ask students to write questions about the lesson. After  checking them over, teachers can pass the envelopes back randomly for  peers to answer the questions the next day.  3-2-1: An example of this would be, Three big ideas about . . ., Two  problems you see, and One question you want answered.5  The Important Thing: Create a brochure applying evidence about a lesson,  based on Margaret Wise Browns Important Book New York: Harper and  Row, 1949.6  The One-Minute Paper: This is a popular, higher-education tool used at  the end of lectures, in which students answer, What is the big point you  learned in class today? and What is the main unanswered question for  you from todays class?7  Ticket to Leave: Another term for Exit Card.  Peter Macons experiments with Exit Cards and Recap Cards exemplify  the workings of a teacher who wants an exciting classroom. To take the  guesswork out of assessing of his teaching, he hears directly from his stu dents. Once he discovered Recap Cards, he sees them as an invaluable tool to  assess what his students learnor noton any given day.  Recently, Peter discovered a wonderful new tool that enables him to  immediately assess what his math students are learning. As he teaches the  concept that every quotient of integers is a rational number, most of students  appear to grasp it quickly. He then assesses their answers using his new tool  Socrative.8 His students were already logged in on their iPads. A box was  open on their screens in which he puts a problem. The students answers  appeared by their names on his screen. Only five got it right!  He presented other problems, and after fifteen minutes all the students were  able to derive correct answers. At the time his students were learning what  he wanted them to. Sometimes as reinforcement, at the end of a Socrative  lesson he uses Recap Cards. Most students score with three stars. He is begin ning to like his teaching more every day! So many ways to reach students! GIVE ONEGET ONE Give OneGet Oneor as some teachers prefer, Seek OneShare Oneoffers  an invaluable way to activate learning. For example, using the Give OneGet  One form Figure 5.1, a teacher can ask students to fill in the top three boxes 
Chapter 5 with three ideasfactsquestions they know from what theyve been studying.  She then asks them to move around the room both to gather classmates ideas  and to share their own. Once they have filled the remaining six boxes, they  return to their seats.  Give OneGet One provides students an enjoyable opportunity to share  their thinking and pick up different information. They particularly like mov ing aroundand need it! The process encourages community building, as it  Figure 5.1 Sample Use of Give OneGet One.

Make Meaning 37 opens students to learn from one another. It also builds confidence, as they  observe peers writing down their ideas. And, it builds collective responsibil ity for learning the material in question. Like all new procedures, teachers  should take time to teach students how to interact using Give OneGet One.  Bob Mullen, a longtime teacher and now a consultant, uses GiveOne Get  One in his workshops with teachers to show them its effectiveness. In his  sixth-grade language artssocial studies classroom, he had a reputation as one  who tried new strategies. Hardly a week passed in which his students were  not challenged to learn in a new way. No one was bored! He selects topics he wants workshop participants to know more about. Give  OneGet One is one of the easiest and most effective activators of students  brains, he tells them. It can be used for a variety of purposes from intriguing  students to want to learn, to sharing with others about what they know. And,  one of my favorites is using Give OneGet One for Review. See Textbox 5.1.  9 9 Pass out a Give OneGet One sheet designed in any way youd like. 9 9 Begin by asking students to fill in the three top blanks with what they  think will be important to learn for the upcoming test. 9 9 Have them leave their desks to gather ideas from their classmates. 9 9 Whenever they find a peer having the same ideas, they should put the  peers initials on their sheet in the corresponding box; peers should do  the same on their sheets. 9 9 When they find a new idea, they should put it in a blank box. Once  they have all boxes filled in, they have to return to their seats. 9 9 Ask the class first to share those items that have the most number of  initials on their Give OneGet One sheets. Record these most common  ideas on the board.  9 9 Then ask students to share other ideas that they believe are important  even though no one else may have listed the same idea. Put these on  the board, unless it is obvious they should not be added. 9 9 Add a couple of essentials of your own if they have not come from  students. 9 9 Make upor modifythe test based on whats on the board! Why?

Students will be empowered because they will have a say in what they  believe theyve learned.

The teacher discovers what students have learned, which may or may  not be what she had intended. 9 9 Ultimately, as a teacher, you are acting like a coach, that is, using  the material that will be used in the game test. No more guessing  games! You design a fair test. Students study what they need to study. Textbox 5.1 Give OneGet One as Review
Chapter 5 This approach helps students review and prepare for a test, Bob confides.  You dont have to do that tedious review of material for students. Instead,  you set up Give OneGet One as Review to invite your students to review  independently, with each other, and then as a class. After some discussion,  participants become convinced that the opportunity to interact for review lets  students and teacher know what they need to learn. Students do the work of  the review. The teacher does not go over what will be on the test while  students sit passively at their desks. A win-win situation, particularly as Bob  noticed with his own classes when more of his students did better on tests.  Teachers can use Give OneGet One at any time during a lesson. Some use  it to preassess students knowledge, understandings, and skills. Others use it  in the middle of a lesson to stimulate sharing of ideas or to answer questions.  Some use it at the end as a summarizer. As with other interactive strategies,  teachers use Give OneGet One in the context of what they want students  to know, understand, and be able to do. Otherwise it becomes a gimmick.  The TAPS Template that follows assures that teachers use ideas including  Exit Cards, Recap Cards, and Give OneGet One meaningfully. TAPS TEMPLATE FOR TEACHER PLANNING This last strategy demonstrates the importance of aligning teaching and inte grating interactive methods within a clear, well-defined context. The TAPS  Template for Teacher Planning Figure 5.29 builds on Grant Wiggins and  Jay McTighes Backwards Design structurewith input from Chip and Dan  Heathand Carol Ann Tomlinsons Differentiated Instruction methods.  In choosing this template, teachers commit to the fundamental elements of  successful instruction. At the same time, they avoid teaching a series of dis connected lessons as can happen, for example, when they rely on textbook  chapters as their curriculum. The TAPS Template requires teachers to pay careful attention to every part  of a lesson, unit, and course of study. For example, effective essential ques tions are crucial to drive the learning, such as these questions from the Math  Forum at Drexel University: What do you notice? What do you wonder?  for considering the implications of a solution to a problem.10 Such ques tions emerge from a thorough understanding of the intended lesson or unit.  The TAPS Template includes well-known elements of teaching and assures  that a coherent structure will result. Building a template takes time, patience,  collaborationand hard work. When planning with all of the T, A, P, and S elements of the template,  teachers diversify their teaching to meet the flexible needs of students. They  avoid relying on only one-size-fits-all, whole-class lessons. In both the 

Make Meaning 39 planning process and when teaching the TAPS Template, teachers keep in  mind two questions: Whos not going to get it? Who will get it quickly or already know it? Once these questions become embedded, teachers no longer assume that all  students learn in the same way at the same pace. Both questions remind them  to pay attention to individual studentsin planning and execution. Figure 5.2 TAPS Template for Teacher Planning.
Chapter 5 Implementing the TAPS Template for Teacher Planning assures that students  learn coherent, aligned, and relevant material. It assures, as well, along with  pedagogies such as Exit Cards, Recap Cards, and Give OneGet One, it will  make for purposeful learning. Students understand the context of what they  are asked to learn, and are able to connect the various pieces. They do well  when teachers offer diverse approaches both in their teaching and in asking  for feedback. The four strategies offered in this chapter allow teachers to  use their known skills in new and rich ways that benefit their studentsand  them.  REFLECTION After Dan Hilliard learned about these four strategies, he was dumbfounded  about why he had not heard of them before. Then he remembered that it  often takes about thirty years for good ideas to become common practice.  For example, it took thirty years after the Wright Brothers developed the first  successful airplane to implement commercial flying. Ever since Dan heard the metaphor linking the piano teacher to the classroom  teacher, he has paid more attention to what his students do in his classroom.  Using Exit Cards, Recap Cards, and Give OneGet One improved his ability  to assess and to redesign his teaching. Because he likes these processes, he  invites colleagues to his room on the third Thursday of the month to have  conversations about best practices. So far, five of his colleagues have joined  and others have expressed interest. For the first meeting, he introduced the  Taps Template for Teaching as a framework for thinking about best practices.  Good teachers become alert to new and better ways to teach and learn.  Implementing the strategies such as those in this chapter enriches their rep ertoires. More importantly, they let go of traditional practices that no longer  work; new habits of teaching replace the old. POINTS TO PURSUE Use Exit Cards and Recap Cards Follow Peter Macons lead in this chapter. Take advantage of students feed back as he did, by using Exit Cards. Make it a practice to use them often.  Dont wait until the end of a unitor the year.  Try Recap Cards. Take your time to introduce this process. Dont worry if  students do not take them seriously at first. If you persist, they will see their  value.

Make Meaning 41 Share Your Use of Exit and Recap Cards Asking fellow teachers to take a whole planning period to observe your  classroom can be time consuming. If, instead, you invite a colleague to drop  in at the end of a lesson when you intend to use Recap Cards, theyll be more  likely to accept your invitation. After your demonstration, ask for feedback.  Perhaps you will start making colleague feedback a habit in your school. Try Multiple Give OneGet One Approaches Take a lead from Bob Mullen and design Give OneGet One exercises to acti vate your students learning before, during, or at the end of a unit. Give One Get One is an effective way to engage students to learn in class.  Take your time to integrate this process into the habits of your classroom.  Provide plenty of time for students to learn how to use each form of Give  OneGet One that you introduce. Once this concept is internalized, students  will be grateful, as they will retain more.  Commit to Using the TAPS Template for Teacher Planning When using the TAPS Template, you establish clear intentions for your  students and for you. Take time to assess how using the template engages  more students than your old planning system. Determine what differences it  makes to you. Share your work using the template with colleagues to generate  valuable discussion about whats important in teaching.  Design a Seminar for Colleagues Because everyday pressures keep teachers overbusy, propose establishing  a bimonthly seminarlike Dan Hilliards best practices Thursdays. Make  the focus on improving practice. Begin by discussing and agreeing to try the  ideas in this chapter, and all the other ideas and practices in part I. You will  become better teachers.  NOTES 1.	 John Quinn, Brian Kavanagh, Norma Boakes, and Ronald Caro, Two Thumbs  Way, Way Up: Index Card Recap and Review, Teaching Children Mathematics,  December 2008January 2009. The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics,  295303. Thanks to Ginny Tang who led me to this source. 2.	 Ibid., 300, adapted. 3.	 Ibid., 297, adapted.
Chapter 5 4.	 Ibid., 303. The authors claim Recap Cards to be one of the more innovative  approaches, alongside implementing NCTM standards. The results were impressive:  100 percent of the students in the class described in the article passed New Jerseys  fourth-grade mathematics assessment, with 73 percent falling within the category  advanced proficient. 5.	 From Jon Saphier and Mary Ann Haley, Summarizers: Activity Structures to  Support Integration and Retention of New Learning Carlisle, MA: Research for Bet ter Teaching, 1993. Along with Activators: Activity Structures to Engage Students  Thinking Before Instruction Research for Better Teaching, 1993, are invaluable  reproducible resources for mobilizing learning at both ends of a lesson. 6.	 Ibid. 7.	 Ibid. 8.	 5 Fantastic, Fast, Formative Assessment Tools by Vicki Davis in Edutopia,  January 15, 2015, http:bit.ly1xUUm0J found in Marshall Memo 579, March 23,  2015.  9.	 The TAPS Template for Teacher Planning was developed with my colleagues  at Teachers21, Wellesley MA. 10.	 With thanks to Barbara Delaney, Bellingham Middle School, Massachusetts,  who found these wonderful questions at a Drexel Math workshop. Google essential  questions to find a plethora of them.

Part II HOW CAN WE EXPAND OUR  TEACHING PRACTICE? By taking the longer view, teachers discover the strength of seeking wisdom  both old and new to resolve difficult questions. Part II invites teachers to expand their practice and seek answers. Once teachers shift practices toward creating exciting classrooms, they think  differently. They reflect more and consider broader perspectives. When they  see students respond favorably to new practices, it encourages them to try  other new approaches. Being willing to look within themselves and beyond  the world of the classroom world, they discover new ways to nurture learning. Part II invites teachers to step back and assess the big picture. Despite the  fact that their work takes place in isolated classrooms, good teachers see their  thought processes as they mature in their teaching. They see the larger factors  governing the world and causing rapid change. And, they seek ways to stay  abreast of current innovative thinking. Ultimately, creative teachers examine the full range of their practice. They  ask hard questions, questions that help them meet the needs and demands of  students, their families, and the global world. As they expand their teaching,  they find answers and discover new questionsan endless process.
Whether we want to admit it or not, we are in the midst of a huge cultural shift  in our society. Some have called these times as significant as the Renaissance and others say more so! Teachers tend to teach by osmosis. From their earliest days as pupils, they  absorb the habits and practices of their teachers, who stand at the front of  the room, take attendance, deliver one-size-fits-all whole-class lessons, use  textbooks, fill out plan books, average grades, assign homework, and keep  kids after schooland do it alone. As pupils they internalize beliefs about teaching. For instance, a history  teacher develops the notion that he needs to anticipate answers to every  student question, when in fact he might better stimulate thinking by conjur ing unanswerable questions. Or, he may believe that his students must take  notes every day to digest what he tells them, rather than asking them to seek  answers to authentic, worthwhile questionsthus inviting thinking into his  classroom. Or, a math teacher who has internalized one way of encountering math as a  pupil repeats the same pattern with her students. She begins every class hav ing them put homework on the board, corrects their examples, and collects  the homework. She then teaches a new concept, and if time allows she lets  them do the homework assignment until the bell rings. Had her math teachers  allowed time in class for her and her peers to invent solutions to problems and  present them to the class for scrutiny, she might have become a different and bettermath teacher. Habitual practices often constrict imagining other possibilities. Many  teachers employ a weekly approach to lesson planning. Friday is test day for  Chapter 6 See the Big Picture
Chapter 6 material delivered Monday through Wednesday, with Thursday for review.  This routine, logical on the surface, tends to fragment thinking and learning  because it does not allow for flexibility and in-depth exploration. However, it  is the perfect methodology for coverage. When teachers pay attention to the ill effects of established practices, they  begin to notice their impact. For example, instead of blaming students for  their failure to do homework, teachers might see their part in this failure.  They might consider reconfiguring the role of homework as follows:  Redefine homework as home-practice to inform students of its true  purpose.   Offer options, such as allowing students to pick six of ten questionsexamples  they think will help them learn best.   Ask students to create their own questions and answers.   Instead of writing, invite them to create a graphic organizer to illustrate what  they know.   Finally, and perhaps most intriguing, ask them to choose what they will do for  home-practice. See what arrives the next day. Why should teachers take time to reexamine habitual practices, particularly  if they think they are working well? Unlike generations before them, todays  schools are heading into an unknown cultural future. Given the quickening  pace of the doubling of knowledge, the plethora of new technologies, and the  ubiquitous access to the Internet, teachers cannot act as if the world is what  it was for them.  Responsive teachers are open to the present media-driven culture. Those  who cling to teaching habits of old may soon face obsolescence, as students  prefer to learn from the medias multiple resources. The more students  become bored in the classroom, the more they will immerse themselves into  technologys instant capacity to connect them with whatever they seeor  want to see. Teachers will be shut out of their lives. Given present uncertainties, teachers can look to discover new possibilities  to excite students. They can steer them toward engaged tasks that invite  inquiry andperhaps most importantrequire struggle to find resolution.  Once students experience the joy of using their minds to solve intriguing sce narios and problemsno easy task!they may be less tempted to stay inside  the instant nonthinking of texting and Googling.  Teaching students to live in the questions rather than jump to quick  answers requires a new paradigm. Teachers have to let go of outmoded teach ing comforts and routines. They reexamine the contexts in which they teach  and determine how to make them more engaging. They collaborate with col leagues. They delight in the struggle to discover new perspectives. The three 

See the Big Picture 47 ideas in this chapter offer ways for educators to evaluate the implications of  todays fast-changing culture.  THE BIG SHIFT Given the incessant demands of working in schools, teachers rarely take the  opportunity to view their teaching from a broad perspective. Francis Jordan  in his first year in the classroom was surprised to discover the complexity of  teaching his sixth graders in what he thought was a good school. He and his  colleagues were being asked to do far more than they bargained for. At a fac ulty meeting he asked, How can I even think about the broader issues facing  our society when I have so many children who need my attention? I have kids  with autism, who come from single-parent homes, who live in dire poverty,  who bully other kids. Its endless reallyand, I do it alone. As he thought about his conundrum, Francis knew he should immerse him self into the lives of his students. Not to become immersed, he would distance  himself from themand they would know it. However, when he took time  to see the big picture inside and beyond the classroom, it gave Francis per spectiveand solace. Being willing to look further down the road allowed the  freneticism of the moment to reside within a greater context, and allowed him to  arrive at a better sense of where everyonehe and his studentswas headed.  He liked tackling matters of consequence. The more he brought up intrigu ing problems, controversial issues, and big perspectives, the more his sixth  graders became excited and engaged. They thought him quirky at times but  liked his energy and humor that kept them involved. Hardly a dull moment.  He began to love his teaching. After teaching for nearly forty years, Francis left the classroom. He spent his  last twelve years serving as a consultant. He wanted to bring his big-picture  perspective to his teacher workshops. As part of his packets he included a  one-page commentary that he titled The Big Shift Textbox 6.1. After  having someone read it aloud, he asked participants to meet with one or two  others who they did not know and discuss three questions: 1.	 What do you observe thats different about todays students? 2.	 How have you had to change your teaching in response? 3.	 As a result of discussing The Big Shift, what might you consider doing  differently? After ten to fifteen minutes, Francis invited pairstriads to join another  pairtriad to select what big idea they should bring back to their table group. 
Chapter 6 Whether we want to admit it or not, we are in the midst of a huge cultural  shift in our society. Some have called these times as significant as the  Renaissanceand others say more so! This shift is evident in the exponential expansion of the media both in  content and technologies. These effects are most obvious in the children  we are now being asked to teach.  We are at the vortex of this radical shift in our culture. Unless we  respond with intelligence, creativity, and commitment, our students will  zoom past us ignoring our outmoded methods and approaches. They will  find ways to educate themselves, as do all pioneers who invent solutions  to newfound problems.  Our students have changed radically, says Marc Prensky. Todays  students are no longer the people our educational system was designed to  teach.  We need to examine our current purposes and practices in light of  the information-age culture. We cannot remain in isolated classrooms.  Students cannot be expected to work in isolation either. Instead, as we  move toward collaboration and cooperation, our students will need to be  encouraged and supported in working together to learn. Already, they are  sending instant messages of homeworkand some with their teachers!  Individual accountability will remain, yes, but it will come to mean some thing different. What, we are not sure. We will need to collaborate and to create ways for meeting todays  students where they are and nurture them to become good students, good  citizens, and good people. This is not about indulging them. We have  much to offerand can decide just what that is. Textbox 6.1 The Big Shift. Quote from: Marc Prensky, Digital Natives, Digital  Immigrants. After ten minutes, each group shared its conclusions. Francis was never sure  that these conversations had much impact, but he felt satisfied that he at least  broached this key issue. Maybe, he thought, teachers dont really see themselves considering  bigger issues. They are too busy entangled in every-day challenges. Some body else would have to deal with such matters. Yet, as he wrote in The  Big Shift, teachers have much to offerand can decide just what that is.  To bring his point home, Francis cites an idea of Richard Lavoie from a  speech he gave in Fitchburg, Massachusetts.1 Lavoie used three words to  define the way we now live: Unlearn, Learn, Relearn. Using the example of  the telephone, Lavoie traced our societys relationship from the rotary phone  to the cellphone. 

See the Big Picture 49 In nearly all aspects of todays culture, Lavoie reminded his audience of the  need to unlearn what they learned in order to learn anew just to keep up. He  cited cellphones, computers, GPS, TiVoDVR, and Amazons Kindle. Once  weve finally learned how to use one of these, a new model appears. Unless  we update, the old model soon becomes obsolete. He let the audience know  that this way of living is natural for the young, but is often is a struggle for  teachers. Many nodded their heads in agreement. HOW PEOPLE LEARN Another handout invites participants to examine their teaching practices in  light of a well-known graphic, How People Learn Textbox 6.2. Most of  them have seen this information in one form or another and usually nod their  heads in quick agreement and are ready to move on. When Francis used an earlier version of the graphic, he hoped to  demonstrate that students learn better when actively engaged. However, he  did not get much reaction. Later, he added a line between See and Hear and  Say. He asked them to discuss the implications of teaching above the line  and below the line. He put them either in pairs or triads and sometimes  regrouped them into fours or sixes as he did with The Big Shift. People learn . . .  10 of what they READ	  20 of what they HEAR  30 of what they SEE  50 of what they both SEE and HEAR  70 of what they SAY  80 of what they EXPERIENCE  90 of what they SAY and DO  95 of what they TEACH Source: This particular chart has been adapted from charts by Edgar Dale, Eldon  Ekwall, and James L. Shanker, William Glasser, and David Sousa. While the original  source of the research is unclear, it provides for stimulating conversation when includ ing the middle line. Textbox 6.2 How People Learn. A common chart or pyramid that teachers hear about  in education courses looks something like this one
Chapter 6 To stimulate conversations, Francis includes the following questions:  How does this chart relate to how you distribute your instructional practice both  above and below the line?  Is below-the-line teaching better than above-the-line teaching?  Can you teach effectively only from either above the line or below the line?  Should you?  How accurate do you think are the percents as stated in the chart? Are they  accurate for you?  What other questions does the chart raise? The revised chart compels participants to focus on learning. They often  agree that the percentages do not apply equally to all people. Yet, the chart  shows teachers that they should not remain stuck in the delivery mode. When  they teach only from above the line, they see themselves doing all the talking.  However, when they project themselves teaching below the line, they engage  and interact with their students. Sometimes participants admit to Francis they would like to teach below  the line, but the challenges of covering overburdened curriculums necessitate  that they remain above it. He points out, however, that staying above the line  assumes that students learn when the teacher explains. When participants  reflect about their time as pupils, they remember how little they learned from  just having to listen. The last line of the chart, however, raises a common concern: How can  we monitor all of our students when they are teaching one another? Francis  recounts his own experience of how this activity benefited both his students  and him. Before he had his students teach one another, he required them to  write what they would share. This way he could assess their thinkingand  writing skillsbefore they taught. This process took more time but proved  effective.  ENTITY THEORY VERSUS INCREMENTAL LEARNING The third big idea that Francis offers participants asks them to rethink how  they perceive student learning potential. He includes a chart in the packet  from John Saphier that was derived from the work of Jeff Howard. The chart  emphasizes Howards understanding of the distinction between fixed and  fluid intelligence, between Entity Theory, the bell curve based on IQ that  determines fixed intelligence levels of students, and Incremental Theory,  which is based on Howards fluid concept of Effective Effort to enable  students to get smarter Figure 6.1.

See the Big Picture 51 The concept of fixed intelligence is based on the bell curve that formed the  basis for the factory-model schools of the past century. Young children were put  in grade-level classes and sorted out by IQ. Researchers now understand that  natural intelligence indicates a small fraction of future success. Daniel H. Pink  Figure 6.1 Two Beliefs about Intelligence and Achievement. Adapted from the work of  Jeff Howard, Founder and President of the Efficacy Institute, and John Saphier, President  of Research for Better Teaching.
Chapter 6 concludes that IQ counts for the entry point in high-level fields but connotes  only a 410 percent effect on success.2 Jonah Lehrer makes a compelling argu ment that self-control has a greater effect on academic success than IQ.3  The mantra of Jeff Howards Efficacy Institute, Smart is not something  you are. Smart is something you get, is a prime example of the Incremental  Theory in practice.4 Teachers would be wise not to assume the entity level of  anyones intelligence but instead teach keeping in mind Incremental Theory.  Nothing less should be acceptable. To build confidence in students teachers can use errors as feedback rather  than as indicators of low intelligence. Having this frame of mind, they  suspend prejudgments about students who have been grouped or tracked.  Instead, they concentrate on each students potential and provide multiple  pathways for getting smarter.5 They can guide him to exceed expectations6  by invoking Saphiers dictum: This is important. You can do it. I will not give up on you.7 Without a doubt, invoking the Incremental Theory frees the potential of  teacher and students alike. If, on the other hand, teachers apply the Entity  Theory, they deprive students of realizing their dreams. If they appear to lock  into a students limitations, they send a messageunwittingly or notthat  he is less than he might be. When schools are organized around ability lev els, they invoke either false assumptions about brightness of high-level  students, or perhaps, more insidious, inferiorities of low-level students.  See chapter 10, Abolish Tracking for an extensive discussion of this issue. When educators keep in mind The Big Shift perspective, when they  understand How People Learn, and when they adopt the Incremental Theory  mindset, they become open to seeing every student as capable of reaching the  starsevery student. REFLECTION Taking the longer view and exploring the big picture requires time and effort.  Unless educators are willing to take this step, they may find themselves  becoming obsolete inside a rapidly changing culture. Students wired for  digital thinking may reject teachers old ways of dispensing knowledge and  skills. Instead, teachers have to find their bearings in this new world and bring  intelligence, skills, and wisdom into the classroom. Dan Hilliard has the insatiable curiosity of Rudyard Kiplings elephants  child. At home, he asked more questions than anyone in his family. Some times, he would ask a second question without waiting to hear the answer to 

See the Big Picture 53 the first. As a teacher, hes discovered that his curiosity leads him to try new  ideas and take risks.  Sometimes, he gets into trouble. Early in his career on the first day of  school he told his tracked top section that they will have an A for the  year. Because you are the best students in your class, you will most likely  get As anyway, so I dont want you to worry. We are here to learn. He stuck  to his commitment despite the chagrin of the guidance counselor. Dan has become fascinated by todays fast-changing culture, particularly  as it affects his students. He tries to imagine how he would grow up in their  culture instead of staying fixed on the relatively fixed world of his youth. POINTS TO PURSUE Finding Empathy with Students Teachers have the enviable task some would say of instructing the young.  Yet, children who enter your classroom appear different. Where you were  much like your parents when you were young, todays students are growing  up in a new milieu.  How can you celebrate the young as they are? How can you see yourself  growing up inside their world, inside The Big Shift? How can you help  them become thoughtful, creative, and civil citizens amidst media pressures  to emulate celebrities, watch frivolous television, and listen to misogynous  popular music, among other incongruous phenomena? Moving Away from Delivery to Invoke Learning Francis Jordan found that when he put a line dividing the top from the bottom  in the How People Learn chart it stimulated participants to think more about  their teaching habits. He often wondered, however, just how much difference  this chart made in practice.  How can you free yourself from hamster-wheel teaching in which you feel  you are going nowhere? While you are feeling pressure to cover material, are  you willing to support students to teach each other along the way? How can  you let your students into the process of completing the equation of teaching  and learning?  Using Entity Theory to See Students as They Are Jeff Howard advocates the key value of getting smarter. The principles  behind his Efficacy Institute separate fixed intelligence from incremental 
Chapter 6 intelligence. Teachers can choose to see their studentsand themselvesas  either fixed or as having growth potential.  How do you relate to the Entity TheoryIncremental Theory continuum?  Have you thought of yourself as a fixed teacher or a fluid teacher? Try  this test: Do you see some students as naturally bright, because of their  demeanor? Do others appear slow when it may be far from the truth? How  can you move beyond these biases?  Help Students Find Their Brightness in an Ability-Group System If you work in a school that schedules students based on levels, how can you  overcome its impact on student self-perceptions? Except for courses in which  students earn the right to takesuch as Algebra IIhow might you convince  your school to value more heterogeneous grouping?  Once you acknowledge obvious differences among students, how can you  find ways to drop such terms as slow learner, and low-level learners?  How would this change affect you and your school? NOTES 1.	 Richard Lavoie, Its So Much Work Being Your Friend: Helping the Child with  Learning Disabilities Find Social Success, Speech at Fitchburg State, March 9, 2009. 2.	 Daniel H. Pink, A Whole New Mind: Why Right Brainers Will Rule the Future  New York: Penguin, 2005, 2006, 5759. 3.	 Jonah Lehrer, Dont: The Secret of Self-control, The New Yorker, May 18,  2009. 4.	 The Efficacy Institute, Inc., http:www.efficacy.org. 5.	 Jon Saphier and Robert Gower, The Skillful Teacher, 31920. 6.	 Ibid., 334. 7.	 Ibid., 296.
Have you ever thought about Winnie the Pooh as a Taoist? The mystics see from universal space. The Vedas speak of looking from  behind the eyes. The Taoists say the Tao is unnamed, the source from  which all emanates. Rumi invites us to sell our cleverness and purchase  bewilderment. Eckhart Tolle speaks of the Now as the only reality. And,  Robert Frost in The Road Not Taken voices the teachermystic in all of  us. Oh, how we chose knowing we might have chosen differently! How we  promise ourselves to return but keep on! How we look back and see our path  as the better choiceand we think what a difference thats made! Sarah Robinson fell in love with Frosts poem when she first heard it  in her freshman year in college. After her first weeks as a middle school  Social Studies teacher, she understands that she has chosen a road less taken.  Despite the chaos, she is in the right place. She loves her classes. One day  she shares The Road Not Taken with her students. As she is about to tell  them that she chose the road that brought her to them, she has an epiphany.  Frost meant that we think we choose the right road before us when in fact we  only believe we do. We rationalize our having taken a unique path when we  have no sense of it at the time. Frost lets us see our pathour teachingfor  what it is rather than for what we think it has been. The Road Not Taken lets  us know weve chosen such paths many times before and since. Successful teachers recognize and accept reality. We may think that weve  taken a special path, but we become wiser after we reflect on the meaning  of the ones we found. We access the deeper meaning of our work. Knowing  Chapter 7 Search for Wisdom
Chapter 7 ourselves, knowing our preferences, after all, informs us of our adventure,  one of our own makingand that makes all the difference.

Sarah immerses herself as she copes with a myriad of overwhelming tasks.  She does her best to keep up with the expected and unexpected. She applies  her sense of teaching to everything she presents and experiments with new  ideas. But, it is not until years later that she allows larger perspectives into  her life and teaching. She discovers not only the joy of learning the wisdom  of the greats but also the gifts they bring. She explores texts from Lao Tzu,  Confucius, the Buddha, Jesus, and writings by Thich Nhat Hanh, the Dalai  Lama, Jon Kabat-Zinn, Wendell Berry, Rumi, and Hafiz, among many others.  Some become seminal influences and forever change her practice. Sarah cannot count the times their teachings energize her classroom. They  help her cope with increasing pressures from an expanding media-centered  culture, encroaching state and board authorities, and unrealistic expecta tions of parents. She understands her primary responsibility is to teach to the  interior landscape of each and every child. She should meet their longing to  understand themselves and their place in the universethe place where the  ancient sages dwelled. After her department head asks her to teach Ancient History, she discovers  the depth of this truth. Rather than relying on the textbooks inadequate nar rative on ancient China, she incorporates primary sources on the analects of  Confucius, chapters of the Tao Te Ching, and sutras of the Buddha. In addi tion, she has her students read Benjamin Hoffs The Tao of Pooh and selected  readings from the Dalai Lama. After thoughtful conversations with her students over several weeks, she  borrows an idea from a colleague and asks her students to take an imaginary  journey to China. This assignment has them seek the wisdom of the ancients  to save a failing community in America. They are to write an essay reflecting  their thoughts on one of the following questions: How am I to understand and better myself? How am I to live within my family so peace and harmony prevail? How am I to relate to others so goodness prevails? How am I to live well within nature and the environment? Sarah wants her students to discover their own understandings of the wis dom of the ancients. She asks that they dwell within themselves to discover  their own truths. She takes the advice of her colleague and does not ask 

Search for Wisdom 57 them to seek out additional sources but to reexamine and explore those they  explored and discussed in class. Sarahs not worried about parents helping,  as they likely do not know nearly as much as their children do about this  topic. By the time students complete their journey and report their findings, they  see themselves in a new light, often with astonishment. They sense the gen erosity of the assignment. One girl wrote, I thought I knew myself before  writing this paper, but now I understand myself differently and more clearly.  Thank you, Ms Robinson. Her assignment succeeded because of the following factors:  It taps into core human concerns.  It evokes a passion for seeking wisdom and relating it to her students lives.  It puts fundamental human qualities at the forefront, including civility, kind ness, generosity, thankfulness, helpfulness, self-awareness, competence, hope,  truth, wisdom, engagement, respect, responsibility, care, compassion, commu nication, and empathyqualities that she emphasizes in her classroom.  It demands probing discussions, rigorous reading and rereading, writing and  rewriting. Each evening, she was able to assess their drafts on her computer  and return them to their files on the schools network. This provided them with  immediate feedback and encouraged them to stay involvedand the process  used less paper, because no one printed out their drafts. When she looks back at this assignment, Sarah knows it hit a sweet spot.  Being invited to seek to get in touch with their inner selves, all the students  worked hard and wrote as well as they could. Each found his or her own  path in seeking the universal truths inherent in the questions. While some  struggled to grasp the implications of their newfound knowledge, all of them  pushed their own envelopes. Sarah is grateful that she asked them to take that  trip. Teaching with wisdom in mind emerges slowlyand only when we  become open to it. Most likely, it comes to us rather than our moving  toward it. One of Sarahs earliest encounters happened at her local cinema  as she watched Richard Attenboroughs Gandhi with her middle schoolers.  Observing Ben Kingsleys Gandhi, she feels the power of his presence; she  sees herself needing to change how she approaches the world and her class room. She now perceives herself more as who she is and how she behaves  rather than in what she says. Shes become more observant of herself both as  a teacher and a person.
Chapter 7 Sarahs colleague, Mike Lehman, loves ancient wisdom, too. In his Language  Arts classes, he includes the ancients as often as possible. He has been in the  school longer than Sarah. Everyone respects his wit, wisdom, and creativity.  Learning about her trip-to-China assignment, he is impressed with its unusual  format and really likes the four questions. They are like essential questions,  ones that have no right answers built-in. All of them demand higher-order  thinking designed to provoke student interest. All those questions do that.  I wonder if you realize that.1 No, I dont, Sarah responds. But each student wrote a distinct essay. No one  came up with right answers, as there werent any. Thanks for the feedback. Mikes interest in eastern thinking began when he first read Shunryu  Suzukis Zen Mind, Beginners Mind. He was struck with the phrase in the  prologue, In the beginners mind there are many possibilities, but in the  experts there are few.2 Suzukis words were counterintuitive to Mikes  drive to become the expert teacher. He entered the profession wanting to  drive to the top and be seen as the best.  Suzukis words let him know that he can never become that expert. Now  at every moment he remains open to possibilities. He no longer clings to his  beliefs. Mike delights in others insights, including those of his students and  colleagues. Later, he hears about Thich Nhat Hanhs There are two ways to  wash the dishes. The first is to wash the dishes in order to have clean dishes  and the second is to wash the dishes to wash the dishes.3 These words open  him to the true meaning of being in the moment.  His life as a teacher up to then had been an endless chain of completing  one task after the other, after the other. Invoking Hanhs mantra wash the  dishes to wash the dishes allows him to remain present to the task before  him. Whenever he strays from this peaceful place, Mike recalls Hanhs words  often simply by taking a breath. He introduced this idea at a middle school in  a talk in which he invited students to do your homework to do your home work. Paraphrasing Hahn, The fact that I am sitting here and doing my homework is a wondrous reality.  I am being completely myself, following my breath, conscious of my presence,  and conscious of my thoughts and actions. There is no way that I can be tossed  around mindlessly, hating what I am doing and wanting to be somewhere else.  I am here doing my homework, simply doing my homework. It is a miracle. Its  awesome!4  He put these words on pink index cards for anyone who wanted one. They  disappeared. Teachers tend to develop consistencies in their practice. They act as they  believe. For instance, a teacher who is content driven strives to portray 

Search for Wisdom 59 exciting information. He uses dynamic, interactive lectures, clever visuals,  and intriguing handouts. Another teacher who believes students should feel  good in his class aims to include emotion in his content. He does feel-good  exercises at least once a week.  Reflecting on his earlier years, Mike realizes that he focused on  rigor. He required his eighth graders to master considerable content. He also  evoked lively discussions. Not until he came across Rainer Maria Rilkes  famous wisdom to love the questions themselves, however, did he balance  the content of his teaching with a pursuit of inquiry.  When teachers are open to what comes their way, as Mike and Sarah  demonstrate, they discover new paths, new outlooks, and new investigations.  To love the questions means to become willing to ask before telling, to invite  thoughts in rather than to stuff minds, and to pursue further questions rather  than to anticipate correct answers. To live in the questions means to remain  patient as students struggle to understand. Every day teaching is redefined.

Sarah shares with Mike her experience when first teaching the Tao Te Ching.  Because she has always been eager to engage her students, she hoped to  intrigue them with direct translations of chapters from the Tao. She also chose  The Tao of Pooh, which she thought would engage and provoke. She had  barely a week before she would begin teaching the Tao. Unbeknownst to her,  she was heeding Mikes acceptance of the wisdom of Shunryu Suzukis in  the beginners mind there are many possibilities. She plunged in. The next six weeks proved to be among the most exciting of my teaching, Mike.  My students and I pondered the wisdom of chapters from the Tao Te Ching  and the freshness of Winnie the Pooh as a Taoist. We had the same excitement  exploring the analects of Confucius and the sutras of the Buddha. At the end as  you know, I gave them the assignment of the trip to China, which was one of  the best Ive ever put together!  Recently, I have found that Zen stories, Hasidic tales, and Native American  wisdom feed my teaching. These writings create great moments of insight.  Among the most interesting is The Rabbis Gift from Scott Peck who was not  sure of its source. Sarah then tells Mike a brief version:  It is the story of a monastery fallen on hard times with only four monks and  the abbot. In desperation, the abbot seeks the advice of a rabbi who lived in the  nearby woods. After commiserating and reading the Torah together, the rabbi  offers no advice to the abbot except his mysterious the Messiah is one of you.
Chapter 7 The Abbot returned to his monks with the cryptic message. The monks, sus pecting truth in the rabbis words, began to treat each other with extraordinary  respect on the chance that one among them might be the Messiah. And they  began to treat themselves with extraordinary respect. Soon, more people came to picnic and young men began to inquire and then  joined. So within a few years the monastery had once again become a thriving  order, and thanks to the rabbis gift, a vibrant center of light and spirituality in  the realm.5 How amazing to imagine each student as the Messiah, and how much  more of a challenge to think of my colleaguesor me!as the Messiah. This  story encourages me to let go of assumptions, to see the gifts in everyone,  including myself. And to live in the present. While I may not succeed, the gift  of this story assures me that I will try.  Mike nods, I can imagine classrooms where teachers and students treat  each other with extraordinary respectand treat themselves with extraordi nary respect. What a difference that would make! God blooms from the shoulder of the Elephant who becomes courteous to  the Ant. Hafiz says it all. REFLECTION Paying attention to wisdom guides our lives and enriches our teaching. When  we invite our accumulated wisdom into our classrooms, we deepen our com mitment and understanding about why we teach. We become receptive to the  lives and spirit of our students. When we deny the presence of our deeper  selves, we curtail opportunities to see the deeper selves of our students. Dan Hilliard grew up in a socially religious home; his family joined a  church when he was twelve years old, so his father could improve his posi tion in the community. In his early years of teaching, he did not find a church,  but after a workshop at a Quaker School, he discovered that he liked the  contemplativeness of Quaker Meeting. Since then, hes learned about eastern  philosophy, astrology, past-life regression, and other alternative spiritual  philosophies.  He began to fit alternative ideas into his lessons. His students like this  aspect of his teaching, as they feel challenged. Theyre eager to understand  themselves in the world. The whirl of social media, in which they strive  to keep up, is often confusing. They like Mr. Hilliard, because he respects  themand because he gives them time to think and process. 

Search for Wisdom 61 POINTS TO PURSUE What Feeds Your Teaching?  Sarah Robinson is grateful for having found Robert Frosts The Road Not  Taken. The poem helps her understand who she is as a teacher. What semi nal poem, book, reading, essay, or film feeds your teaching? Why makes it  special? How does it speak to your calling? Have you shared it with your  students? With your colleagues? What Is the Best Assignment You Have Given? When reading about Sarah Robinsons ancient-wisdom assignment, does it  remind you of the deepest assignment youve ever given? Did that assign ment push the envelope of your students minds and hearts? What unexpected  results did it bring? To you? To your students? Were you ready for what  happened? If youve never ventured beyond conventional assignments, consider doing  one along the lines of Sarahs sending kids to ancient China. Having instant  media available with computers, tablets, and smartphones, student research  would become intriguing.  How Can You Make Questions the Center of Your Teaching? Essential questions have become an important tool in this age of Google.  Searching an EQ will not bring easy answers. These questions require think ing, speculating, and time.  How can you bring questions into the heart of your teaching, especially if  you perceive your need to teach as much as you can as quickly as you can?  How can you get your students to love pursuing questions rather than want ing to give you right answers? How can you use questioning to help students  probe their ideas about the uncertain future ahead of them? Can You Find Ways to Successfully Teach an Unfamiliar Subject? Teaching demands being flexible. As much as youd like to keep things as  they are, you sometimes are thrust into a new subject or a new grade level.  What will allow you, then, to accept the risk of teaching a subject with  which you are not familiar? How can you let go of thinking that you have to  be the expert? Can you trust that you will learn alongside your students? Can  you invite them to openly explore with you?
Chapter 7 See Your Students, Your Colleagues and Yourselfas the Messiah What if you took The Rabbis Gift to heart and saw every student, every  parent, every colleague, your principaland possibly yourselfas the  Messiah? Is this even possible in your mind? Anyones mind? What differ ence would it make if you believed it? If your colleagues believed it? If your  students did? Would more students and colleagues choose to picnic in your room at  lunch time?  NOTES 1.	 Google Grant Wiggins essential questions for an excellent foray into this impor tant teaching skill.  2.	 Shunryu Suzuki, Zen Mind, Beginners Mind New York: Weatherhill, 1970,  21. 3.	 Thich Nhat Hanh, The Miracle of Mindfulness Boston, MA: Beacon Press,  1975, 4. 4.	 Ibid., 4, adapted. 5.	 Adapted from Scott Peck, The Different Drum New York: Simon and Schuster,  1987, 1315. Also the full story can be found at http:www.community4me.com rabbisgift.html, with a link to shortened version.
If you consider yourself an average teacher, think of becoming better, one step  at a time. Josh Wilson takes his teaching seriously. From the moment he stepped into  his first classroom, he knew he belonged. Everything felt right. The school,  the kids, the community. By the end of his first year, he was convinced that  he needed to be flexible. The way he learned to teachsitting and observing  as a pupil and from his teacher preparation programwas not adequate.  He would forge his own path to reach his students and their families. Josh struggles, however, to understand why change is so difficult for many  of his colleagues. He notices when attending conferences, everyone comes  back to school liking new ideas. Yet, he sees that few of them gain traction,  as his colleagues continue to teach as they always have.  It reminds him of what happened to him after seeing Frederick Wisemans  documentary Meat in the mid-1970s. As Wiseman portrayed the process of  stockyard cattle being dismembered in the slaughterhouse to the supermarket  meat counter, Josh declared never to eat meat again. His resolve, however,  lasted about two weeks, maybe three. He still can recall Wisemans disturb ing black-and-white images but continues to enjoy his barbecued burgers. Recently, Josh discovered Jonathan Haidts remarkable concept of the  rider mind and the elephant body in his book The Happiness Hypothesis.  The elephant in us enacts habitual practices weve learned to sustain our daily  lives. The rider, on the other hand, represents our mind that looks around and  ahead, wondering, speculating, and conjuring alternatives.  The rider is the viewer of Wisemans documentary who commits to  becoming a vegetarian. He is also is the teacher who attends a statewide  Chapter 8 Stay Current
Chapter 8 workshop on brain research, is excited to bring back new ideas for revamping  lessons, and shares his enthusiasm with colleagues. Yet, three weeks later, he  is practicing as he always has, the ideas from the workshop having receded  into the background. Why does this happen? Josh asks himself. Perhaps, if I share Haidts  rider and elephant metaphor it will help. Sometimes, people make radical  changes in their lives on their ownchanges that retrain their elephant. Some  quit smoking one day never to smoke again. Others quit sweets and desserts  to maintain low blood sugar. And some commit to exercise for health and  fitness and stick to it. Still, as Haidts book makes clear to Josh, change in  teachingperhaps in any professiontends to be slow, as the continued per sistence of teachers standing at the front of the room and delivering lessons  testifies. Perhaps its because we teach alone. Teachers next door to us teach alone,  too. To make changes, we need support and encouragement. Sometimes  when we try something different, we do not have enough time to work it  out, as we think we must keep up covering the curriculum and meet other  external demands. Other times, our students have difficulty adapting to a  new approach, so we back off and pledge, perhaps, to try it again next year.  We find it easier and less stressful to let the elephant continue to do its thing.  Besides, Josh says to himself, My colleagues and I have no incentive to  changeand no one to hold us accountable. Josh decided to encourage his colleagues to stay current with the latest  research. If they were to become more interested in new ideas and methods,  it would improve their students chances to learn. He would begin by sharing  his ideas on the impact of Google. Hes convinced that his students apparent  lack of attention stems from the instant responses Google offers.  He thinks back to the time with his eighth graders when he shared Carl  Dunckers monk-on-the-mountain problem made famous by Arthur Koestler.  This problem was a staple for him at his former school in the mid-1990s.  It became part of the elephant of his teaching. After presenting the problem  on the first day of school, his students would leave perplexed and likely gen erate discussion at the dinner tableeven in busy households. One morning, exactly at sunrise, a Buddhist monk began to climb a tall  mountain. The narrow path, no more than a foot or two wide, spiraled around  the mountain to a glittering temple at the summit. The monk ascended the path at varying rates of speed, stopping many times  along the way to rest and to eat the dried fruit he carried. He reached the temple  shortly before sunset. After several days of fasting and meditation, he began  his journey back along the same path, starting at sunrise and again walking at 

Stay Current 65 variable speeds, taking many pauses along the way. His average speed descend ing was, of course, greater than his average climbing speed. Prove there is a single spot along the path the monk will occupy on both trips  at precisely the same time of day.1 The problem baffled most of his students and their families. Even when  some of them solved the problem, others remained confused. He hoped that  from this experience they would understand that his classroom was a safe  place not to know and where they could persevere to find out. He wanted  students to understand that learning was, first and foremost, about creative  and critical thinking, seeking meaning, and solving mysteries. Questions  were more important than answers. With the good graces of his principal, Mark Johansen, who liked his  faculty to take initiative, Josh recounts this story at a faculty meeting. As  you can see from trying to solve this problem, it offers a challenge. Only a  couple of you have come up with a possible answer. Perhaps had we more  time, you would. I remember the time I first tried to solve it, I suddenly found  the solution without realizing it. Because it required that my thinking to be  different, I thought it would be good to offer it to my students. But lets step back for a moment. Why do you think I dont use this prob lem any more? The room becomes quiet. Is it because of Google? asks  Marie Simmons, one of the most curious members of the faculty.  Yes, exactly, thats what I think. Today students would surely leave class  and open their phones or computer and Google monk-on-the-mountain.  Voila! They would find the solution. No need to figure it out. No need to be  baffled. No need to struggle. No need to use their minds. That is my concern  about Google. On the one hand, it is a fantastic resource. On the other hand, it  takes away opportunities to become perplexed, to wonder, because it enables  us to find out almost immediately what we want to know.  Before the Google era BGE, we had the freedom to intrigue, to sur prise, and often to be the first to bring new ideas to students. Early in my  teaching, I could count on exposing students to something new and take  time to explore its implications. As the years passed, I observed them com ing into my classroom having more and more information, until in my later  years, I rarely was able to surprise them.  After Google AGE, the paradigm has shifted. We can find almost  anything, immediatelyand information even finds us! People are satisfied  when they can have information quickly. Why bother, some ask, to make  the effort to figure anything out? I know how we can get around Google, Marie replies. We can create  ways to say things that Google doesnt know. For example, you could change  the monk-on-the-mountain to the rabbi-in-the-canyon problem. Use the same 
Chapter 8 type of language to set it up. The students would be just as perplexedand  would have to stay with their thinking. Google would not know what to say.  It would be a great opportunity for them to work with each other. I imagine  the room would become noisy, a good kind of noise. And, surprise, surprise,  they might even ask their parents for helpif they are home. I like that idea, Marie, I will try it. The faculty spent the next half-hour discussing the impact of Google.  By the end of the meeting, most of them realize that they need to pay atten tion not only to it and other search engines but also to the intricacies of the  digital culture surrounding them. They agree to have further discussions both  at faculty and department meetings.  Josh has thought a lot about using laptops but finds them wanting. He imag ines that his students would surf while feigning to take notes, or perhaps  fact-check his teaching, or more likely chat with friends. Opportunities for  face-to-face interactions would decrease. There would be fewer threaded  conversations in which he and his students look and listen to one another,  observe facial expressions, and attend to intonations. He noticed when he  observed a colleague who uses laptops that his students only spoke with him  and not with each other. No one seemed to be paying attention to one another.2 He imagines if his students were to have laptops they would tether to  their flat screens, randomly engage and disengage from the intended learn ing, and never become a community of learners. Hes not willing to take the  risk of losing opportunities to interact face to face. It would be like losing a  languagea fundamental human language at that! However, students should  have their own mobile devices, such as iPads or cellphones, with access to  Web 2.0 tools and the Cloud for storage.Teachers and students should take  advantage of the communication, information sharing, interoperability, and  collaboration that these devices provide.  In this paradigm, Josh figures, much of the time teachers would work in  a hybrid flipped-classroom model. During class students would do face-toface project workpractice, as well as group explorationproblem solving. At  home, they would use their mobile devices to review the previous nights  lesson and dig for information that might help them supportsolve problems.  They could also encounter new material and bring their thinking and ques tions into class. The potential is endlessand will be more so as new devices  become available.3  Whenever possible, Josh tells colleagues about new ideas or methods. One of  his favorites is David Sousas PrimacyRecency Figure 8.1. Sousa bases his  thinking on how the brain learns best. He advocates placing the major input  portion of a lesson at the front of a learning episode primacy; providing time 

Stay Current 67 in the middle to process; and concluding with active summarizers to cement  the learning recency. However, nearly all of his colleagues do most of their  teaching during the middle of the period, a traditional routine embedded in  classroom teaching. Before showing Sousas chart to the faculty, Josh inserts a curved line  to indicate the difference between Sousas approach and the traditional. He  presents his version to encourage colleagues to pay attention to how most of  them run their classrooms.  At the start of each period they usually collect homework, take atten dance, give announcements, and handle other noninstructional matters; in  the middle, they deliver their lesson; and at the end, they have students begin  homework or relax until the bell. Josh concludes, To be honest, at first my  Figure 8.1 PrimacyRecencyRetention During a Learning Episode. Adapted from  David Sousa, How the Mind Learns: A Classroom Teachers Guide. Revised Edition.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press, 2001, 90. Used by permission of the publisher.
Chapter 8 students struggled with PrimacyRecency, as it is contrary to what theyve  been practicing for years. But, its been well worth it. Now they are learning  more than ever! I hope youll consider using it. Josh particularly likes some of the findings from brain research over the  past twenty years. MRIs, fMRIs, and PET scans have been able to observe the  brain at work. Among the most significant ideassome well-known, some  not sothat he pays attention to are the following:  Mihaly Csikszentmihalyis Flow  Howard Gardners Multiple Intelligences  The difference between short-term and long-term memory learning  Down-shifting shutting down emotionally that limits thinking under stress  Eustress positive stress; just enough to stimulate that differs from distress  When people talk they learn  The brains natural inclination is to seek patterns  Feedback plays an essential role in learning  Exercise is crucial for improving learning Despite his efforts to encourage his colleagues to change, sometimes he  feels hes becoming a broken record. Some try a new method, perhaps just  to please him, but often they give up. Apparently it is easier to do what they  know.  Then, Josh discovered the Marshall Memo4 that debuted in August 2003.  Publisher and educator Kim Marshall acts as a designated teachers reader.  He subscribes to sixty-four mainstay journals, magazines, and newspapers  and many others. He writes cogent synopses of important and relevant  articles that he emails to subscribers on Monday evenings. Josh is impressed  with Marshalls writing style. After subscribing for several months, Josh  believes his faculty should subscribe too as it is the perfect tool for staying  current. He convinces Principal Mark Johansen to take out a subscription for the  school. Because the Memo comes to each faculty members inbox, the cost  is 12 per year per person, much less than the 50 he spent for his own sub scription. He couldnt wait to see its impact. Mark agrees to devote time at  each faculty meeting to discuss selected content from the Memo. Josh refers  to it at department meetings whenever he can. He wants the Marshall Memo  to become like Jonathan Haidts rider who reassesses our everyday practice and eventually leads us to retraining our elephants. While at a conference, Josh hears about The Main Idea,5 an email publication  that offers elegant summaries andor reviews of eight to ten current educa tional books a year. Jenn David-Lang, founder and scribe, captures big ideas 

Stay Current 69 in a readable and useful format. Norman Atkins, CEO of Uncommon Schools  and Cofounder, North Star Academy Charter School, writes on The Main  Ideas website that Jenn has the heart of a teacher, the brain of a think tank,  and the patience of a librarian. Jenn has summarized notable books by well-respected authors including  Michael Fullan, Richard Dufour, Heidi Hayes Jacobs, Richard Stiggins,  John Saphier, Tony Wagner, Ross Greene, and Robert J. Marzano. She also  designs workshops for subscribers. For example, she put together a classroom  management workshop with handouts based on the immensely popular Harry  K. and Rosemary T. Wongs The First Days of School.6 Josh convinces Mark  to encourage his faculty to subscribe to The Main Idea. If twenty-five teach ers were to subscribe, the cost would be 29 per year rather than 49 per  individual. 

Staying current with the latest research and methodologies is essential if  teachers are to align themselves to best practices. Not to do so deprives  students of what they deserve. Global demands, technologies, and social  media are forcing schools and classrooms to reassess their practices. Paying  attention to new knowledge, understandings, and pedagogies keeps them  relevant in educating the young. Exciting Classrooms invites teachers to look  for significant ideas and practices to enable them to teach effectively. Teachers as riders can search for better ways to teach in order to engage  todays learners. They can find ways to retrain their teaching habits and  approachestheir elephants. Sometimes, it may mean separating the young  from their electronic devices to challenge their minds to think, create, and  resolve. Other times, it may mean integrating these devices into the class room. Teachers can decide when and how. REFLECTION When Dan Hilliard first learns about the rider-and-the-elephant metaphor, he  understands his difficulty in changing his deep-seated practices. Hes already  given up making New Years resolutions. Dan sees his New-Years-resolu tion rider like the viewer of Wisemans Meat. Much personal hype without  substance. He recognizes, too, that he has done many of his teaching practices without  thinking. He usually collects homework at the beginning of class; then passes  out quizzes, tests, and papers if he has them; sometimes he takes excessive  time on noninstructional matters; he often calls on the first hands raised; he 
Chapter 8 grades papers with names on them; and for years hes kept his student desks  in rows. Dan surmises about how he might better inform his rider, so he could have  more ways to consider retraining his elephant. He plans to observe colleagues  during his planning periods. Perhaps he will discover better ways to interact  with students. Hes also heard about a neighboring school renowned for its  alternative approaches to teaching and learning. He asks his principal if he  can go visit and come back and report to the rest of the faculty. Its there that  he learns about the Marshall Memo and The Main Idea. POINTS TO PURSUE Take an Inventory of Your Practices How can you become more honest about your teaching? You can begin by  making a list of common practices that you use in your classroom. Indicate  on a scale from 1 to 4 the effectiveness of these practices. Eliminate the less  effective ones and explore alternatives. Show your list to colleagues to seek  their inputand encourage them to do the same. Set up weekly best-practices  conversations.  Assess the Rider and the Elephant in Your Teaching Josh Wilsons experience with Fred Wisemans documentary on meat pack ing reminds him to remain diligent. He knows how often his rider has wanted  to try something new, but the idea soon slipped away. His elephant persists. How difficult has it been for you to integrate new ideas and practices in  your teaching? Have you tried to connect with colleagues when implementing  a new practice? When have you been successful in retraining your elephant?  Under what conditions? Who helped you? Try PrimacyRecency Like Josh Wilson, if you choose to commit to implementing David Sousas  PrimacyRecency, stick to it no matter how challenging it is. Do it quietly,  without fanfare. If it fails, give yourself credit for your effortand either try  again or try another brain-research strategy. David Sousa, John Medina, and  Eric Jensen among others have many! Google any one of them for ideas. 

Stay Current 71 Explore the Marshall Memo If you want to enrich your teaching, keep a lookout for new ideas. They seem  to come out nearly every day. For starters, visit Kim Marshalls website to  explore the potential of the Marshall Memo for you and for your school.  His Memo provides new ideas every week. If you cant convince others to subscribe, subscribe yourself. You then  can build a stronger case for having everyone subscribeor at least in your  department or grade level. Explore The Main Idea For another enrichment possibility, subscribe to Jenn David-Langs The Main  Idea to develop the habit of paying attention to new and significant literature  in the field. Share her website with colleagues to encourage them to subscribe.  Establish a BookFilm Club in Your School Form a teachers bookfilm club with interested colleagues in your district.  Commit to reading books and seeing films from both inside and outside the  field. Your teaching will be the better for it, particularly if teachers from  different grade levels and subject areas attend. Faculties that read books and view films together enrich the conversation  about teaching. NOTES 1.	 Arthur Koestler, The Act of Creation London: Hutchinson, 1964, 18384.  Koestler refers to the June 1961 issue of Scientific American as his source, but he  remarks that the problem originates with the psychologist Carl Duncker. 2.	 Josh found support for this idea from Loren Noren, adjunct professor at the  Stern School of Business at NYU who spoke against laptops in the classroom on The  Takeaway, April 6, 2015. 3.	 Bud Brooks, retired Director of Technology at Bancroft School, Worcester,  Massachusetts, shared some of these ideas in a personal communication. 4.	 See Marshall Memo, http:www.marshallmemo.com. 5.	 See The Main Idea, http:themainidea.netindex.htm. 6.	 Harry K. and Rosemary T. Wong, The First Days of School: How to Be an Effec tive Teacher Harry K. Wong Publications, Inc., 2004.
Taking the higher road brings new horizons and invites educators to reform  their practice. When Jesse Wilcox stepped into his first classroom more than forty years ago,  he found desks and chairs in rows facing the teachers desk and a blackboard.  He saw a similar pattern in every room. It had been the same when he sat in  his classrooms as a child. Today, he sees that same pattern echoing through out his schools corridors. Most of his colleagues still stand at the front of  their students sitting in rowsand do most of the talking. One evening Jesse returns home after yet another unproductive faculty  meeting. This time his colleagues have resisted the effort of his Curriculum  Committee to revamp the freshman year. The committee proposed a new  house system that would put teachers into smaller teams so they could know  students better. Few faculty agreed, however, as most of them saw the present  system as Just fine, so why mess with it? We are already a good school.  We have a good reputation. Like most of his colleagues, Jesse began as a stand-up teacher in his first  year. He tended, however, to turn his lectures into discussions. He liked  interacting with his sophomore history students more than talking at them.  He found he could invoke his sense of humor to engage them, often using  puns. Despite his choice to wear a coat and tie, he preferred running an infor mal classroom, a reflection of his personality.  An average student himself, he worked hard to push his students to become  excellent. A tough grader, he insisted on rigor, sometimes asking more of  his students than he probably should have. Because of his slanted bell curve  more Ds than Bs, he found himself having to defend his position in the  Guidance Counselors office.  Chapter 9 Seek the Higher Road
Chapter 9 Today, he is a different teacher. Hes revamped his room. He began by  painting his desks different colors. Students could choose which color suited  them any given day. Now a few of those desks are scattered among several  comfortable chairs, a couple of couches, lots of plants, and colorful displays.  His desk resides in the far corner. His teaching place could be anywhere.  His students often arrive having been exposed to new material at home the  night before rather than bringing in homeworkor home-practice as he  likes to call it. He finds his classes eager to discuss what theyve discovered.  He prefers to explore their thinking rather than dispense knowledge. Jesse is  comfortable with his students whether they excel or not.  That night after the faculty meeting, he takes out his journal, as he usually  does, and asks: Why do so many of us resist when hearing about a new proposal rather than to take  the time to consider its full implications? Why do most of us in the district insist on maintaining our grip on teaching from  the front of our rooms? Why do we continue to talk more than listen? Why do we still think that giving information is more important than processing  it? Why do we persist in teaching the same material to all students at the same time? What holds so many of us back from taking the higher road of creative, challenging,  interactive, and provocative teaching for ourselvesand for the school? Teachers work in a profession that prides itself on consistency. Invok ing tradition provides an anchor in the storm of change. Such consistency,  however, often serves a teachers needs rather than the needs of her digitally  wired students. She sees them as unable to stay on task during her lessons;  they see her as taking too long to make her point. Teachers often view their responsibility as information bearers. They  establish and maintain authority from the front by directing their students  eyes toward them. From the first grade, children see the teacher taking charge.  They learn to do school well, and by middle school, they know the drill.  It becomes second nature. Ironically, this paradigm remains second nature  for the new teacher when she takes her place on the other side of the desk in  her first classroom. Unlike professionals in medicine, law, and business, teachers know from  the beginningor think they knowhow to teach. They have been observ ing teachers since kindergarten. While other professions require internships,  residencies, and apprenticeships, aspiring teacher candidates teach for a brief  time, sometimes as little as six weeks. From their first day of school they are  assigned to their own classroom. They teach alone. They receive little or no  feedback. They are given no impetus to change.

Seek the Higher Road 75 Today, teachers feel they have more reasons to resist change, as increasing  pressures from federal and state governments demand adequate yearly prog ress on tests scores. They are required to cover more and more material to  meet this demandand to do it faster. So, they find it easier to tell students  what they want them to know. Yet, they know that they are reaching fewer students. The effort to  condense education into a narrow paradigm of clerical-level learning to meet  test standards is forcing more students onto independent educational plans  IEPs. As society identifies more learning disabilities, special education  becomes larger. Schools establish more inclusion classes to mainstream the  learning disabled. Yet, teachers persist with old methods in the hope that  somehow all will learn. Teachers do what they know. In the end, perhaps its simply easier for teachers to remain at the front of  their students. Perhaps they do what they know because it creates less stress  and more peace of mind as they confront the multiple complexities of every day teaching. At least it appears that way. Jesse Wilcox wonders about this. Maybe for many of his colleagues to make  changes and implement new strategies is simply too demanding. School  is already complicated enough. So is home. He returns to his journal and  writes: Perhaps its easier:  To tell students what to learn rather than to take time to empower them to par ticipate in designing their learning  To call on the first hands raised, repeat each answer, and then elaborate to com plete the lesson rather than to partner with students in serious dialogue  To give truefalse, short-answer, multiple-choice tests particularly ones writ ten by publishers rather than to design authentic performance assessments  To teach from textbooks rather than to take time to design and implement inno vative programs using the textbook only as a resource  To teach all the kids the same material at the same time rather than to provide  relevant materials based on student readiness, interest, or learning style  To teach in ones preferred style rather than to adjust to the different learning  styles of students  To teach lessons from old notes year after year, and give the same quizzes and  tests rather than to rework, redesign, and make relevant what students need to  know, understand, and are able to do  To assign reading and writing as homework rather than to teach these literacy  skills in class  To give the same homework assignments rather than to provide choice, alterna tives, or to let students create their own
Chapter 9  To leave at the close of school and take care of personal business rather than to  stay after school to collaborate with colleagues  To watch a favorite television show at the end of the day rather than to read a  journal or professional book; after all, school is tiring. If Jesse shared this list at a faculty meeting he would offend many of his  colleagues and the administration. At the same time, he realizes hes on to  something. During his forty years, he has seen countless teachers replicate  these methods and refuse to change. Fortunately, others treat teaching as a  profession and stay current with research, new methods, and new materials.  He decides to share his thoughts with Angela Scortino and Carlos Sanderos,  two of the most innovative teachers in his department.  Angela has only been at the school for three years, but her students already  know her as a dynamo. She is not afraid to risk a new approach or consider  radical ideas. Carlos, on the other hand, has been a teacher for nearly twenty  years. His progress toward freeing himself from the tyranny of lecturing,  however, has taken him several years. He has become an excellent discussion  leader and innovative curriculum designer. His students rarely leave without  arguing with each other about what they were discussing in class.  Angela and Carlos agree with Jesse that many veterans do teach the  easier way. His list may appear insulting, but it is true. These veterans  work in the paradigm of whole-class lessons in which the smartest students  received As, and the less able received lower grades. They act as indepen dent agents and pursue teaching as it suits them. After all, they believe its  worked that way for years, so why change. Jesse, Angela, and Carlos know these methods are failing students.  Lectures, which may have worked for academic-oriented students, are putting  more students to sleep. Fewer do their homework. Fewer care about tests and  exams. They agree that traditional education is becoming increasingly out of  sync with todays digitally driven students. They want to find a way to encourage colleagues to take a higher road, one  that respects students and responds to the demands of todays global, technical  world. Jesse cautions them not to place blame. Instead, they should advocate  for the teaching profession to stay current, just as people expect doctors and  dentists to use only the latest instruments, techniques, and medicines. Then,  add that the same principle holds true for lawyers, auto technicians, shoe  salesmen, beauticians, restaurateurs, roofers, and cleaning services to name a  few. Teachers should not be exempt from this responsibility.  Angela suggests that they begin by making a list of higher-road  principles that will encourage teachers to move away from the easier path.  The list should be eclectic and open-ended, so people will find some ideas  they could latch onto. Carlos adds that they should ask the principal if they 

Seek the Higher Road 77 can present their list at a faculty meeting. It would be a risk, but worth it.  They brainstorm and come up with their initial list; this list contains the fol lowing recommendations:  Hold high expectations for all studentsand encourage them to succeed  beyond all expectations  Challenge all students, acknowledge their different learning styles, and make  sure each one learns before moving on  Persist in taking risks to find better ways for students to learn  Create or join study groups to examine best practices, lessons, and student  work  Meet regularly with colleagues using clear agendas that are designed to  improve instruction  Mentor and nurture new colleagues by offering support, ideas, and compassion  Stay after school if necessary to prepare and meet with colleagues  Attend students games and performances. They wonder, however, if they should share Jesses Perhaps it is easier  list.

Choosing to teach unconventionally takes courage and relentless effort.  Doing it the easier way by not rocking the boat while keeping students and  parents quiet and happyor apparently happyallows teachers to become  comfortable. They feel safe, right, and normal. However, when a teacher  teaches differently, he takes on the role of the underdog. He becomes a David  in a world of Goliaths.1 He gives up and lets go of practices that no longer  work. He puts in untiring effort, hard work, and persistence, persistence, per sistencenothing less satisfies. When teachers pursue the easier path, students do not learn. Teachers  fool themselves when they think they are teaching well just because some  students are willing to sit and listen, take notes, study, and ace tests. If others  were to try harder, they surmise, those students would also get good grades.  However, when they to look back to their own school days and remember  how few of their classmates earned As, they might reconsider these tradi tional practices. Every school district has pockets of Davids who abandon the easier  path and respond to the challenges schools and families are facing. These are  the great teachers. Everyone knows who they are. They have taken the higher  road. They have signed the Teaching Manifesto. See Appendix, Teaching  Manifesto.
Chapter 9 REFLECTION Dan Hilliard cringes when he hears blanket criticisms of his fellow teachers.  However, many of them do stand at the front of the room most of the time.  Yet, they are not necessarily poor teachers. His colleague, Jared Wilmot,  enthralls his Language Arts students by sharing lively stories and insights  into the novels he teaches. He talks a lot of the time, tells poignant stories,  provides lively visuals, raises provocative questionsand allows time for  them to interact. They cant wait for his next class. They love his friendly  demeanor and carry new ideas out of his room almost every day. As Dan has tried new methodologies, he pays attention to their impact.  When he holds high expectations, most students step up to meet the  challenge. Implementing 10-2 Thinking and PrimacyRecency has brought  relevance to his lessons. Adopting the piano teacher metaphor has enlivened  interactions with his students. The TAPS Template for Teacher Planning has  generated energy and coherence to his lessons and units. And, he enjoys his  best-practices Thursday discussion with colleagues. But, too many teachers treat teaching as telling and fail to intrigue  students. Dan often wishes he could share more of his ideas, but he hesitates.  A few of his colleagues appear open to publicly assessing their teaching. Its  just not done throughout his school. He hopes, however, that he will find a  way. POINTS TO PURSUE What Would Rip Van Winkle Observe in Your Classroom? Undoubtedly, all fields have practitioners who prefer the old ways.  Teachers are no exception. The Internet story of Rip Van Winkles awaken ing one hundred years later where he finds an unrecognizable world except  for the classroom contains much truth.  Have you wondered why so many teachers persist in teaching as their  teachers taught them? Do you know why you loved your favorite teachers?  What of their qualities would you like to emulate? Would Rip Van Winkle  recognize what you are doing with your kids?  What Is Your Role in Being a Bearer of Information? The earliest schools served primarily as information bearers. School was  where you found out stuff. You could come home with information not even  your parents knew. Today, information is everywhere.

Seek the Higher Road 79 Given teachers historic role, how has the Internet affected what you decide  to share? What information should you convey to your students? What infor mation should you discover together? What can they learn from you that they  will not find on Google? What do you want them to learn?  What Will Convince Teachers to Let Go of Easier Practices?  Jesse Wilcox comes up with long list of what teachers do to make their  practice easier. He is not sure, however, what to do with it. With his col leagues Angela Scortino and Carlos Sanderos, they decide to approach the  faculty with a list of approaches teachers can use that are not easier.  However, what keeps some teachers practicing the easier methods? Is it  because no one observes them? If you practice easier methods, what will  convince you to change? Would you even be willing to take the extra time  needed, knowing you will not be paid for it? Would you be willing to share Jesses Perhaps its easier list with  colleagues? Take the Higher Road Jesse, Angela, and Carlos have chosen the higher road to teaching. Taking  this road evokes ones true calling. Taking this road exudes enthusiasm.  Nothing gets in the way of what you want to accomplish. In tough circum stances, you find the silver linings and move forward.  If youve hesitated to commit yourself to this level of teachingto leave  the easier pathwhat holds you back? If you decide to deepen your  commitment, dont hesitate to ask for help from a colleague whos left the  easier path behind. They will be honored. Are You a David among Goliaths? Are you a David among your colleagues? Do you know other teachers who  are? How do youthey persist, despite the conventional teaching surrounding  youthem? What keeps a David from succumbing to the Goliaths?  NOTE 1.	 This metaphor is explored by Malcolm Gladwell, How David Beats Goliath,  The New Yorker, May 11, 2009, 4049.

Part III WHAT MUST WE CHANGE? Facing what doesnt work enables educators to find ways that work better. Part III calls into question four serious impediments to effective teaching and  offers practical alternatives. Education, like other institutions, has embedded practices that obstruct sen sible, relevant, and productive teaching. Most of these practices originated  inside the paradigm of factory-model schools that were built to meet the  demands of the industrial era. Managers men led from the top and hired  cheap labor women to carry out scripted lessons to groups of children often  sorted by IQ. Despite the demands of a rapidly changing global world, this  hierarchical structure still prevails. The isolated classroom teacher remains the unfortunate legacy of this  paradigm. Despite major efforts across the country to implement standards  and strengthen curriculums, most teachers continue to teach as they always  haveand more so because they feel they must keep up with the demands  of high-stakes tests. When teachers choose to uproot ineffective embedded traditions, they  adopt an emperor-is-not-wearing-any-clothes attitude. They pay attention to  the effects of practices cited in part III that interfere with reaching the poten tial of each and every student, namely, tracking, unions, interruptions, and the  persistence of whole-class lessons. Teachers become more empowered when taking leadership in reforming  these practices. They free themselves and their students to become people  who live the lives they deserve, gain the freedom they crave, and find the  happiness they desire.
Whos not going to get it? Who will already know it or get it quickly? The habit of preparing one lesson for the whole class resides deep in teachers  DNA. But, when confronted with these two questions, teachers immediately  bring individual students to mind. The door swings open to consider alterna tive approaches. These questions have become favorites for Pam Peters, a lifelong teacher  and now a popular teacher trainer. She likes them because they force work shop participants to rethink their whole-class approach to lessons. They  immediately know the names of students who would struggle with a given  lesson and also those who would grasp the material quicklyor already  know it.  Pam shows two videos of teachers who adjust their teaching to meet the  different levels of understanding among students. In the first video, a sci ence teacher assigns three groups of students alternative ways to investigate  a concept. She gives the middle group an at-grade-level lab activity, which  used to be her whole-class lesson; she gives the advanced group a simulation  designed to stretch their thinking; and she provides struggling learners with a  computer to assist them in handling data.1  In the second video, a math teacher assigns three groups of sixth graders  alternative approaches for solving the same concept: one group she gives  manipulatives to work with; the other two groups she gives textbooks, one at  grade level and the other more advanced.2 Pam points out that both of these  teachers want to make learning accessible for every student. Its what coaches  do in response to players skill levels. Her workshop participants usually do  not question this analogy.  Chapter 10 Abolish Tracking
Chapter 10 After some conversation, however, the notion arises that the groupings  depicted in the videos may represent either a hidden form of tracking or a  type of ability grouping. Participants view the readiness groups for the les son as likely to be the same groups for every lesson. Some even state that the  teachers in the video should not have allowed students to work at different  levels because some of them would be stigmatized while others rewarded. Pam then puts on a third video in which a fourth-grade teacher demonstrates  incorporating student interests while attending to their readiness levels.3 She  first asks them to choose an American Revolution historical figure that they  would like to learn more about. After dividing them into three groups based  on their choices, she places on each table a basket with multiple levels of  books. The video then shows students reading books at their comfort levels. The next part, however, challenges Pams participants. The teacher passes  out three different-colored cubesred, green, and blueto individual  students sitting at their respective tables. She then asks all of them to refer to  the compare and contrast side of each cube. She tells the students to whom  she gave red cubes to draw a picture of their historical person, a member of  their family, and write a comparison; those with green cubes compare and  contrast using a Venn diagram; and those with blue cubes create an openended compare-and-contrast diagram.  The teacher has no qualms about assigning different-colored cubes to  different students, nor apparently do her students. But Pams teachers do!  I cant abide having students know that some are better than others. Its  not right to group kids like that. How do you think the red-group kids  feel seeing their green and blue classmates doing higher-level work? The  conversation often becomes heated. Sometimes, Pam is able to reframe the  issue from a broader perspectiveand sometimes not. Paradoxically, participants criticize all three video teachers for setting up  readiness groups as a form of ability grouping. Yet, at the same time, they  often defend their own schools decision to make permanent homogeneous  groupings for bright, average, and slow students. By the end of the  discussions, the message of the videos often becomes lost as teachers defend  their groupings. Pressures to perform well on state and federal assessments,  they argue, demand they teach as fast as possible and in the way they know  best. Creating flexible readiness groups takes too much time; having their  fixed ability groups is more efficient. Pam then circles back to a fundamental question and asks, Why do we  insist on teaching using the same assumptions and methods our teachers  used? Has it crept into our DNA? Perhaps terms, such as bright, average,  and slow, are embedded in the language of the profession.  This is a difficult issue. Pam remembers struggling with it early in her career.  Besides, the longer she taught, the more students surprised her when abilities 

Abolish Tracking 85 suddenly surfaced. She does not recall when she recognized her perception  of slow students might be due to their self-identification as slow; it was a  strategy they used to protect themselves from being thought of as not smart.  Nevertheless, she often found herself prejudging students ability levels when  she should have waited. In those years, she was a caring, energetic, and committed teacher. She did  her best to make her classes lively, engaging, and meaningful. Above all, she  was fair. But one day she met Jennifer Sinclair in the supermarket several  years after Jennifer was in her class. She was struck by Jennifers comment:  I really enjoyed your class, Mrs. Peters, but one thing bothered me. You  decided early which students were smart and which were notand you never  changed your mind. Pam was stunned. From that day, she vowed to try to  stay open to the potential of each studentand later to every teacher in her  workshops.  When Pam tells about her encounter with Jennifer, she invites participants  to consider these questions: Do we hear what we are actually saying when we discuss students and  grouping? Do we really believe some students are bright and others slow? Do we believe we can achieve more with our bright pupils than we can with  our slower pupils? Do we prefer bright cooperative kids who play the game of school well  and are easier to teach? Do we assume the lower kids uncooperative are less teachable? Do we really think we no longer track students as we were tracked? Pam then shows clips of Stand and Deliver,4 in which Jaime Escalante  demonstrates the effectiveness of holding high expectations for all of his  calculus students and how his expectations become infectious. Pam wants to  crack open the language of tracking she sees etched in most teachers minds.  However, she does not point the finger of blame. Teachers, after all, deal  with large numbers of students. In middle and high school, most have well  over one hundred per day. Therefore, having an expedient terminology is  useful. Because they have to constantly sort and grade students, having cate gories facilitates that process. And after all, labeling is endemic in our culture. The real danger in using this terminology is its threat to student potential.  Its a different matter to see a student as struggling or falling behind in his  efforts to learn at a given moment. Having this perspective, a teacher can help  him progress to the next level. Its another matter to predetermine that he is  a slow or level one student. Once categorized, his fate will have been  sealed. Teachers no longer seek his potentialand he no longer will believe  in himself.
Chapter 10 Teachers can shift their thinking. Some teachers are open to surprise, to  Aha! moments that signal a students sudden grasp of a concept, an under standing, or insight. They teach invoking the mantra, Expect the surprise  and it will come.  The habit of sorting resides deep in the profession. It was the foundation  of the factory-based public school system developed in the twentieth century.  However, once teachers become aware of the harm of sorting they find ways  to become open to every students potential. Having surprise in their mind  alerts them to the possible, away from the numbness of prejudgment. What can teachers do to break out of this predicament? They begin by  realizing students do not have a fixed intelligence see chapter 6, See the  Big Picture. Once they know that IQ does not determine intelligence and  that self-control is more essential, they let go of labeling students as slow  or bright. They focus on high expectations and nurture each students  potential.  Pam then shows clips of two other exemplary teachers:   Marva Collins, whose Chicago elementary student on 60 Minutes responds  to Morley Safers hard question about his school, Why do you like it?  Its just too hard, with Thats why I like it, because it makes your brain  bigger.5  Rafe Esquith, whose Los Angeles ELA fifth graders read, among other  books, Of Mice and Men, The Joy Luck Club, and To Kill a Mockingbird and produce a full-length Shakespearean play every year.6 Pam encourages participants to see these two teachers not as exceptional  but as illustrative of what they too can do for students. She reminds them of  the story of Alan Turing whose persistence broke the German secret codes  and shortened World War II by two years. His work saved an estimated four teen million lives. She makes the point that each teacher, each person, affects  the lives of others. Not on the scale of Turing perhaps, but true nonetheless.  She recommends that they see The Imitation Game,7 the acclaimed movie on  Turings life.  Escalante, Collins, and Esquith show how teachers can   hold high expectations for all students,  believe in every student regardless of perceived abilities,  ask the most from each student every day, every class,  nurture each student along the way,  and instill in learners a fascination for learning. Or, in their own words,

Abolish Tracking 87  Jaime Escalante: Youre going to work harder than you ever have before.  The only thing I ask from you is ganas, desire. If you dont have ganas,  I will give it to you, because I am an expert.8  Marva Collins: Theres no magic here. Mrs. Collins is no miracle worker.  I do not walk on water; I do not part the sea. I just love children and work  harder than a lot of peopleand so will you.9  Rafe Esquith: There are no shortcuts.10 Teachers who still view students as fixed quantitiesas bright or  slowcan break away from this mindset. They could recall a teacher who  judged them unfairly. Sometimes, such judgments stay in ones psyche for  years. But choosing to let go of labeling helps prevent the same legacy for  their students. As teachers find their own paths to greatness, they create these  paths for students. They heed the wisdom of Marianne Williamson errone ously attributed to Nelson Mandela who quoted it at his inaugural: Our deepest fear is not that we are inadequate. Our deepest fear is that we are  powerful beyond measure. It is our light, not our darkness, that most frightens  us. We ask ourselves, who am I to be brilliant, gorgeous, talented, fabulous?  Actually who are you not to be? You are a child of God. Your playing small  does not serve the world. Theres nothing enlightened about shrinking so that  other people wont feel insecure around you. We are all meant to shine as  children do. We were born to make manifest the glory of God within us; its  in everyone. And as we let our light shine, we unconsciously give other people  permission to do the same. As were liberated from our own fear, our presence  automatically liberates others.11  Jaime Escalante, Marva Collins, Rafe Esquith, and the great teachers  weve known do not play small. Why should we?

The seminal work of Carol Dweck told in her book Mindset: The New  Psychology of Success provides insight for understanding how to perceive stu dents. Dweck describes two possible mindsets: a fixed mindset and a growth  mindset. People who have a fixed mindset believe their abilities, personality,  and moral character are fixed; their responses to circumstances either prove  or disprove their worth. People who have a growth mindset, on the contrary,  believe their initial talents, interests, aptitudes, and temperaments can be  changed through effort. Every challenge becomes an opportunity.12 Simply recognizing these two mindsets has a profound impact. Teachers  stop to think about how much they allow outside factors to tell them about 
Chapter 10 their students, such as test scores, judgments of previous teachers, and class  placements. These factors when combined with their initial impressions of  students often fix in stone who they areand will be. Dweck reminds us, however, had we been Mozarts teacher in his first ten  years as a composer, we might have written him off as mediocre. Were we to  have been Edisons teacher in his early years, we might not have recognized  his entrepreneurial skills. Pam Peters brings Dwecks work to the attention  of teachers at her workshops. She urges them to make the following commit ment and post it on their refrigerator: I will not judge any students potential by what he has done in the past or what he  has done today. I will see him anew today. I will accept whatever he is not good  at as a challenge and opportunity for me to make his brain biggerand mine!  Teachers can choose not to judge students based on IQ or single-placement  tests. Less capable students and athletes canand dooutperform their  talented counterparts. Successful coaches know that good teams thrive with  players of mixed abilities. Research also shows that mixed-ability classes  benefit all learners.13 And, as Richard Lavoie indicates, regular students  always benefit from being in inclusion classes.14 Janice Kemp, a participant in one of Pams workshops, recounted an  instance in her graduate class when she forgot to put her name on a paper.  As the professor asked two of his best students if the A paper belonged to  one of them, his jaw dropped when he saw it belonged to Janice. He appeared  to assume that she was incapable of such a paperand worse, he made her  feel bad. Upon reflection, Janice realized how often she and her colleagues  assume, as did her professor, that some of their students are less capable. Another teacher in Pams workshop shared what shed heard at a  conference. An elementary special education teacher assigned her students  reading books, which they were enjoying. After several weeks, however, the  supervising teacher discovered that this teacher had given them advanced  books by mistake. She immediately replaced them with more appropriate  materials. This incident reminded Pam of an episode of The Simpsons in  which Bart was placed in a remedial class and wondered how working slower  would help him catch up to the other kids. Near the close of one of her workshops, Pam overheard Jessica, a  ninth-grade history teacher, say, I dont know if I could teach this concept to  my lower-level kids. No one challenged her assumption and instead nod ded in agreement. Pam was awestruck by the finality of Jessicas statement  and its implications. Jessicas colleagues seemed to believe, as well, that their  top classes could discuss and debate while their lower classes could not.  How sad, Pam reflects. Are any of my ideas gaining traction? 

Abolish Tracking 89 Comments such as Jessicas evokes Jerome Bruners famous dictum, We  begin with the hypothesis that any subject can be taught effectively in some  intellectually honest form to any child at any stage of development.15 Few  serious educators disagree with Bruners sentiment. Yet teachers and schools  appear to ignore it. What if, instead, schools took Bruners words to heart and  used them as a mantra? Tom Vreeland, a volunteer tutor who had unwavering  optimism about students potential to learn, stuck with his students who twice  had failed to pass the Massachusetts high-stakes test. Eventually, they did.16 Pam likes to share Malcolm Gladwells story of Robert Golomb, a virtuoso  car salesman who has an exceptional intelligence in dealing with people.  His resolve to take care of every customer who comes through the door pre vents him from prejudging. He refuses to preassess customers looks, that is,  factoring inunconsciously perhapstheir age, race, and gender. Nor does  he gauge their inclination to buy or not. He remains open and treats everyone  fairlyand doubles the average sales of other salesmen.17 Pam suggests that  teachers act as Golomb and delight in being open to the potential of all of  their students and making sales well beyond the average. Be aware that you choose how you speak about your students. Listen carefully  to the words you use. Do you say low-level or high-level, when discussing  students? Once you see how detrimental these terms are, you listen for them  with your colleagues. Some participants begin to grasp what she is saying.  You all can recall classmates, friends, and family who have succeeded beyond  expectations. You can recall students who surprised you despite your early  assessments. When you think about it, you have become smarter through the act  of teaching. Everyone has potentialand as you accept this truth you become  better. So, when you hear colleagues use these terms, you can reframe the  conversation. When teachers consider the two questions addressed at the beginning of this  chapter, Whos not going to get it? and Who will already know it or get  it quickly? they know these questions apply only to a moment in timeand  not to the students themselves. REFLECTION Teachers who label students give up on them. The average students stay  average. They make choices that keep them in their place. They rarely distin guish themselves. They fulfill expectations earning Cs and Ds. The bright 
Chapter 10 students maintain their place by memorizing for As. Few take risks. They can  suffer anxiety over grades. And, despite dedicated teachers efforts to the con trary, special education students feel special, as in less than their peers. Dan Hilliard struggles not to use such terms as bright, slow, and  average. After hearing the two questions posed at the beginning of this  chapter, he reframes his thinking about his students potential. In conver sations, however, he occasionally uses these terms, as they are part of the  schools common language. Even parents use them freelybut usually only  positive terms.  Dan read Carol Dwecks Mindset. Hes developing a growth mindset both in  his life and teaching. It frees him from making judgments of his studentsand of  himself. He has recommended Dwecks book to his principal for the staff to read.  POINTS TO PURSUE Break Away from the Tyranny of Language Like all professions, teachers learn their own lexicon. Some terms seem to be  embedded, such as slow, bright, honors, level one. Unfortunately,  such terms constrain teachers and parents from seeing potential.  Ask yourselfand ask colleagueswhat keeps teachers locked into  categorizing students? If you see a student break out, do you see it as an  anomaly? What might you do to change your thinking? How might you look  for surprises from your students? And how can you look for the unexpected?  Find Ways to Challenge Students at All Levels Given the numbers of students in classrooms, the task of challenging all of  them is difficult. The expansion of special education services has made it  more possible for schools to support struggling students. Some schools even  have gifted and talented programs for the better-than-average students.  How can you advocate for students in your classroom who perform above  and beyond your curricula? How will you provide them with challenges to  develop their thinking and creativity? What can you learn from coaches and  teachers in the arts? Learn from the Great Ones Jaime Escalante, Marva Collins, and Rafe Esquith are examples of excep tional teachers. No doubt, you know of other teachers you would consider to  be great.

Abolish Tracking 91 What can you do to infuse great teaching qualities in yourself? Can you let  go of playing smallIm just a teacherand step toward greatness? Can  you acknowledge the greatness you already have? Seek a Growth Mindset Carol Dweck has become the poster person for teaching that is growth ori ented. Read her seminal book Mindset. Invite others to join you for what  should be intriguing conversations.  Can you make a commitment to become more growth orientednot only  for your students but with yourself?  See Yourself As a Coach Taking Bruners hypothesis seriously brings up the analogy of teacheras-coach. In Mr. Hollands Opus, Glenn Holland denies hes a coach  to Lou Russ, an athlete who wants to learn to play a bass drum.18 Yet,  Mr. Holland becomes just that as he teaches Lou to play successfully. Can you see yourself as a teacher-as-coach? Can you coach when you  know you need to cover a lot of material? How can you reconcile these roles?  Make their Brainsand YoursBigger Discuss the following statement with colleagues, adapted from Marva  Collinss students words of wisdom: I will not judge any students potential  by what he has done in the past or by what hes done today. Instead, I will  accept what I am not good at as a challenge and opportunity for making my  students brains biggerand mine!  How can this challenge become central in your schools conversations  about teaching? NOTES 1.	 Differentiating Instruction: Creating Multiple Paths for Learning I ASCD,  1997. Differentiation of Activities by Readiness. 2.	 Differentiating Instruction: Creating Multiple Paths for Learning I ASCD,  1997. Differentiating Content by Readiness. 3.	 Differentiating Instruction: Creating Multiple Paths for Learning I ASCD,  1997. Differentiation of Content by Interest and Differentiation of Activities by  Readiness. 4.	 Stand and Deliver American Playhouse Theatrical, 1988.
Chapter 10 5.	 Carol Dweck, Mindset: The New Psychology of Success New York: Ballantine,  2006, 19495. 6.	 Mel Stuart, The Hobart Shakespeareans Docudrama.com, 2006. 7.	 The Imitation Game Winston Company, 2014. 8.	 Stand and Deliver American Playhouse Theatrical, 1988. 9.	 Zay Smith, Chicago Sun-Times, quoting from Marva Collins and Civia  Tamarkin, Marva Collins Way: Returning to Excellence in Education Los Angeles:  Jeremy Tarcher, 19821990, 47, in Carol Dweck, Mindset, 199. 10.	 Mel Stuart, Hobart Shakespeareans. 11.	 Marianne Williamson, A Return to Love Dunmore, PA: Harper Collins, 1992,  Chapter 7, Section 3. 12.	 Carol S. Dweck, Mindset. Thanks to Mary Anton-Oldenberg for bringing this  book to my attention. 13.	 See, for example, John Sutton and Alice Krueger, eds., EDThoughts: What  We Know About Mathematics Teaching and Learning Aurora, CO: McREL:  Mid-continent Research for Education and Learning, 2002 220, 45. 14.	 Richard Lavoie, Its So Much Work Being Your Friend. Lavoie also says  inclusion students do not always benefit. See Richard Lavoie, When the Chips are  Down Learning Store: http:www.learningstore.orgwe1004.html or excerpts on  YouTube. 15.	 Jerome Bruner, The Process of Education: A Searching Discussion of School  Education Opening New Paths to Learning and Teaching New York: Vintage,  1960, 33. 16.	 Tom Vreeland, Mount Everett High School, Sheffield, Massachusetts. 17.	 Malcolm Gladwell, Blink: The Power of Thinking Without Thinking New  York: Little Brown, 2005, 8896. 18.	 Stephen Herek, Mr. Hollands Opus, 1995.
There is a type of crab that cannot be caughtit is agile and clever enough to  get out of any trap. And yet, these crabs are caught by the thousands every day,  thanks to a particularly human trait they possess. The trap is a wire cage with a hole at the top. Bait is placed in the cage, and  the cage is lowered into the water. One crab comes along, enters the cage, and  begins munching on the bait. A second crab joins him. A third. Crab Thanksgiv ing. Yum. Eventually, however, the bait is gone. The crabs could easily climb up the side of the cage and through the hole,  but they do not. They stay in the cage. More crabs come in and join themlong  after the bait is gone.  Should one of the crabs realize there is no further reason to stay in the trap  and attempt to leave, the other crabs will gang up on him and stop him. They  will repeatedly pull him off the side of the cage. If he is persistent, the others will  tear off his claws to keep him from climbing. If he still persists, they will kill him. The crabsby a force of the majoritystay together in the cage. The cage is  hauled up, and its dinnertime on the pier. Teachers stick together. Given their long history as blue-collar union labor ers in factory-model schools, they unite around one another. They develop  strong social bonds and loyalties and seldom commit to act independently.  They function inside a strong hierarchical structure and act in deference  to their superiors whether they respect them or not. They rarely imagine  administrators as colleagues; they are, after all, the bosses. Their deep  loyalty to one another protects them from outside threats coming from  authorities.  Ben Klunder, a new teacher, was surprised to hear on his first day veteran  colleagues complaining in the faculty room. He had come into teaching from  a liberal arts background. He knew the profession was not well respected,  Chapter 11 Abandon the Crabs in the Cage
Chapter 11 but he couldnt wait for his chance to be a teacher. His first weeks with his  ninth-grade Language Arts classes were more exciting than he imagined. He  was looking forward to becoming friends with his new colleagues. He was surprised, however, with their demeanor at a faculty meeting.  Instead of grappling with issues and focusing on bettering the school, no one  paid attention. The more the principal spoke, the less interested they became.  After the meeting, Ben asked his department head, Delaney Goodman, why  the meeting was like that. Delaney explained that the school recently underwent a difficult time.  Four years ago, our new principal at that time tried to impose his ideas on  all of us. He did not consult anyone beforehand, nor did he enlist any of us  to help him. He caused deep resentment. A few of us quit, but most of us  retreated into old patterns. Resistance was better than compliance. As you  know, we have a new principal. It will take time for our faculty to acclimatize  to him. Its a slow process.  Delaney proceeded to explain that the faculty still resents being forced to  attend meetings in which they have little or no say. So, they feign attention,  correct papers, and carry on side conversations; some even fall asleep. They  joke about how they subvert meetings, and often roll their eyes to show their  disgust. Some get up and leave at the appointed time in the contract even if  the meeting is not over. Actually, the principal does not enjoy most meetings  either. He has to lead them, as hes expected to. Later that evening, Ben thinks how much better faculty meetings would be  if he and his colleagues would take initiative to establish a collegial relation ship with the administration. He took out his journal and wrote:  What if we change our attitude? What would happen if we worked with the  principal to make the meetings meaningful? Instead of sitting through endless  announcements and administrivia, together we could design workshops to  improve instruction. Imagine the effect of four hours per a monththirtysix hours per yearof real professional learning. If I were to have had such  workshops during, say, forty years in the classroom, I would have nearly fifteen  hundred hours of collaborative professional learningand my colleagues and  I would become a more collegial and competent faculty.  Veteran colleagues try to find false solace by complaining about matters  such as restrictive schedules, single-letter grading systems, extra duties,  angry parents, uninformed school boards, state mandates, and unmotivated  students. Complaints often become excuses, which allow faculty to place  blame as if they have had no part in creating problems. They point fingers  instead of recognizing their complicity in scheduling, grading and reporting  systems, and rigid contracts. 

Abandon the Crabs in the Cage 95 Ben quickly understands that teachers are instrumental to the culture of  his school. It is one matter to complain about what is not working, but it is  another to take responsibility for making changes for the better. They often  seem to take a crabs-in-the-cage mentality instead of striving to invent new  and better ways to teach. So much wasted effort, he thinks.  Among the complaints that Ben hears in the faculty room are about other  colleagues who do not pull their weight. Yet, some of those same teachers  do not pull their weight, but he says nothing. Another trait among the faculty  that really surprises him is how teachers allow one another to perpetuate old  ways. No one seems willing to critique teaching practices. At faculty meetings, some veterans put down new teachers initiatives.  They voice sharp criticisms like, We do not do this around here, or Weve  tried that before and it doesnt work. Ben feels uncomfortable challenging  such comments. He wishes he could. By keeping silent, he realizes he is  condoning the culture of nicebut it might assure him a place in the social  structure of the school.1  However, such condoning mentality hurts everyone. When veterans  slight new teachers during faculty meetings, they shut down their potential  to impact effective change. They affirm the status quo. Soon, new teachers  either conform, or perhaps as likely quitand if they still want to teach move  to another school. This situation reflects a crabs-in-a-cage mentality in which everyone sticks  close together on the floor of the cage. Any attempt by one to climb outto  make an effort to changefrightens others into pulling him back. By sticking  together, teachers build an enclave, one that ironically protects them not only  from threats of change but also from the influx of new ideas. Teacher unions can reinforce this mentality. In the early years of  factory-designed schools, unions proved important and beneficial. Collec tive bargaining allowed teachers to advocate for decent wages and working  conditionsstill a fight for manyand protection from unfair dismissals.  But in recent years, unions have transgressed into the business of education.  As a result, they often become a stumbling block for change and innovation.  Their role has grown not only in negotiating salaries and benefits, their pri mary purpose, but also in enforcing seniority for veteran teachers regardless  of their competence, determining schedules, workloads, job descriptions, and  teaching hours.  The union mindset focuses on security and protection. The practice of  harboring less competent members is particularly insidious. Delaney told  Ben about how an art teacher, who everyone knew was inadequate, garnered  support from the union when the school board held a public hearing to ques tion his competency. This teacher was cutting corners and not fulfilling his 
Chapter 11 contract. Yet, only one staff member was willing to testify in support of dis missal in front of the board at a public meeting.  Nearly as insidious, especially for students, is the reluctance of unions  to support innovations unless specified in the teacher contract. Given that  most contracts are negotiated for multiple years, they become roadblocks for  change. If it is not in the contract, the argument states, we cannot and will  not consider it until we renegotiate. In some districts the union hierarchy exerts a stranglehold on its  membership. When a member attempts to act outside the contract, it invokes  the crabs-in-the-cage principle. Union officials have chastised members for  wanting to paint their own classroomseven after maintenance refusesor  for arranging to hold parent conferences outside specified contract hours. In  some districts, union leadership manages to stay in office for years and is  able to enact frequent grievance procedures to block any and all proposals  for changing instructional practice. In some districts, past presidents even  maintain control years beyond their time in office.2 Tenure has become another obstacle that prevents creativity and indepen dence. In most districts, teachers spend their first few years on probation,  proving their worthmainly by staying out of trouble. They, then, secure  a professional contract or tenure. Ironically, assessments during these first  years often focus on behavior and not on the quality of instruction. Unlike  college and university professors who must prove their academic credentials  to earn tenure, teachers need only do a satisfactory jobor appear to. When visiting her doctor, a patient is confident that her doctor is up-to-date  in his practices, as he is required to take periodic recertification exams. If he  were able earn a certificate to practice for life without rigorous recertification,  she would not continue as his patient. Yet, the teaching profession presses  to equate tenure with job security. In many districts, the profession requires  little more than attending workshops and courses to collect professional  development credits. They rarely conductor allowserious assessments of  teaching practice. At a brain-research workshop led by a nationally respected presenter,  Benklunder noticed that two-thirds of the participants left after lunch to shop  rather than complete the workshop; since they had already signed in, they  received their credit hours for the day. Needless to say, Ben was embarrassed,  not only for the presenter but also for the profession. The presenter told him  afterward that such behavior is not unusual. Once receiving tenure, teachers are virtually guaranteed a lifetime contract.  For example, two teachers in the same department teaching the same subject  in the same school can perform at very different levels. Yet they expect to  have their contracts renewed annually. An egregious example happened in 

Abandon the Crabs in the Cage 97 the case of one science teacher who taught twenty-eight times as much as  another teacher down the hall in the same school.3 Teachers know who are the most effective teachers in their school and who  are not. Yet, they rarely consider themselves as one of the weaker teachers.  A principal and good friend from a neighboring school told Ben that after  interviewing all of her teachers, she learned that they only perceived other  teachers as weakernever themselves. Parents, too, know which teachers  they want for their children, but often have to count on the luck of the draw. Ben surmises about his colleagues crabs-in-the-cage mentality. He again  takes out his journal and asks: How can we break out of our persistence in support of mediocrity? Why dont we pay closer attention to the evidence that confirms our central  role in student achievement? How can we become open to data analysis of performance levels to comple ment our personal judgments? Why do so many of my colleagues support simplistic satisfactory unsatisfactory performance rating systems of their teaching that assure that over  95 of them are guaranteed a satisfactory rating? Michael Jones, in the Boston Globe, sums up the absurdity of this rating  system in one sentence: At 72 of Bostons 135 schools, not a single teacher  was given an unsatisfactory evaluation. Fifteen of these are on the states list  of chronically underperforming schools.4 When teachers remain hunkered  down with the crabs-in-the-cage mentality, they not only perpetuate medioc rity and failed practices, but they also deny the opportunity to identify and  verify factors that define greatness. Dr. William Sanders, a senior research fellow at the University of North  Carolina, designed the seminal Tennessee Value Added Assessment System  TVASS. His system provides convincing evidence at that time that teacher  effectiveness is the leading factor in student achievement. In fact, according  to Sanders it is ten to twenty times as significant as the effects of other factors,  such as socioeconomic status, race, urban versus rural, and heterogeneous  versus homogeneous groupings.5  Whether or not teachers agree with Sanderss research model and con clusions, they know some are better teachers than others. It behooves each  teacher to know the difference and then strive to teach as the best among  them do. Other researchers, notably William Damon, lament the passivity and  apathy of students and the discouragement of teachers.6 At the same time,  Damon recognizes teaching as the very heart of schooling. Because a childs  learning requires a framework of guiding relationships . . . the teacher is the  single most important resource of any school.7 
Chapter 11 However, recent evidence indicates a shift. Edutopia, funded by the  George Lucas Foundation, reports that the most significant variable is socio economic status, followed by the neighborhood, the psychological quality of  the home environment, and the support of physical health provided.8 Given  the fifteen years between Sanderss study and this one, Edutopias conclu sions reflect changes in culture. Still, in any school, teachers have more con tact with students than their parents do. Even at 30 percentprobably much  more in many instancesteachers are crucial. Education is a human activity,  not a series of test results. By insisting on securing and protecting tenure rather than being open to  performance reviews, teachers implicitly support a play-it-safe mentality. If  students fail to learn, teachers often make the argument they do not try hard  enough. If our good students do well, they contend, we must be doing  something right. Such behavior admits to not taking responsibility to design  teaching to meet every type of learner.  Teachers can take initiatives to improve instruction, seek and  receive feedback, and support one another. A faculty would be wise to estab lish a Golden Toilet Award for any colleague who takes a risk to try some thing new and then fails.9 When teachers fail, they know theyve tried. If they  never try, they never find out whether their ideas might work. At the same time, schools should honor teachers who succeed. They need  not pretend all teachers are fine and thus ignore colleagues who design and  implement exceptional practices. Teacher of the Year, even Teacher of the  Month, misses the point. This form of recognition is often more political than  instructional. Instead, make it common practice to acknowledge exceptional  work whenever it appears. Teachers then learn about the good work of their  colleaguesand become better themselves. Teacher of the Week, Teacher of  the Day, Teacher of the Moment. Its a no-brainer, really. And, why not encourage teachers to share Golden Moments, to celebrate  the wonderful times that make teaching worthwhile. Such as breakthroughs  with parents and students, or new collaborations that open doors among  colleagues, or moments when a student finally gets it. Such celebrations  bring diversity and exploration into a school culture and move faculty away  from feeling pressure to stay under the radar. Nobody wins when everyone  stays at the bottom of the cage. Ultimately, the crabs-in-a-cage syndrome supports a subculture in which  the main purpose is to guarantee jobs. Although teachers work in isolated  classrooms, they make a tacit agreement to teach in much the same way.  Conforming to the accepted behavior of their culture means no one will  bother them. 

Abandon the Crabs in the Cage 99 When teachers give good grades, especially to honors students particu larly in high-powered districts, they please everyone and avoid complaints.  When they limit the number of students they send to the office, administration  views them as effective teachers. On the other hand, in cases where teachers  face difficult groups often from the luck of the draw administrators become  annoyed when increasing numbers of students are sent to them. They assume  the teacher is doing a poor joband may often prejudge without any in-class  observation or offers of help.

One day after a department meeting, Ben Klunder says to Delaney Goodman,  Sometimes, when I reflect on the crabs-in-a-cage phenomenon, I understand  why we teachers stay there. We face constant public scrutiny and criticism.  Everyone has opinions about education.  Youre onto something here, Delaney replies. Its been my experience  that when the economy tanks, we are often blamed; when it thrives we remain  invisible. When budgets tighten, we suffer. When state test scores drop, we  hear criticism. When parents see future, they talk as if they know how to fix  us; since they attended school for years, they know all they often act as if  about education.  And, Ive seen this happen when an administrator does not like a teacher.  He can make her life miserable to the point where she wants to quitand  sometimes does. We find it frustrating when others do not appreciate the com plexities of what we do every day. Sticking together helps to assure survival.  You can see where the crabs-in-the-cage analogy might fit in. Ben begins to sense the big picture. Yes, but I think this mentality fails to  serve usand ultimately our students. If the accepted culture in our school  advocates that teachers lecture and give quizzes, tests, and papers as the  primary assessments, I may need to think twice before teaching differently.  Ive heard some veterans express their displeasure with alternative methods  calling them progressive or risky.  Good students, too, Delaney chimes in, may resist new approaches,  because they do not want to change how they do school. They master earning  As by memorizing for tests and writing thoughtless formulaic essays. I was  like that. Today, this mediocrity explains why colleges have to have set up  remedial reading and writing centers. And, it confirms why many students  become bored and drop out. Delaney and Ben see it like it is. The crabs-in-the-cage mentality often  starts at the top. Principals who taught as sages on the stage prefer quiet, 
Chapter 11 orderly classrooms with teachers standing at the front. They prefer to not  rock the boat. Some actively support personal congeniality rather than  challenge the staff to develop professional collegialitya far more difficult  task. They stay away from spending time in classrooms, except for the  required scheduled observations and evaluations. These are dog-and-pony  shows. By these actions, principals unwittingly support the crabs-in-thecage mentality. Some principals, however, challenge restrictive school cultures and union  contracts. They advocate, for example, walkthroughs, learning walks, or  mini-observationssomewhat analogous to hospital grand roundswhere  principals and teachers make quick visits to classrooms and provide descrip tive, nonevaluative feedback. These approaches break through the closed  culture of isolated classrooms. In schools using walkthroughs, teachers appre ciate the feedback once they trust its intentions. And principals appreciate it,  as well, as they learn what actually happens in classrooms. Teachers can take responsibility to teach at their best. They know how impor tant they are for improving instruction. The crabs-in-the-cage mentality,  however, puts a stranglehold on improving teaching. When a teacher stays  on the floor of the cage and agrees to conform to outmoded practices, he is  committing malpractice. As author Steven Pressfield writes, The highest treason that a crab can  commit is to make a leap for the rim of the bucket.10 Great teachers make  this leap every day. REFLECTION Dan Hilliard has conflicting concerns about his union. When he first became  a teacher, he joined and participated in union activities and even became  treasurer for a year. But recently, his union leadership has expressed concerns  about his radical ideas. One of the officers questioned him about his practice  of meeting parents after school hours, as it is in violation of the contract.  Dan has not confronted the unions concerns, but he worries about possible  difficulties.  He is also concerned that some teachers seem to hang on until they retire.  Tenure has given them security. Because they know they will not be chal lenged, they often hunker down and do only what theyve always done. They  resist new initiatives, knowing that it will mean more work.  Meanwhile, Dan continues to push the envelope. Teaching, after all, is first  about what is good for his students and their families, not about the contract.  Its not about clinging onto the cage floor. 

Abandon the Crabs in the Cage 101 POINTS TO PURSUE Assess the Role of the Union in Your School Ben Klunder was surprised to learn that some of his colleagues did not per ceive his school as he did. After a few faculty meetings, he saw that he was  not on the same page as his most vociferous veteran colleagues. It was as if  they were like crabs at the bottom of the cage, wanting to stay there. To learn about the likelihood of a crabs-in-the-cage mentality in your  school, begin by assessing the role of the union. You can determine if it  serves your contract welland how well it serves innovative teaching.  Having conversations with colleagues about the union can be enlightening.  Are there other crabs-in-the-cage issues in your school? Redressing a Negative Faculty Room Many new teachers are surprised at the negativity of the faculty room. In  some schools, the same people hang out and grouse about the administration,  colleagues, students, and the community. Not all schools.  What can you do if your faculty room is filled with complainers? How can  you reorient attitudes of your colleagues, particularly veterans? How might  you redirect conversations toward what works in your schoolor what could  work? Or, you could also do what many choosenot go into the faculty  room. How Might You Expand Your Teaching Role? If you are a new teacher like Ben Klunder, you, too, may feel unforeseen con straints on your teaching. You feel slowly being shut out from the embedded  culture controlled by the schools veterans.  How might you take initiative as a faculty member in your school, knowing  that you might be confronting the union contract? Perhaps at a meeting you  could introduce the Golden Toilet Award or the Golden Moments concept? It  might get people thinking off the floor of the cage. Initiate Cooperation with Your Administration Faculty meetings need not be the sole jurisdiction of the principal. Ben  comes to the realization that he and others can take a role in improving these  meetings. Seek out like-minded colleagues and together approach the principal to  find ways to improve professional learning for everyone, particularly at 
Chapter 11 faculty meetings. If your union takes a strict-contract attitude, try to work  around it as much as possible. Making the Leap! How can you take initiative to raise expectations for all teachers in your  schooland for yourself? How could you encourage them to emulate Steven  Pressfield and make a leap for the rim of the bucket? Bringing up such a  proposition takes courage, even when you know that you are thinking first of  your students.  NOTES 1.	 Elisa MacDonald, When Nice Wont Suffice: Honest Discourse is Key to  Shifting School Culture, Journal of Staff Development, June, 2011.  2.	 It would be unfair not to acknowledge instances of union leadership that exert a  positive influence on improving education. Brian Gearty of Blue Hills Regional Voca tional School in Canton, Massachusetts, and Robert Becker of Wachusett Regional  School District in Holden, Massachusetts, are examples of two innovative union lead ers I have met. Unfortunately, such people are too rare. 3.	 Michael Schmoker, Results Now, 37, cites David Berliners reports of the  chaos in curriculum. 4.	 Michael Jones, Grade the Teachers: A Way to Improve Schools One Instruc tor at a Time, Boston Globe, November 1, 2009. 5.	 Marilyn Marks, The Teacher Factor, The New York Times, Education Life  Supplement, January 9, 2000. 6.	 William Damon, Greater Expectations: Overcoming the Culture of Indulgence  in Our Homes and Schools New York: Free Press, 1996, 32. 7.	 Ibid., 200. 8.	 Education Trends, 8 Myths that Undermine Educational Effectiveness,  at http:www.edutopia.orgblogmyths-that-undermine-educational-effectivenessmark-phillips?utmsourcefacebookutmmediumcpcutmcampaignblogmyths-undermine-ed-effectiveness-countdown-link, June 10, 2014. 9.	 Robert Evans, National Seminar for the Experienced Pro, Mallery Seminars,  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2001. 10.	 Steven Pressfield, The War of Art New York: Warner Books, 2002, 2021.
It has to do with power. Every time anyone shamelessly interrupted my class,  the message was clear: My time is more valuable than yours. Whatever youre  doing cannot possibly be as vital as whatever Im doing. Why do teachers have to struggle to find uninterrupted time? What in the school  psyche allows office personnelprincipals, guidance, and secretariesto  interrupt over the public address system PA? What allows janitors during  classes to operate floor-cleaning machines in the hallways or lawn mowers  outside windows? People claim that teachers are an essential piece in a childs  education, yet such actions in schools undermine their efforts. Coleen Armstrong is right. Whatever she is doing in her classroom is not as  valuable as what others do. It is a power struggle.1 But an unnecessary power  struggle, an unjustified power struggle. Successful businesses put customers  first, so schools should put teachers and students first. When the principal  interrupts over the PA, the lesson disappears! Depending on the length of the  announcement and its content, returning to the lessonif possiblecan take  several minutes. Will the following students please come to the office? has  an even more emotional impact.  Patti Grenier, former superintendent of schools in Barnstable, Massachusetts,  and now a consultant at Teachers21, shared at a workshop that an average of  seven minutes are lost with each PA announcement. Think about that. If five  interruptions occur during the day, thirty-five minutes of teaching is lost. For  a week, that means three hours! For thirty-six weeks, forty-eight hours! Armstrongs insight is the-emperor-is-not-wearing-any-clothes expose of  this travesty. In dire contrast, in Japan, the classroom is considered sacred.  Learning takes priority. No interruptions are tolerated.2 In contrast, in  Chapter 12 Stop the Interruptions
Chapter 12 American schools, where interruptions are the order of the day, Japanese visi tors flinch when the PA Big Brother? issues a commandor when teachers  barge in on one another. This last comment deserves scrutiny. If you are a teacher, how often do  you drop in on other teachers in the middle of the period to borrow something  or simply to say hello? How often do you interrupt your own students dur ing a lesson instead of letting them have extended time? Have you thought  about suggesting to your colleagues to consider the impact of the traditional  assembly-line schedule of forty-to-forty-fiveminute periods? How might  you make it a point to advocate for more uninterrupted learning time?  Lorraine Hong offers a different perspective from Armstrong, one that is  more subtle and perhaps more insidious.3 Hong describes how increasing  intrusions caused her to lose her passion for teaching. In her school as part  of an hour-long writing period, the principal told her and her fifth-grade  colleagues to include ten minutes of keyboarding. While her principal consid ered this a simple request, by the time the computers were set up and students  settled, the lesson took fifteen to twenty minutes to implement.  Later, a new math curriculum was put in place that required teaching  sixty minutes per day. Hong found it impossible to schedule it on Mondays  and Fridays, because students were required to leave for gifted programs  and for special-education pullouts. She summed up her frustrations in an apt  analogy: When the days are fragmented and move at the pace of fast-food eateries  rather than four-star restaurants, teachers have no time in which to build the  provocative experiences that nourish layered learningexperiences that pro vide teachers with the continuing intellectual and creative challenges that allow  them to be professional educators rather than short order cooks.4  Four-star restaurantswhat a way to visualize classrooms! So contrary  to the repetitious hamster-wheeldriven lessons after lessons, spinning end lessly. Lessons without comprehension, because of pressures from federal  and state assessments and overcrowded curriculums. Hong and Armstrong  articulate what most teachers appear to accept as part of school culture.  However, teachers can combat these interferencesand in Armstrongs  words, take back their classrooms. Teachers would be wise to assess the effect of this interruptive culture.  Instead of consenting to every addition to the curriculum, they can express  their apprehensions. The continuous growth of patchwork curriculaadding  more content without taking any awaydecreases the quality of whats being  taught. A mile-wide, inch-deep curriculum reduces learning. In contrast, 

Stop the Interruptions 105 in-depth investigations based on big ideas, active literacy, critical thinking,  and thoughtful assessments engage studentsand teachers. Every time a teacher interrupts her students with Its time to put away  your materials or You have to leave now, she sends a wrong message.  Students see that working fast and getting the right answers in short segments  make for success. Analytical thinking, reflective conversation, and interactive  processing, on the other hand, take time to developand for long-term learn ing need time to take root. Another form of interruption comes from digital devices. In classes where  students are allowed to have cell phones with the notification feature switched  on are provoked to respond immediately. Such interruptions delay returning  to the task at hand by as much as fifteen minutes. Attending to electronic  communications to fill in dead time precludes daydreaming from which  eureka ideas can arise.5 And it disrupts coding short-term memory into  long-term memory. In a class where students are constantly referring to text  messages, any chance of developing thinking and creative ideas becomes  nearly impossible. When interruptions rule, learning retreats to the back burner. The schedule  dominates. When the intercom makes an announcement in the middle of a  class, the priorities are clear. When a secretary calls over the intercom to ask  for student health forms, learning grinds to a halt. When guidance calls for  a student, everyone listens. When a student turns to the messages on his cell  phone, hes no longer in class. Whatever ideas were waiting to be discovered  disappear. Sean Mullens, a first-year music teacher, recalls his comment in a conversation  he had with colleagues at a beginning teachers workshop. I really feel bad  that I interrupt your classes when I pull out students for music class. Mary  Thompson, a special education teacher, concurred. I, too, feel badly when I  interrupt a lesson to pull out a student to work with me.  As the conversation progressed, it became clear that conflicts with  specials are a central concern for both classroom teachers and specials  teachersbut for different reasons. Having to work with fragmented sched ules ultimately hurts everyone, especially students. Instead of acknowledging the inevitable, Amir Sharma, a new fifth-grade  teacher, suggested taking another tack. Why not bring this issue up at a  faculty meeting? Why not demonstrate that studentsand weare being  shortchanged by this system. I have heard veteran teachers in my school say ing the same thing. I bet if everyone puts their heads together, we might come  up with ways to minimize interruptions. We will define and claim our space  and declare that quality instruction is our most important goal.
Chapter 12 Pam Peters, who was leading the workshop, liked what Amir suggested.  I agree with the sentiment in this room. Lets see if we can think in the spirit  of Coleen Armstrongs power struggle and a take-back-the-classroom men tality. Lets see what you can come up with. She then asked them to break  up into smaller groups and come up with ways to resolve the problem.  After twenty minutes of heated discussion, each group was asked to share  its ideas. Sean Mullens spoke for his group. We could begin by asking to  eliminate the more obvious interruptions: lawn mowers, vacuums, snow blowers, the PA, and cell phonesours included. And, no unannounced  visitors are permitted including colleagues. No exceptions. We have a plan  to make this happen. We will gather interruption data for a month. When we are inter rupted we will note what happens to our lessons. Once we collect evidence  we can compile the data and bring it to the administration. We then will  move the conversation away from complaining to improving conditions for  instruction. I cannot imagine the PA operating during class time if everyone declared  it off limits, Mary Thompson chimed in. Ive heard of schools that already  function without it, including large high schools.6 And, I cannot imagine if  we develop a culture of no interruptions that office staff, guidance counselor,  or administrators would not abideand fellow teachers would not enter a  classroom uninvited during a lesson either. I would be most grateful, and so  would my American History students.  Portia Lavine, a Language Arts teacher from a more progressive school,  spoke up. One exception is walkthroughs, or learning walks, which work  because they are integral to the system of instruction in our school. Everyone  is aware they are coming, even students. My colleagues and I like them, as  they provide us with valuable feedback. We become better teachers for it.  And our administrators are becoming more sensitive to all that we do. Since  we all know theyre coming, they are not considered interruptions. Theyre  part of our instructional matrix. A possible side benefit of a no-interruptions policy is that it allows  administrative staff to become more involved in classroom teaching. Instead  of calling individual students out of classes throughout the day, college guid ance counselors could schedule classes for college application preparation.  A principal might find time to teach a class in his subject area. Any time the  administration participates in the teaching process, it reinforces the message of  the classroom as the focus of the schooland reduces class size for everyone. In my school, Ignatius Perkins, a fourth-grade teacher, pipes up, we  schedule electives one day a week for each grade. On Monday, the first grade  has art, music, computer, and extended physical education, on Tuesday the  second grade, and so on. Not only do we have uninterrupted days on the 

Stop the Interruptions 107 other four, but we also had the opportunity to collaborate for one whole day  per week! Ive also heard of other schools who schedule specials for a grade  on two half-days, which makes for two half-days a week for collaborative  planning. Wow! Pam Peters interjects. With this approach you achieve two essen tial changes in the culture of the school: fewer interruptions and less isolation  of teachers! 

Classrooms ultimately belong to students. They should be considered sanc tuaries. Once teachers recognize this principleand recognize the precious  little time they have to create opportunities for effective learningthey will  not tolerate interference. They already contend with far too many outside  dictates that cut into their teachingincluding excessive interruptions to  prepare and administer standardized tests. As long as teachers are complicit  with an interruptive school culture, they perpetuate short-segment teaching  that results in short-term learning. By reducing interruptions, they make pos sible the primary imperative of the classroom.  Perhaps Principal Tim Healey said it best after observing a secretary  making an all-school PA announcement on a trivial matter: Mediocre  schools make decisions that are based on what is convenient for secretaries  and administrators. Great schools make decisions that maximize and guard  instructional time.7 REFLECTION Dan Hilliard discovered early on the deleterious effect of his schools PA  system. At least three times per day, the office would make announcements  to request forms, indicate team bus schedules, call for individual students,  notify about after-school events, and occasionally broadcast a message from  the principal. Dan noticed how difficult it was to bring his students back into  his lessons, especially after they had been deeply engaged. When Dan brought his concern to veteran teachers, some shrugged, Its  the way it is. But he would not let it go. He conferred with his team and  together they agreed to count how many interruptions came from the office and from maintenanceand to use stopwatches to time just how long. If pos sible, they would also try to assess how much time before students to regained  focus, admittedly a difficult task. After several weeks, they brought their data to Principal Margaret Fellows.  They were not surprised that she recognized the severity of the problem. However, 
Chapter 12 she was usually open to different ideas coming from faculty and students. She  promised she would do her part to end interruptions from the office. She agreed  to use the PA only at specified times at the beginning and the end of the day.  She surprised them when she asked if they and any others would like to  study the interruption issue further, specifically, to look into those from main tenance, for sending students to specials, and the impact of extracurricular  areas. In particular, Margaret emphasized, we should determine the effect  of curricular add-ons. I am noticing increased frustration among staff. Assess ing this area will be a challenge. I hope you will help. Dan and his colleagues  quickly agreed, as they also find dealing with add-ons difficult. What a difference it would make, Dan said to his colleague Allegra  Bernardi, if we could count on teaching without any interruptions; not only  would we be able to teach more effectively, but our students would have more  opportunity to be stay involved! POINTS TO PURSUE Collect Data on Interruptions  Coleen Armstrong points out the obvious. Every teacher knows school has an  interruptive culture. Have you ever wondered why this is necessary? Taking Armstrongs lead, do what Dan and his team did and document  your schools interruptions. Once you collect your data, approach your prin cipal. Have a backup plan if she resists. Take Lorraine Hongs Insights to Heart  Less obvious and perhaps more insidious are the interruptions described  through Lorraine Hongs eyes. Having some students leave in the middle  of lessons is common. Piling on curriculum has become the norm in many  districts. Identify curricular allocations that interfere with your teaching. Note, too,  the number of students who leave during lessons. Can you advocate changes  to reduce the conflicts? Have discussions with colleagues to see what you  can do to make learning smootherto make your classrooms into four-star  restaurants. Create Classrooms to be Sanctuaries for Learning James W. Stigler and James Hiebert make clear the distinction between U.S.  classrooms as interruptive and Japanese classrooms as sanctuaries. Given the 

Stop the Interruptions 109 plethora of distractions in your classroom and school, what can you do to  make your classroom a sanctuary for learning? How can you create the selfrespect necessary to make this possible?  Sanctuary classrooms come from being honored from the inside as well as  from the outside. How can you reduce the number of interruptions you cre ate? How can you teach students, as well, to understand that not responding  to digital devices during class will improve the atmosphere? Making Specials Less Interruptive to the Classroom Given the randomness of students leaving for specials, can you think of a  less interruptive approach? As suggested in this chapter, propose that each  grade have either the morning or the afternoon scheduled for specials two  days per week. When you make uninterrupted teaching your priority, you  begin to think about different possibilities and configurationseven inside  your classroom. Make Your Classroom a Four-Star Restaurant Take Lorraine Hongs image to heart and visualize yourself as a teacher in  a four-star classroom. What is already there? What else do you need? What  interferes that makes you feel like a short-order cook? What do you want to  discard? Instead of eliminating digital devices, how might you use them to  feed a four-star classroom? NOTES 1.	 Coleen Armstrong, Do Not Disturb! Teacher Magazine, MayJune 1995. 2.	 James W. Stigler and James Hiebert, The Teaching Gap: Best Ideas from the  Worlds Teachers for Improving Education in the Classroom New York: Free Press,  1999, 5556. 3.	 Lorraine K. Hong, Too Many Intrusions on Instructional Time, Phi Delta  Kappan, May 2001, 71214. 4.	 Ibid., 714. 5.	 Will the BlackBerry Sink the Presidency? by Sharon Begley in Newsweek,  February 16, 2009, 37, excerpted in the Marshall Memo 274, February 23, 2009. 6.	 For example, Peabody High School and Wachusett Regional High School in  Massachusetts, each with nearly 2000 students, do not allow the PA to be used during  the day. 7.	 Tim Healey, Creating Greatness, Principal Leadership, February 2009, 31, in  Marshall Memo 272, February 9, 2009, 1.
I think I used to be more like Mr. Appleton, because I gave a lot of lectures. But  now, I am more like Mrs. Baker, as I do many fun activities as well as some  lecturing. Im afraid I do not use many of Ms. Cassells ideas. I agree, Id like to be more like Ms. Cassell, but I think I would have to be  careful if I wanted to have a life outside of the classroom! Teachers like to talk about themselves. Pam Peters and her consultant  colleagues often comment about this phenomenon. Early in their Differenti ated Instruction DI course, they assign Carol Ann Tomlinsons now-classic  essay among educators, Mapping a Route Towards Instruction.1 Tomlinson  develops her essay around three teachers who teach about ancient Rome. Pam  asks participants to write a reflection about themselves in comparison to the  three teachers: Mr. Appleton represents the classic stand-up, one-size-fits-all teacher who uses  a textbook. He has students read the text in class and take notes. He lectures  frequently, expecting students to take notes, as well. He gives out study sheets  the day before a test. Mrs. Baker introduces graphic organizers to help students read the textbook.  She brings in pictures, invites students to wear togas, and brings food for a  Roman banquet. Also, she shows video clips on gladiators and reads Roman  myths to her students. She goes over the chapter before the test rather than  having them review it on their own at home. Ms. Cassell plans her year using long-range thinking. She concentrates on a few  key concepts and generalizations, sets clearly defined facts and skills, provides  multiple pathways to learn material, and develops essential questions to drive  Chapter 13 End One-Size-Fits-All Teaching
Chapter 13 her students thinking. Her classroom is unified, intricate, and more complex  than the other two.  The teachers see themselves in various combinations. In an attempt to  make their classrooms more appealing, many state that they used to teach like  Mr. Appleton but have moved over to Mrs. Bakers approach. Few say they  emulate Ms. Cassell. Many see the value of her approach but, at the same  time, they think she should get a life because of how much she is willing  to attempt and accomplish. Usually conversations center around the issue of coverage. Participants  point out pressure from administration to cover as much as possible to pre pare for state assessments. To teach like Ms. Cassell would take too much  time. It would be nice to be similar to Ms. Cassell much like it was before  state assessments when we could spend time teaching what we enjoyed. The irony of this reasoning ignores that teaching as talking alienates stu dentsand it ignores the conclusions of research. The National Research  Councils definitive compilation on brain research states, Teachers must teach  some subject matter in depth, providing many examples in which the same  concept is at work and providing a firm foundation of factual knowledge.2  Teaching for coverage does not guarantee retention. When teachers  explain, they often are the major beneficiaries. No matter how well they  explain, theres no guarantee students will learn. However, if teachers pro vide opportunities for students to explain what they know, they will have a  better idea of what they have learned.  Yet, teachers feel caught: If I dont cover what might be on the test, my  students will not have an opportunity to learn it, declared one of Pams  participants. When I cover everything in a mile-wide inch-deep approach,  I recognize that not many will retain it. At least I can defend that I am doing  my job and covering what needs to be covered. But, as a colleague insight fully shared at the same workshop, When we teach something and students  do not learn, then nothing has happened!3 At the conclusion of the conversations about Mr. Appleton, Mrs. Baker, and  Ms. Cassell, Pam often senses her groups reach an impasse. Still, the elephant  in the room has been exposed. Pam points out, I think you should do every thing you can to make it possible for every student to learn. How can you do  any less? Exciting classrooms are essential!  When a teacher perpetuates Mr. Appletons standup pedagogy, her digi tally wired students will likely be destined for boredom and disinterest. Only  a few will learn from taking notes. When a teacher emulates Mrs. Bakers  activity-centered teaching, her lessons will be more interesting but will lack  coherence and direction. Students may enjoy the learning, but may not con nect the dots when bouncing from one activity to the next. 

End One-Size-Fits-All Teaching 113 When a teacher takes Ms. Cassells approach, she is in for more work and for more satisfaction. Each lesson, each unit, and the whole year will fit  into a coherent sequence and include carefully selected knowledge and skills,  principles of learning, and essential questions.4 However, both of the approaches are deeply embedded: Mr. Appletons  in the upper grades and Mrs. Bakers at the elementary level. Pam does her  best to encourage participants to consider working toward Ms. Cassells  paradigm. She acknowledges that such a commitment may require a major  overhaul in practicemore for some and less for others. In our DI course,  I will do my best to help you make your classrooms exciting, engaging, and  effective. 

The path to Ms. Cassell is complex. Pam then asks the participants to do an  exercise that she learned for her colleague, Jerry Goldberg5: Fold your arms, please, in your natural way. Those whose left arm is on top of their right arm, raise your hand. Then, after a  pause she says, You are visual learners. Those who have the right arm on top, please raise your hand. You are auditory  learners. Anyone who disagrees with this research, raise your hand. You are kinesthetic  learners. Then, she asks everyone to fold their arms the opposite of their natural way. Most participants find this last step uncomfortable. Pam brings home the  obvious point: I dont put much stock in this research. Yet, we do have stu dents who fold their arms opposite to us; that is, their ways of learning differ  from ours. Arent we obligated to reach out to these differences? Shouldnt  we respond in ways that enhance each students learning? I think we have no  choice. Pam hopes that as a result of exercises like the one aboveand from  ideas in the coursethat participants will shift their mindset away from  one-size-fits-all lessons toward trying alternative pedagogies. For example,  she introduces 10-2 Thinking as a move away from Mr. Appletons lec ture delivery and toward engagement see chapter 1, Implement 10-2  Thinking. She also shares a colleagues story of how he shifted his teaching away  from standing and talking at the front. He opened his teaching to include  more purposeful engagement, which enables intelligence to grow in his  studentsand in him.6 Throughout the DI course, Pam offers multiple ways  for teachers to meet the needs of all their students.
Chapter 13 Pam also frames DI techniques inside a backward design mindset to help  teachers move closer to emulating Ms. Cassell. Whenever you teach, you  must have purposeful intention; align the learning sequences; set clear objec tives; aim for understandings, not regurgitation; and closely connect home  practice to your objectives. When students see everything fitting together,  they will find learning exciting and more useful. Pam also encourages participants to move away from textbooks as the cen ter of their teaching. Covering the text and filling out worksheets, turning the  page and filling in one worksheet after another, becomes monotonous. Taking  responsibility for framing and implementing what to teach, on the other hand,  gives you control of what students will know, understand, and be able to do.  They align their curriculum so students will learn better. Pam offers an example. Take two history students. One, lets call her  Pauline, sits in a classroom at her desk and takes lecture notes every day for  two weeks. Her teacher gives a couple of quizzes and finishes with a test  usually on a Friday the day after he reviews the material much like Mr.  Appleton. Paulines been in this routine for weeks. The other student, Brian, engages in directed discussions analyzing and  assessing material. This week he focuses on the complexities of cause and  effect of wars and the resulting moral issues. Sometimes, Brian and his class mates engage in whole class activities; other times they work in small groups,  in a pair, or in a triad. The teacher uses Give OneGet One for review. See  Textbox 5.1, Give OneGet One as Review, in chapter 5 Make Meaning.  She sees herself as a coach who assesses her team during the review and  then determines how to arrange the material for the upcoming test. Pam then summarizes, Pauline receives information from her teacher and  must take responsibility for learning it outside of class. Brian engages with  his teacher inside the class, then reviews and reinforces it at home. While both  students may earn As, Brian will retain moreand will have more tools for  responding to future classes. He will be developing lifelong learning skills. On the closing day of the DI course, Pam passes out copies of the Teaching  Manifesto see Appendix. This manifesto encourages teachers to expand  the horizon of their teaching. It invites them to take steps that lead them to  deliver less and engage more. It asks them to become open to the myriad of  good research and ideas to improve their practice. The manifesto addresses  what a teacher can do on her own and with her colleagues. I hope that you  will sign the Manifesto as a commitment to improve your practice and to  make your classrooms exciting for your studentsand for you.

End One-Size-Fits-All Teaching 115 Ultimately, teachers choose whether they teach like Mr. Appleton, Mrs. Baker,  or Ms. Cassell. They can carry on as their predecessors and teach one-sizefits-all lessons. They can diversify their teaching to meet the needs of each  student. They can choose the TAPS Template for Teacher Planning as a guide  for making this commitment. They can sign the Teaching Manifesto. And  in line with Carol Ann Tomlinson, they can create their own map toward  instruction and seek all the help they can muster to make it happen. Teachers  are, after all, deciders of their destiny. REFLECTION The one-size-fits-all lesson has been the teachers staple for generations.  Dan Hilliards move into the center of his room began a journey toward  diversifying his teaching. Throughout his schooling, he sat through wholeclass lessons. Dan understands that one-size-fits-all thinking has become  oxymoronic in todays global world. He has become open to the plethora of  methods available for engaging his students so that they learn and love to  learn. He wants to revamp his teaching to meet his students needsand to  make his teaching more satisfying. When Dan read Carol Ann Tomlinsons Mapping a Route Towards  Instruction in his DI class, he discovered that he was more like Mrs. Baker  than he realized. He has been working hard to make his lessons more dif ferentiated, but he needs to integrate them with his units, as Ms. Cassell has.  He hoped that the course would provide him with many good ideas. POINTS TO PURSUE Which Teacher Are You on Tomlinsons Spectrum? As you read the discussions around Mr. Appleton, Mrs. Baker, and Ms. Cas sell, where do you see yourself on the spectrum? How did you get to where  you are? Are you happy with where you are? Have you changed? If you want  to change, how will you begin?  How Much Do You Do One-Size-Fits-All Teaching? One-size-fits-all teaching has a deep history. As efficient as this approach  has been for teachers, clearly it has not worked for all students. Carol Ann  Tomlinsons advocacy for DI has opened the door to alternatives.
Chapter 13 To what extent do you practice one-size-fits-all teaching which focuses on  coverage? Have you thought of ways to break away without compromising  your perceived obligations to teach all thats required? What small steps can  you take?  Consider using the TAPS Template for Teacher Planning as a guide for  deepening your teaching see Figure 5.2. TAPS Template for Teacher Plan ning, chapter 5, Make Meaning. Share your progress with a colleague. Being a Ms. Cassell Pam Peters tries hard to steer her participants to move toward thinking like  Ms. Cassell. She knows that its hard work but necessary. If you are a Ms. Cassell in your school, how will you help your col leagues let go of one-size-fits-all practices? How will you convince them that  while being Ms. Cassell is more challenging, it is more satisfying. Can you  prove to them that their students will benefitand so will they?  How Do Others View Your Teaching? If you want to begin thinking more openly about your teaching, invite a col league to observe you. Ask him to describe how students perform in your  classroom. Are they passive or active? Some of the time, most of the time,  or all of the time? Take time to converse after his observation. You may be  surprised. Sign the Teaching Manifesto A Teaching Manifesto? Take time to read the Teaching Manifesto see  Appendix and think about how it relates to your teaching. Then, check off  the items you want to aspire to. Sign it, date it, and commit to fulfilling it.  Post it on your refrigeratoror better yet in your classroom. Using the  manifesto as a guide may lead you to new teaching practices for which your  studentsand youwill be grateful. NOTES 1.	 Carol Ann Tomlinson, Mapping a Route Towards Instruction, Educational  Leadership, vol. 57, no. 1, 1999, 1216. 2.	 J. D. Bransford, A. L. Brown, and R. R. Cocking, eds., How People Learn:  Brain, Mind, Experience, and School, exp. ed. Committee on Developments in the  Science of Learning, National Research Council, National Academy Press, 2000, 20.

End One-Size-Fits-All Teaching 117 3.	 With thanks for Debra Spinelli who shared this anonymous quotation. 4.	 See Figure 5.2. The TAPS Template for Teacher Planning, in chapter 5, Make  Meaning, for a graphic representation of Ms. Cassells approach. 5.	 Jerry is a former superintendent and a consultant with Teachers21 in Wellesley,  Massachusetts. 6.	 Robert Sternberg, in Carol Dweck, Mindset,5.

Part IV WHAT CAN WE LEARN  FROM BEYOND THE  CULTURE OF SCHOOLS? By taking a longer view, teachers gain strength from seeking wisdom both old  and newand discover how to resolve difficult questions. Part IV invites teachers to examine out-of-the-box points of view to freshen their  teaching. Educators who want to discover their full potential look beyond the culture  of the school and the classroom. The world is integrating disparate elements  at mind-bending speed. Educators who hunker down inside the confines of  embedded school thinking will become anachronistic and irrelevant. Strong educators find ways to open their minds to ideas from beyond the  norm, from beyond the enclave of school culture. They imagine new roles  that serve the greater community. They reframe their perceptions and dis cover tipping points to enable them to accomplish more than they thought  possible. Theyre relentless in pursuing their ideals. Taking a long view enables themespecially younger teachersto sus tain their efforts. They imagine their ideal classroom. And, they find solace  in invoking the metaphor of being a spiral galaxy that infuses life into their  students.  Expanding thinking beyond the classroom, beyond the schoolhouse, makes  for a better understanding of place and purpose. Teachers connect imagina tively with administrators, students, and familiesand with each other.
Imagine the effect of receiving consistent feedback from one of your col leaguesa teacher as a gadfly. As this book has made clear, from the first day a teacher steps into her  classroom she works alone and without feedback, except when her supervi sor evaluates. Rarely does she have time to discuss teaching practices with  colleagues. And rarely, if ever, does she observe a colleague or invite one to  observe her. Its simply not part of the culture. Teaching is a private affair  subsidized by governmentand has been for generations. Perhaps the myth of teaching as an intimate affair stems from the dialogi cal encounters of Socrates on the Acropolis. Or from Mark Hopkins, then  president of Williams College, sitting on one end of a log, with a student on  the other. Then came one-room schoolhouses with but one teacher. Finally,  factory-model schools, buildings with long corridors and a woman teacher,  assured a unified curriculum, each tecaher delivering it alone. No wonder  teachers remain isolated.  Why not, then, introduce the idea of a gadflya teacher, without his own  classroom, to serve all the classrooms in the school? George Wesson, a  lifelong teacher and now a consultant, came up with this idea one evening as  he was preparing to spend a day in a school doing walkthroughs. He wrote  the following memo in his usual flamboyant style:  Memo to colleagues from George Wesson The Gadfly concept as I see it: As the gadfly, I arrive at my small office in the morning and check my computer  to see if any teachers have made requests for help. Aha, Mrs. Wilson needs  Chapter 14 Become a Gadfly
Chapter 14 the material I promised to teach this morning; Mr. Keogh wants help planning  a third-grade trip to our local science museum . . .  I first go to Mrs. Wilsons fourth grade with the requested material and pre pared to teach a lesson to her children. She stays to observe and discuss with  me her impressions of the lesson. I proceed to Mr. Keoghs third grade to meet  with his team to plan the museum trip. . . . Throughout the day I rove as an observer, questioner, commentator, teacher,  co-teacher, seminar leader, and idea person. I float from room to room by  invitation. I advocate for meaningful, exciting, rigorous, engaging, humorous,  stimulating, and worthwhile learningfor students and teachers. I imagine  helping teachers to purge methods that fail, implement best practices, and create  new ones. I set up feedback loops. I am not a judge. I am a pied piper among  my peers. As a gadfly, I break down the generational isolation of the classroom. I find  ways for colleagues to release their skills and gifts to one another. I see them  interacting on many levels: talking about teaching, creating new ideas, and  designing aligned curriculums. When a teacher requests that I take over a  class, she either stays, or spends time with a colleague, or prepares on her own.  Whenever I can, I create opportunities for ad hoc conversations to develop  collegiality. For my homework, I reflect on my day and in response to staff requests look  for web resources, materials, books, articles, and resource people. I respond  to emails or text on my phone if necessary and prepare what to bring the next  day. I think the main task of the gadfly is to break down classroom isolation,  which has been unwittingly self-imposed and endemic in the system. What do you think of my idea of the gadfly? Sincerely, George As George aptly describes, the gadfly supports and nurtures creative pos sibilities for exciting classrooms. He provides feedback that gives colleagues  the confidence and tools to improve teaching. He also takes part in staff meet ings to help keep conversation focused on teaching. The gadfly should come from within a faculty, perhaps as a rotating  one-to-three-year appointment or as someone who will be on an in-school  sabbatical. Having a gadfly changes the schools culture. The gadfly breaks  down the embedded isolation. He encourages teacher initiative. He supports  collegial relationships that can evolve into professional learning communities  or self-management teamsteachers working together with administrators.  Collaboration throughout the school allows the whole to become greater than  the sum of its parts.

Become a Gadfly 123 What can the gadfly do? At a faculty meeting, George gives the following  examples:  Introduce activators to excite and engage students  Use summarizers to build retention  Create options for struggling students  Provide alternative materials for advanced students  Demonstrate how to form readiness groups  Teach self-assessment practices  Demonstrate responses to different learning styles  Introduce brain research techniques  Design flipped lessons where students learn first at home  Arrange and rearrange desks to facilitate lessons  Introduce assessment products in place of tests  Frame essential questions for lessons, units, and courses  Initiate access to Web 2.0 tools While some of these ideas are practiced in some classrooms, many teachers  are not familiar with them. As they share, other innovative methods will emerge.  George imagines that once teachers taste better practices they will want more.

After hearing favorable responses from his consultant colleagues, George  drafts another memo, further clarifying his idea: Follow-up memo on the gadfly from George Wesson:  Imagine the effect of receiving consistent feedback from one of your colleagues,  a teacher as gadfly. His purpose is to make every classroom better. Imagine  the effect on the gadfly himself. He who finally has an opportunity to share his  pent-up ideas! Because he needs help with his pedagogy, he knows that every one does.  Teachers should not have to teach alone any more. Great teaching demands  that every time a teacher steps into her classroom, she will do everything she can  to engage students. The gadfly is there to help make it possible. Alone, teachers struggle to let go of treating students as targets needing  improvement, as regurgitating robots who pass tests. But with the help of a gadfly,  they can make lifelong learning central to their teaching. An ever-present gadfly  helps teachers to break the teach-to-the-test paradigm and discover best practices.  The gadfly as a member of staff without a classroom becomes a member  of everyones classroom. He is an insider who helps to improve teaching. 
Chapter 14 His presence validates not only the need to improve practice, but also the  ability to succeed. The gadfly affirms the desire of colleagues to teach in  exciting classroomsand provides the will and resources to do it. REFLECTION Schools are hierarchical. Administrators sit at the top, led by a superintendent  and his central office staff. Below them is the principal and his staff, next are  the teachers, and below them paraprofessionals. The term superintendent  reflects the factory-based origins of the public school.  When Dan Hilliard was hired, he naturally expected his principal to be in  charge of his teaching. Surprisingly, during his initial five years, his principal  never appeared. He told Dan that he hired him because he came from a wellrespected college and had his masters degree. He was confident that Dan  would do fine. Fortunately, his department chair visited him often and took  time to share his observations. Now, his present principal, Margaret Fellows,  is required to evaluate new teachers twice a year for the first three years and  veteran teachers once a year. The feedback she gives is very supportiveand  offers valuable ideas and strategies.  However, Dan has a new department head who does not visit often. He  misses the consistent feedback, as he finds it difficult to weigh all the impli cations of his teaching. When he hears of the idea of teacher-as-gadfly, he  becomes intrigued. After all, he is somewhat of an idealist. Yet, how would  such a position be funded? Who would determine who would be a gadfly?  Could he do it? Dan will try to convince Margaret to advocate for a gadfly  for the school. POINTS TO PURSUE Consider the Gadfly for Your School The idea of having a gadfly in your school may seem foreign at first. Suspend  your disbeliefif you have itand explore with colleagues the potential of  appointing a gadfly. What might you do to introduce the concept? How might  you inspire a serious conversation about the potential of a gadfly functioning  in your school?  Once people begin to accept the possibility of a gadfly, who might be will ing and capable of doing it? Should the school hire an outsider? What are the  budget implications? Who would you advocate for this position? 

Become a Gadfly 125 Create a Gadfly in Your Department or Grade Level Think about a gadfly in other contexts. What if, for example, you and likeminded colleagues agreed to become gadflies for one another? If you are a  department head, how might you restructure your position to act as a gadfly?  Perhaps you could do it for selected time periods, for example, for a week  each month. Perhaps, you could be a gadfly for colleagues during planning  periods? Propose the Gadfly Idea in Your School Even if you are skeptical, simply bringing up the notion of a gadfly might  inspire teachers to become more willing to open their doors to one another.  At least, it might be a start. Anything to break down the embedded isolation  of teachers.
Imagine a school full of teachers who have a vitality, a life force, a quicken ing, and view themselves as tipping-point contributors. Malcolm Gladwell keeps close touch with key ideas in our culture. In The  Tipping Point he writes that social change can happen quickly with only  little input, in the same way viruses cause epidemicswhat he calls tipping  points. Radical change occurs under the right circumstances. He makes an  analogy with a measles epidemic in kindergarten. One child introduces the  virus, which immediately spreads, reaches a critical mass, then quickly runs  its course. A situation may be placid one moment and explosive the next.1 Annie Thomas became a teacher because she wanted to subvert the sterile  patterns shed seen throughout her schooling. She chose to teach middle  school Social Studies. She liked commiserating with the volatility of early  teenstheir excitement one day, their hesitancy the next. She intended to  bring in materials with which they could engage, learn from, and want more. Teaching has been harder than she imagined. After five years, however,  shes begun to find her groove. Now, I really like the challenge of meeting  these kids who are so different from me when I was their age. I am get ting closer to making their education relevant and useful. At least, they are  responding better.  However, Annie is often baffled by her colleagues reluctance to seek  better ways to teach. Most of them cling to past practices. However, her  colleague Javier Gonzalez implemented an effective social contract with his  students to guide their behavior. Except for Annie, his colleagues have not  given his approach a try; many continue to have problems with the behavior  of their students. Paul Durant, another colleague, developed ways to escape  Chapter 15 Leverage Tipping Points
Chapter 15 the tyranny of the required textbook, but no one else except Annie and Javier  has asked him how he does it.  Annie has noticed the same trend with other issues. Constructivism, which  has roots in Dewey, Piaget, and Vygotsky, remains largely unknown. In her  reading, she discovered that the progressive Open Education movement fal tered before it could find a foothold in schools; administrators and traditional  teachers dug in to preserve the status quo. Montessoris rich successes remain  largely outside the reach of public classrooms.  As part of her professional development, Annie has taken seriously Carol Ann  Tomlinsons DI methods.2 As a result, she has changed her teaching. She also  has adopted ideas and strategies from Understanding by Design UbD work shops and thus has changed her approach to planning.3 Because both of these  pedagogies are proving effective with her students, she imagines that they may  eventually reach a tipping point in schools. Not soon perhaps, but eventually. One evening, after a particularly tense faculty meeting, Annie took out her  journal. She had proposed that her faculty consider introducing DI and UbD  into the curriculum. She was surprised at the resistance from many of her col leagues and the principal. She asked herself the following questions: 

Why have innovative efforts in schools often failedmore likely actively  resisted?

Why dont good new ideaseven good old ideasspread as viruses?

What inhibits my colleagues from responding to off-the-wall ideas, trying  them out, and being willing to adopt what works?

What good comes from professional development PD that introduces  new strategies year after year if teachers do not take advantage of them?

Is it possible for me to create a tipping point in my school?

What keeps most of us where we are, year after year, generation after  generation? Are we stuck in the crabs-in-the-cage mentality?4 Annie appreciates PD when the presenters are well-prepared, offer new  ideas, and provide excellent follow-up materials. Sometimes her colleagues  appear to accept the new ideas. Weeks later, however, she sees that few teach ers actually use them. She walks by their classrooms and sees them standing  at the front and doing what they have always done. Not everyone for sure.  But many of them.

Annie looks beyond her classroom for ideas to invigorate her teaching. One  evening at a friends home she learned about Pikes Place Fish Market in 

Leverage Tipping Points 129 Seattle. After reading the book Fish! A Remarkable Way to Boost Morale and  Improve Results and visiting the Markets website, she becomes convinced  that she should explore its fresh and zany attitude. Of course, she would not  throw fishbig ones!at her students as the Market does to its customers;  she can, however, inculcate its philosophyits four principles: Choose your attitude Play Be present Make someones day5 She always tries to be upbeat. She is an inveterate punster who inflicts  groans on her students, yet they always want to hear more. Still, she thinks  that she may be taking school more seriously at times than she needs to.  Reflecting on the Pikes Place Market principles, she wrote in her journal:

I can be upbeat about my students and circumstances regardless of how  I am feeling on any given day.

In addition to puns I can put more playfulness into my lessons and encour age students to express their humor.

I can be more present with student responses and less present to what  I think I want to say.

I can certainly bring a smile to a student that, in turn, uplifts everyone. Annie is convinced that intention in teachingin life as wellis impor tant. Yet, intention does not always lead to what she wants. She discovers  from Paul Hawken, We have no control of the outcome  the only thing  we can control is our intent.6 She persists with her intentions as a way, per haps, to implement tipping points to spur further changes until only remnants  of poor past practices remain. The intention itself is not a tipping point, but  enacting the intention may set it in motion. Another series of insights about improving teaching came from Chip and  Dan Heaths Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die.7 Annie  likes their emphasis on stickinessGladwell writes about thisideas that are  easily understood, remembered, and effect change. If she could make sticki ness central to her teaching, her students would become more engaged. In her  journal, she copies the six principles that the Heaths develop in their book  using the acronym SUCCESs: Simplicity: determine and prioritize your core message and communicate it  using an analogy or high-concept pitch; keep it simple, dont dumb down.
Chapter 15 Unexpected: gain and hold attention creating curiosity gaps to make students  want your message; use exciting lead-ins, dynamic questions, and mystery  queries. Concrete: use sensory language for example, Aesops fables, paint a mental  picture, employ the Velcro theory of memory as having multiple hooks;  specificity connects. Credible: ideas gain legitimacy from outside authorities or antiauthorities or  from within using human-scale statistics for example, one child for Save  the Children or the Smile Train; let students test it out before they buy. Emotional: people care about people, not numbers; be aware as identity  appeals can often trump self-interest. Stories: drive action through simulation what to do, inspiration the motiva tion to do it, and springboard stories helping others see how an existing  problem might change.8  The Heaths are onto somethingand they have developed materials with  teachers in mind. Teachers who read their book, make use of their web site, and take their message to heart will rethink their pedagogy. Students  enter classrooms full of their own sticky ideas, most of which have little  use. If Annie creates stickiness in their brains, she will break the cycles of  monotonyand no longer see them sitting passively at their desks. In department and faculty meetings, Annie hears murmurings from  colleagues who want their lessons to stick better. She speculates, Can the  teachers in her school reach a tipping point and let go of acting as conduits of  an imposed curriculum? Can they take ownership in what they teach? Annie  is convinced that when they do, teachers will transform the minds and hearts  of studentsand themselves. They will invoke an epidemic of learning. Annie posted a quotation from Martha Graham in the faculty room to  encourage colleagues to rethink their role: There is a vitality, a life force, an energy, a quickening that is translated through  you into action, and because there is only one of you in all time, this expression  is unique. And if you block it, it will never exist through any other medium and  it will be lost. The world will not have it. It is not your business to determine  how good it is nor how valuable nor how it compares with other expressions. It  is your business to keep it yours clearly and directly, to keep the channel open.9  Imagine a school full of teachers who have a vitality, a life force, a  quickening, and view themselves as tipping-point contributors, Annie wrote  in her journal. How would they interrelate? What would be happening in  their classrooms? How would their students feel? What would they be learn ing? Perhaps the intention to become a tipping-point provider is enough!

Leverage Tipping Points 131 REFLECTION Dan Hilliard feels fortunate that he has taken time to learn about new strate gies for his classroom. He really likes DI despite its challenges, especially in  planning. He also is a devotee of UbD, as it brings coherence and relevance  to his courses, units, and lessons. He is intrigued with Malcolm Gladwells Tipping Point, but has not figured  out how to connect his idea to his lessons. When he discovers Chip and Dan  Heaths Made to Stick, however, his mind jumps. He already includes stories  in his teaching to perk his students curiosity. He includes concrete examples  as well, but he often slips into the abstract, which appeals only to some stu dents. The key revelations of Made to Stick help Dan to choose his priorities  and keep it simple. He has recommended the book to his principal, Margaret  Fellows, for the faculty to read but hasnt heard back. POINTS TO PURSUE The Out-of-the-Box Teacher Think of someone in your school who teaches out-of-the-box. Annie Thom ass colleagues Javier Gonzalez and Paul Durant each acted out of the box but  did not gain much traction with the staff. Perhaps you know colleagues who  are like themmaybe you are one.  What is the role of these peopleor your rolein your school? Whether  or not out-of-the-box teachers are viewed positively, how can they become  catalysts and spread new ideas into neighboring classrooms, down the hall,  and throughout the building? Try New Ideas and Strategies Often Old habits are difficult to break. Some are deep traditions that have been  embedded in schools for generations. The lecture is one obvious example see  chapter 1, Implement 10-2 Thinking. One way to break out is to commit to trying a new idea or unfamiliar strat egy as often as you can. Process how well each works with your students.  Invite them to comment on your effortperhaps it will encourage them to  up their effort. Enact the Four Principles of Pikes Place Fish Market One of the pillars of this book advocates that teachers benefit from looking  beyond school culture when seeking better ways to teach. The practice of this 
Chapter 15 Seattle-based enterprise provides a wonderful metaphor for creating a lively,  productive classroom. Explore the implications of implementing the four principles of Pikes  Place Fish Market in your classroom, perhaps even in your school. Plan care fully how youd launch them with your students check their website http: www.pikeplacefish.com, or buy one of their books, Fish! or When Fish Fly  and carefully observe the effects.  How might you introduce these principles to colleagues? Make Intentions a Priority Everything rests on the tip of intention, said the Dalai Lama. Setting new  intentions can be challenging. If you choose this path, be willing to persist!  As Paul Hawken wrote, We have no control of the outcome. . . . The only  thing we can control is our intent. If you are confident in your intent, dont  let failure derail your effort.  Implement Chip and Dan Heaths Principles Chip and Dan Heaths stickiness speaks directly to teachers. The authors  provide a valuable perspective of the teaching process. Make a plan to study  Made to Stick the book and the website http:www.madetostick.com. Invite  colleagues to study with you. Dig in and try out its six SUCCESs ideas. Let  students know what you are doing. Ask them for feedback throughout. Persist in Innovating Your Teaching Martha Graham reminds us that we have a unique expression that only we  can put into the world. As Annie Thomas wrote in her journal, Imagine a  school full of teachers who have a vitality, a life force, a quickening, and  view themselves as tipping-point contributors. Have you ever thought of a new way to teach but dismissed it as too radi cal? Take Martha Graham at her word and resurrect that idea. Perhaps it will  have an impact and become a tipping point, perhaps not. If not, give yourself  the Golden Toilet award for taking a risk and failing. NOTES 1.	 Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big Dif ference New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2002.

Leverage Tipping Points 133 2.	 See chapter 13: End One-Size-Fits-All Teaching for an elaboration of Carol  Ann Tomlinsons Differentiated Instruction. 3.	 See chapter 23: Become Stakeholders for an extensive conversation on Grant  Wiggins and Jay McTighes Understanding by Design. 4.	 See chapter 11, Abandon the Crabs in the Cage, for a detailed discussion of  this concept.  5.	 Stephen C. Lundin, Harry Paul, and John Christianson, Fish! A Remarkable Way  to Boost Morale and Improve Results New York: Hyperion, 2000. 6.	 Paul Hawken, on The Paula Gordon Show, January 15, 2010, at http:www. paulagordon.comcontentsuicide-interventions. 7.	 Chip Heath and Dan Heath, Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others  Die New York: Random House, 2007, 2008. An essential for teachers! 8.	 Ibid. This summary was adapted from material on the authors website, which  offers free materials specifically for teachers. http:www.madetostick.com. 9.	 Martha Graham to Agnes de Mille, Dance to the Piper New York: De Capo  Press, 1980, 33536, in Paul Hawken, Blessed Unrest: How the Largest Movement  in the World Came into Being and Why No One Saw It Coming New York: Penguin  Group, 2007, 9.
We should act as if the universe were listening to us and responding. We should  act as if we were going to win. Once there was a man who never could remember how to swipe his card  on the bus on the way to work. Each day, the driver or the other passengers  helped him. It turned out he later won a Nobel Prize. Teachers can ask: Who  am I teaching? Do I have a future Nobel Prize winner before me? Perhaps  shes a student who appears not to have a clue? Mehmed Abaid takes his teaching seriouslyand always has. His parents  came from Iran to Michigan, where he was born. He loved school, always  looked at the bright side, and did well in college. Now, he loves teaching  his high school Language Arts classes, especially ones with eager students.  He constantly reflects on his role and is open to new possibilities. Each year,  he discovers different ways to teach. He understands that good ideas feed  teachingoften manifesting from beyond the classroom. One of his favorite discoveries came from a New Yorker interview with  Philip Pullman. Pullman argues for pursuing what matters in the face of  people who wish to control others. He calls them theocracies . . . the ten dency of human beings to gather power to themselves in the name of some thing that may not be questioned.1 Theocracies. Unquestioned leadership. Mehmed has not thought much  about this although at times he has sensed it. He occasionally struggles with  his administrators but never lets them interfere with his teaching. And here  is Philip Pullman taking on authorities. Pullman admits in his argument that  theocracies eventually win out, but: Chapter 16 Teach As If
Chapter 16 that doesnt mean we should give up and surrender. . . . I think we should act as  if. I think we should read books, and tell childrens stories, and take them to the  theatre, and learn poems, and play music, as if it would make a difference. . . .  We should act as if the universe were listening to us and responding. We should  act as if we were going to win.2 As Mehmed thinks about it, he senses that most teachers survive because  they appease theocracies, a habit harking back to the factory-designed  schools of the early twentieth century. They resist reform by acting as if  theyve reformed. Yet, teachers still reside at the bottom of a hierarchical  ladder. Despite working alone in private, isolated classrooms, they defer to  people at the top, people who often perpetuate us-versus-them relationships.  What if instead we believe that we are the key deciders in our class rooms? Mehmed ponders. What if we act as if we were in charge, as the  decision-makers? Why not act as if we have an active role in governing our  schools, as our university colleagues do? What might happen?  Taking Pullmans counsel, he and his colleagues could create a sense of  empowerment both for themselves and for their students. Teachers could  ask provocative questions and take time to ponder outcomes to model active  learning. Teaching as if would encourage everyone to engage in exciting  classrooms irrespective of bogus requirements and oppressive theocracies. Mehmed wonders why he and only a few of his colleagues risk invoking as  if possibilities. Why dont we enact offbeat methodologies rather than fulfill  the mandates of others? Why dont we do it our way rather than follow what  were expected to do? Sometimes we convince others of our intentions, but  mostly we stay by ourselves. In fact, we like being different. Choosing the as  if path creates meaning for our teaching. Shortly after reading the Pullman piece, Mehmed discovered Eliot Eisners  deep stuff that schools should teachfive ideas to push the boundaries of  orthodoxy in schools:  Judgmentstudents deal in problems having more than one answer  Critical thinkingexploring big ideas with legs  Meaningful literacyreading, writing, numeracyand music, visual arts,  and dancing  Collaborationmoving beyond solo performance to meaningful collabora tive work during school  Servicestudents learning to reach out beyond individual achievement to  the community at large3 Eisners five ideas encourage Mehmed to step out from under theocratic  thinking. Eisners framework supports Mehmeds desire to invite students to  explore rather than to regurgitate, to investigate rather than to repeat, and to 

Teach As If 137 learn in community rather than to compete for grades. What if all of us took  his five ideas to heart? What would be different about our school? Imagine the excitement when solving complex problems instead of giv ing notes to copy. Imagine inviting students to write reflections in class in  response to unresolved issues, instead of only writing at home. Imagine con necting with the greater world rather than pursuing textbook chapters that  lack any narrative. Imagine teaching for learning rather than for test taking. Yet, implementing frameworks like Eisners would take time away from  covering required material. Mehmed and his colleagues already feel pressure  to teach fast. Still, Eisners five ideas offer a strong invitation to let go of  coverage and to trust uncoverage and exploration. Taking such a position,  however, puts one outside of the prevalent theocracy. Given the pressures of  federal and state assessments, making such a decision is difficult. Eisner is one of a growing number of educators calling for teachers to con centrate on learning. Robert Marzano, whose exemplary research calls for  significant reform, has articulated ten questions to direct teachers away from  the tyranny of the theocracy of coverage.4 His questions address critical areas  for teachers to consider as they aim to create exciting classrooms. Questions  about communicating goals, accessing new knowledge, engaging students,  and establishing rules and positive relationships.  For example, Question 1 is: What will I do to establish and communicate  learning goals, track student progress, and celebrate success? Question 5 is:  What will I do to engage students? And Question 9 is: What will I do to  communicate high expectations for all students? Imagine using Marzanos questions as guides for collaborative discus sions. Imagine how these questions would help tap into understandings of  the teaching process. Imagine becoming open to change as a result of these  conversations. And, imagine what would happen to theocracies.

When we act as if, we heed again Pullmans words and act as if the uni verse were listening to us and responding. We should act as if we were going  to win. Students listen as we listen and respond as we respond. We are  free to teach our hearts out. We find confidence in our purpose, in our invita tions to learn, in our celebrations, in our integrity, and in living our truths to  make a difference. When teachers decide to implement these ideas, they show belief in them selves as decision-makersat least act as if they are. They nurture their stu dents to become lifelong learnerscurious, persistent, insightful, self-reliant,  caring, cooperative, and community-minded. To become citizens the world  needs. 
Chapter 16 So much happens when teachers choose to live in their teaching. What  appears beyond their domain suddenly has relevance. They see connec tions, insights, and serendipity. When powerful ideas appear, such as Philip  Pullmans as if and Eliot Eisners five principles, they open up to new pos sibilities. They dont assume to know the future. They allow imagining as if  one of their students could become a Nobel Prize winner. Ultimately, it keeps  them from succumbing to theocraciesand from creating their own. REFLECTION When Dan Hilliard read Philip Pullmans as if in The New Yorker, he  imagined himself teaching whatever he wanted. He could put aside the expec tations of his theocracy. He hesitated, however, when he remembered that  making such a decision should only be in the context of an aligned, purpose ful curriculum. Simply teaching what he wanted to teach would be wrong;  he might even be creating his own theocracy. Still, he liked Pullmans call  to listen to the universe and bring his own values to the table. He vowed to  bring his best every day. Dan also values good ideas and strategies from others. He liked reading  about Eliot Eisners deep stuff that schools should teach, as it inspired  Angela Bernardi and him to have probing conversations. Dan has recom mended that he and his colleagues take time to assess how Marzanos Ten  Design Questions can improve their curriculum and teaching.  POINTS TO PURSUE What Has Moved You to Rethink Your Teaching Practice? Have you had epiphanies about your teaching, as Mehmed Abaid had with  Philip Pullmans as if? Anything to move your teaching away from embed ded habits? Has an outside idea moved you to rethink your teaching? What  happened? Do you know of some ideas that youve held back, hesitated to  try? Why not share them with colleagues and listen to their reaction. How Have You Responded to Theocracies? Had you ever thought about theocracies and their power in schools? Have you  felt pressure from them? If you have succumbed, are you aware of the pos sible consequences on your studentsand you? What steps could you take  to free yourself? Should you? If you think you should, how would you seek  help from others? 

Teach As If 139 Incorporate Eisners Five Principles Eliot Eisners deep stuff is not unique. Plenty of writers and critics of edu cation have proposed alternative paradigms; John Holt, Herbert Kohl, and  Jonathan Kozol are among the best known. John Dewey tried early in the  twentieth century to reorient classroom practice. For starters, take Eisners five principles one at a time and explore with  colleagues their meaning. See if his principles awaken you to better ways to  think about your teaching. As you come to understand them, implement them  into your teaching and observe their effect. Invite your students to give you  feedback. Assess Robert Marzanos Ten Questions Robert Marzano has persisted in having teachers become more effective. His  writings have been praised for their clarity and thorough research.  Google A Teachers Guide through Marzanos Ten Design Questions.  Better yet, read his book The Art and Science of Teaching: A Comprehensive  Framework for Effective Instruction. Take time with colleagues to consider  each of Marzanos Ten Design Questions and Marzanos proposed Action  Steps. Reading and discussing them will take time. It will more take time and  harder work to implement them. It will be worth it.  Take Seriously Philip Pullmans As If Fake it till you make it, often attributed to Alcoholic Anonymous TwelveStep program, opens the door to using positive thinking to achieve an end.  Mehmed Abaids beguilement with Philip Pullmans as if led him to think  of changing his internal conversationsthose self-communiqus that define  who he is as a teacherand as a person perhaps.  Adopting as-if thinking, you can become open to what transpires and to  what touches your heart. You may become a different teacher. NOTES 1.	 Laura Miller, Far From Narnia: Philip Pullmans Secular Fantasy for Children,  The New Yorker, December 26, 2005 and January 1, 2006, 3. 2.	 Ibid. 3.	 Elliot Eisner on the Deep Stuff That Schools Should Teach, in Marshall Memo  17, December 15, 2003, 34. http:marshallmemo.com. 4.	 Robert Marzano, The Art and Science of Teaching: A Comprehensive  Framework for Effective Instruction Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision  and Curriculum, 2007.
Invoke the kaleidoscope metaphor. As a consultant, Pam Peters loves tapping into the minds and hearts of her  beginning teachers. Meeting with the teachers either after school or on Saturday  mornings, she discusses the trials, tribulations, and trappings of being a new  teacher in what is becoming a more challenging profession. Her letter to Marie  Lambourne, a Biology teacher in a suburban school, symbolizes the kind of  thinking Pam values. November 2014 Dear Marie, I admired your courage and honesty today at our new teachers class. You  shared the woes of your first months and opened the door for others to share  theirs. While you may not feel much better, at least you learned that you are  not alone. When you crossed over to the other side of the teachers desk, Marie, you  quickly discovered more than met your eye as a student. You watched your  teachers glide through lessons year after year. However, now that you are tak ing your turn, you feel you are stumbling. You imagined that your students  would gravitate to your love of learning, but youve seen them chatter, roll  their eyes, and doze off. You entered your ninth-grade science classroom  having magic in your heart only to see it quickly fizzle. No wonder you are  hurting. I cant blame you. Youve said that you want to bond with students as you  bonded with some of your teachers. Yet, whatever you try turns out differ ently. Many of your students ignore your enthusiasm, hardly pay attention,  Chapter 17 Take the Long View
Chapter 17 slouch at their desks, and rarely do homework. Only a few appear to appreci ate what you do. You told us that your department head has observed you only once in the  past three months. He has offered a few suggestions, none of which have  worked. Your mentor listens to you in the lunch room and suggests alterna tives. However, she has no time to be in your classroom. You feel alone,  deserted with thirty armchair desks full of uninterested students. What can you do? I wish that I had some easy answers. But, alas, I do  not. I do, however, have one suggestion. You might begin by stepping back  and take the long view of your life as a teacher. You have already told me  you wanted to become a teacher when as tenth grader you took science from  Mr. Rowe. You admired his unique manner, his gift of storytelling, and his  understanding of the deeper purposes of biology. You wanted to teach biol ogy just like him. Now you are in your own science room, but your teaching does not come  close to Mr. Rowes. Im sure you are disappointed. But, if you take the long  view and visualize the time needed to put it all together, you will see that you  will not become Mr. Rowenor should you. Becoming a teacher, a good  teacher, takes yearsat least fivein which you give 110 percent every  day. You become you, Marie teacher. It is an iterative process that demands  commitment, energy, and persistence. I know you will accept the challenge. In our Saturday morning classes, you have heard from colleagues who  claim to have few difficulties. Their students like them, as I imagine your  students down deep like you. I remember a couple of years ago in another  beginning-teacher workshop, a third-grade teacher shared week after week  that she had no behavioral issues. She had a rare opportunity to teach without  conflict. Her colleagues were in awe, as they were all facing disciplinary  issues and other challenges. However, the next year her third grade proved  more difficult. In our class, we have been discussing ideas and approaches about class room management, lesson design, and assessment. Only some of these ideas  may appear workable for you at this point. Your style and the context of your  classroom limit what you can try. What works for one teacher may not for  another. Unfortunately, I know of no recipes for success, because teaching  combines the science of practice with our personal artistry. Whenever my teaching appeared topsy-turvy and out of sorts, I turned to the  kaleidoscope metaphor. The colorful glass pieces swirling about represented  my students, parents, colleagues, administrators, ideas, and concerns. The  more disconnected, disoriented, and disappointed I was feeling, the faster the  stones tumbled. Some days they would spin so fast that everything blurred. 

Take the Long View 143 But when I took time to step back, I found more controlat least a better  perspective. The pieces slowed and patterns began to emerge. When they  slowed to a stop, I discovered insights, clarity, joy, successes, connections,  and epiphanies. Meaning, direction, and purpose showed up. I felt I was  where I belonged. I remembered that I was doing what I had been called to  do. Such instances may not occur often, especially early in your teaching.  Remember, Marie, teaching ultimately is not about what happens to you; its  about what you doand can do for your students. Experiment with the kaleidoscope metaphor. When you sense it spinning  fast, see it as a message to take time for yourself. Take deep breaths, enjoy a  quiet meal, a movie, or a conversation with a friend. Step back and remember  you are a young teacher who will become better and betterand will. As the tumbling slows, be alert. Look for possibilities as to how to shift  gears, to make changes, to discover new paths. Recognize the kaleidoscope  as a reflection of your mind and heart as it sorts and clarifies. Sometimes it  feels like a mentor. The more open you are the more the metaphor will speak  to you. When the pieces become still, pay close attention to their arrangement.  Take advantage of what you are seeing and take time to reflect. Write in your  journal; write a letter to yourself or to a colleague; talk into a voice recorder;  call a friend or relative. Whatever works for you, take that time. You will  solidify your newfound insights and make them part of your practice. You  will become what you practice. Remember, you bring your best teacher self to school every day. Now that  you are on the other side of the teachers desk, remember to take the long  view and pay attention to what you see in your kaleidoscope. After school when you get into your car, Marie, take a deep breath and  tell yourself, Im here! I made it through the day! Reflect upon the good  moments; for example, when you told me the first time that Debbie passed in  her homework; the day Mary smiled when she walked in your room; the time  Rebecca, your mentor, told you Joe Robertsone of your most challenging  kidsloves your class; and the other day when Paul, your principal, compli mented you about how you handled a parent conference.  Only after such celebrating should you think about what did not go so well.  Keep everything in perspective! Keep the long view! Namaste, Pam P.S. By the way, remember to buy tickets for a concert, so youll be sure to  take the time to do something for yourself!
Chapter 17 REFLECTION New teachers face challenges that threaten their commitment nearly every  day. Given that half of them leave the profession within five years, a new  teacher should be cognizant of her need for support, care, and love. Dan  Hilliard in contrast to Marie, felt blessed in his early years. He became close  to Mel Goodwin, his department chair. Mr. Goodwin and he co-taught a  senior section during his first three years. As a result, Mel took a deep interest  in Dans teaching, often observing him and providing feedback. Years after  Mel retired, Dan learned that Mel regarded Dan as the best young teacher in  the department. Mel had taught him well. For years, Dan has used the kaleidoscope metaphor. He particularly likes  it as a metaphor for visualizing the different aspects of teaching. It has been  particularly useful when challenged. He enjoys sharing it with newer col leagues on his staff. He has found that it provides a much-needed perspective. POINTS TO PURSUE As a New Teacher, Do You Know What Support Is Available?  One of the first emotions a new teacher faces in her classroom is how alone  she is. Thirty students face you behind your closed door. No one is there to  help. And, youve never done this before! As a new teacher, do you know what support you have? Do you know  what support you would you like? The sooner you admit that you cannot do  everything alone even though you may feel that others expect you to, the  sooner you will seek help. If you dont have a mentor, find a colleague new  or veteran with whom you can engage about teaching. That conversation  may open many doors. If not, seek someone else.  As a New Teacher, Develop Collegial Relations As Soon As You Can As a new teacher, make it a point to form close relationships. Plan not only  to arrange social engagements with colleagues, but also schedule regular  times to meet to discuss teaching and classroom issues. Dont be surprised  if you find that your new colleagues are better at being congenial rather than  collegial.  While congeniality is valuable, forming collegial relationships is more  important in the long run. Make every effort to have serious conversations  about your teaching. Begin with short ones in the hallway or faculty room. 

Take the Long View 145 People will see you as serious about wanting to learn how to teach well. You  will be able to offer them good ideas as well.  As a Veteran, What Do You Do to Help New Teachers? Veteran teachers tend to stick with what they know. Some think they should  not impose their thinking on others. Nothing could be further from the truth.  As a veteran, you should see yourself as doing all you can to strengthen the  teaching community.  Have you paid attention to the newer members of your staff? If you are a  mentor, have you made time to support your mentee, to be in his classroom at  any time and in any way necessary? If you are not a mentor, have you offered  to forge a professional relationship with a new teacher? Its an experience  youll not want to miss.  Invoke the Kaleidoscope Metaphor Sometimes, we become stuck in the linearity of the teaching life. Metaphors  can serve as doorways to other sides, to other ways to see and understand.  Pam Peters hopes that her reference to the kaleidoscope metaphor will help  Marie sort out her troubles and see her way to succeed.  Try this metaphor to see if it helps you maintain focus, purpose, and  patience. Share your thoughts with colleagues about this idea.
What is an ideal doorman? At his eighth-grade team meeting Steve Sinclair shared an idea he learned  more than twenty-five years before. At a conference of Social Studies  teachers, Fred Jervis, Founder and President of the Center for Constructive  Change, asked us: What is an ideal doorman? People at the table offered  a litany of qualities: appears well dressed, holds the door, gives smiles,  acts efficiently, carries bags, hails a cab quickly, and knows the neigh boring restaurants and their menus. Fred then concluded, Once you know  the characteristics of an ideal doorman and you want to become one, you can  plan backwards to get yourself there.1 Steve went on to say, This is a simple but profound concept, one I have  used in my teaching ever since. Once you ask the question, youll be sur prised how easy it is to generate answers. For example, remember last year  when I taught my unit on Egypt? I asked my eighth graders to interview sec ond graders who had been studying Egypt for several weeks as their central  subject. They already learned far more than my students ever would.  Before I began the unit, I explained the final outcome: In three weeks,  you will have completed a mini-book for your paired second grader.  I showed samples. Jan Cerrucci, our librarian, located top internet sites for  research and placed books on Egypt on reserve. From there, my students and  I planned backwardsand it worked well.  His colleagues appeared intrigued. They knew Steve as an innovative  teacher who consistently tried new methods. Sometimes, they felt that he  needed to slow down. But, he had been like that since his first year in the  classroom.  Chapter 18 Imagine the Ideal
Chapter 18 They agreed to try Fred Jerviss thinking and visualize their ideal class rooms. That night, Steve was inspired to write in his journal. What would  my ideal classroom look like? Sound like? As he began thinking, he felt that  unlike Platos ideal form, his classroom would be distinct. As long as schools  have classrooms, each one needs to become personal and unique. He wrote: In my ideal classroom, my co-teachers and I create a space with its own aura.  We have a few desks and chairs but also couches, upholstered chairs, area rugs,  plants, curtains, and perhaps a teachers desk set off to the side. Students fine  art and stimulating ideas grace the walls. Music plays at in-between times. There  is no litter.  Students arrive expecting the unexpected but certain they will learn. Everyone  greets each other by name and with a smile. Learning begins the moment they  enter and carries on as they leave. No bells. No public address announcements. Students are free to move about the room when not in groups having lessons.  They are free to stand, sit on windowsills and counters as long as they do not  obstruct others. Stand-up learning for some is the best option.  My colleagues and I evoke deep respect for our students and treat them as  honored guests. We accept them as they are and welcome them into a safe  learning place. We help them bring focus in their work. We teach them to take  breaths to center themselves. We enjoy what we are doing with them and with  each other. We teach without stress. We ask more questions and give less answers. We create conversations using  reason, evidence, and temperance. We invoke empathy, encourage different  viewpoints, and expect rigor. Each student can and will learn. We do all we can  to make it happen.  We concentrate on what they do well. We nurture their weaknesses through  their strengths to help them gain confidence and thrive. We value thinking and  allow time for students brains to ponder, explore, and consider. We value the  struggle necessary to develop worthwhile insights. We work. Productive, useful, thoughtful, attentive, honest, and persistent  work. Purpose is evident. Rigor means to strive without fear of judgment. We  provide frequent and consistent feedback. We transform failures into successes.  Teaching and learning become everyones business. Students learn to teach  themselves. We strive to answer the question, Whats worth knowing? even though we  do not know what jobs await our students, or what technologies, or what prob lems they will face. We take responsibility to teach tools for lifelong learning. We build a culture of creativity, a culture of innovation. We resist making  academics the sole concentration. Instead, we build learning around all facets  of the mind and heart. We provide equal access to the arts, humanities, and sci ences and understand that they have equal value in the learning lexicon. We allow their work to become evidence for learning. The quality of work  reflects the quality of our teaching. We strive to provide authentic performance  assessments. We do not grade students against each other, but instead we give 

Imagine the Ideal 149 honest, summative assessments of their progress in relationship to clear goals  and standards. We use technology, including the Internet, smart boards, overheads, DVDs,  computers, cellphones, iPods, and iPads. We include online learning in a frame work of sensible thinking, reading, writing, discussion, and creative media and  arts. We remain open to emerging technologies and their potential to enhance  learning. We value face-to-face encounters. We do not allow technological interactions to  supersede them. We use new technologies when they serve everyones purposes.  Yet, we spend long periods of time without electronic distractions to build habits  of concentration and deep thinking. And we treasure humanitys uniqueness, its  gift to itself, by learning together through love, laughter, sharing, cajoling, read ing, writing, discussing, engaging, playing, eating, walking, and so on. We provide equal opportunities for learning. We move on to new learning  only when everyone demonstrates that theyre ready. Teaching means to invite.  Invitation is the best motivator. We build relationships to create a culture of appreciation. Our ideal  classroom invites its own sacredness, its reason for being. It acts as a tribe, so to  speak, sharing rituals, mythology, and culture. Our classroom lives beyond the  school dayeveryone feels free to connect, ask for help, and share learning in  person, by phone, or online. We are present to everyone and everything. We listen. My colleagues and  I always seek the next-best way to making learning exciting for our students and for us.  Steve enjoys visualizing the ideal as it helps him align priorities and  awaken possibilities. Few teachers take the time, however, as they feel over whelmed with daily tasks. Yet, when Steve walks through the hallways of  his school, he sees countless rooms with desks in rows and columns with  the teacher up front. Why do so many of us continue to work inside this old  paradigm, Steve asks himself. Why do they persist to teach in this way?  Later, he again writes in his journal: I keep coming back to these now familiar, persistent questions: What keeps so many of my colleagues boxed in? What keeps them insisting on replicating the ways of their predecessors? What prevents them from letting go of convention and seeking the ideal? How are teachers able to ignore the presence of the future and not feel its energy  tugging at them to reform their practice? 

The questions that Steve asks himself are less about blame and more about  curiosity. If only more of his colleagues were to ponder the ideal classroom, 
Chapter 18 they might begin to step away from the old paradigm. They would discover  the precious delight inherent in teaching. Steve remembers back in the 1970s  when open education inspired alternative approaches. His classroom at that  time included areas for reading, cooking, drama, music, painting, illustrat ing, science, math, writing, calligraphyand a bicycle-repair shop. Colorful  fabrics divided spacesin days before fire departments banned themand  student artwork and calligraphy hung on the walls.  He and his two colleagues co-taught all subjects side by side. Students  used planbooks to organize and self-assess their learning. Steve taught in his  alternative classroom for six years until the powers-at-be absorbed it into a  traditional team in his middle school. Perhaps a time will come, Steve thinks, when we will break out of the  mold of the regular classroom. When we will discover new patterns and new  ways to interact and relate. When each classroom will be free to establish its  own identity. Building ideal classrooms from the bottoma curious idea! Teachers can  do it if they believe it is possible. One ideal at a time. REFLECTION Once teachers move away from standing before students, new possibilities  emerge. The more Dan Hilliard uses active strategies, the more he sees his  classroom as unique. He speculates sometimes what his ideal classroom  might look like. He thinks about removing some desks, adding a couch and  soft chairs, bringing in plants, and taking extra care when displaying work.  He incorporates more essential questions in his lessons, ones that have no  obvious answers.  He continues to refrain from making comments after each student speaks,  something he discovered on that day when he sat in Sams seat in the middle  row. He brings in ideas and strategies from other disciplines when relevant,  especially from the arts. If he is to evoke the ideal, he needs to be realistic.  He does not want to be gimmicky for gimmicks sake. Seeking the ideal  means having intention, direction, unity, and sequence at a minimumand  rigor. Dan asks his principal, Margaret Fellows, to devote a faculty meeting on  visualizing the ideal classroom. Yet he wonders, how will his colleagues  react? After some thought, he sees the ideal applying not only to a classroom  but also to a subject area, a department, and grade level. Margaret agrees to  the meeting, but she wants Dan to include teachers to help plan it. She does  not want to impose it as her agenda but wants buy in from everyone. Dan  agrees to work with her to involve faculty.

Imagine the Ideal 151 POINTS TO PURSUE How Can Visualizing Your Ideal Classroom Affect Your Teaching? When you choose to imagine the ideal, you become open to possibil ity. You start to see in a new light. You begin to think of exciting alter natives. You might decide to approach a new unit in an unusual way. Instead  of giving one writing assignment, you might ask students what they would  like to write about. You might even circle desks around the edge of the room  before they arrive.  Whatever you do, you need to know your intent. As for moving the desks,  what would be the purpose of such a rearrangement? Where would you sit?  What would happen in the middle? What might evolve next? What other  arrangements might you consider?  What If You Decide Not to Use the Textbook? Textbooks are difficult. They are expensive. They become out of date. And,  they are difficult to read.  Imagine deciding to toss out your textbook, particularly when it is out dated? At least decide to take it away from its central role in your curriculum.  How do you think your students would react? How would you then get stu dents to the material they need to learn? What might they do differently for  home-practice? Would you need a bigger budget?  Rethink the Classroom What if you were to simply ask your colleagues the straightforward question:  What can we do to create classrooms to stimulate more excitement and less  passivity? Do you think they would take you seriously? Can you imagine  what ideas might emerge? What if you asked your students the same question? Would you be willing  to listen to their suggestionsand even try some?  Assess the Role of Grading Grades have been present for time immemorial. No doubt, you went through  school being graded. Its hard to imagine teaching without them. Still, have you thought about the impact that grades have on learning? Do  you really think the way you grade is effective? Can you imagine alternatives  to grading and still motivate your students? What do you think will happen if  you remove grading from the equation of teaching?
Chapter 18 Seek Out Known Great Teachers  Everyone knows about great teachers. Especially the famous ones in films:  Mr. Chips, Mr. Holland, Jaime Escalante, Rafe Esquith, Marva Collins, John  Keating, among others. Watching their teaching lives can give goosebumps.  They inspire. Yet, great teachers exist everywhere. You could be one of them. Find  teachers who students and parents love. Visit them to learn their secrets. You  might discover elements for your ideal classroom. You might find a new  colleague. NOTE 1.	 Fred Jervis, founder and president of the Center for Constructive Change,  Durham, New Hampshire, speaking in Hanover, New Hampshire, August 1982.  Despite his blindness, he gave a memorable presentation. 
Its turtles all the way down. Some days we find ourselves swirling amid epiphanies, momentary insights,  or revealed truths. We see a resistant student suddenly proclaiming her grasp  of a concept that had eluded both her and her classmates. We catch a par ent recognizing his childs newfound successes. We discover our principal  anticipating our plan to improve our team. These moments happen in unlikely  places, at unlikely moments, in the middle of the night, in the shower, on a  walk, when readingor simply by sitting still. Steve Sinclair often waxes philosophically with his colleagues and in his  journal. A History major in college, he wanted to teach high school Social  Studies. He liked to mingle with adolescents, hear their ideas, and help them  find their place in the world. He migrated to junior high school and later to  middle school where he found his calling. Eighth graders became his thing.  Being with them feels most natural to him.  Steve also takes opportunities to explore new thinking. He attended  seminars with David Mallery; the highlight was a week at Westtown. He  took an innovative course in Social Studies at Carnegie Mellon and an early  computer course at Wesleyan. He also treasured his summers at the Institute  of Religion and Science IRAS at Star Island.  One bright summer morning at chapel on Star Island, he had one of those  moments of insight. Brian Swimme, cosmologist and chaplain at the confer ence, shared a remarkable discovery by astronomers. They had observed  a spiral galaxya galaxy with one center alive with active starscoming  into contact with an elliptical galaxya galaxy with two foci stuck inside  itself with no active stars. What did the astronomers see? The spiral galaxy  Chapter 19 Invoke the Cosmos
Chapter 19 appeared to be bringing the elliptical galaxy to life!1 Steve did not remember  the rest of Brians talk, because he was immersed in seeing teachers as spiral  galaxies bringing life to children. Steve took Swimmes metaphor as an invitation for him and his fellow  teachers to live an engaged and curious life and bring that understanding to  students. As adults and teachers, Steve thinks, we have to take time to  know who we are. We become conscious of our mission. We accept the reali ties before us. We seek possibilities for transforming them into the greater  good. We are icons of the future possibility of living and empowering life.2  We become spiral galaxies and breathe life into our students! Steve entered teaching eager to touch lives. Every day he imagines making  a difference to his students, parents, and school. Rarely does he have passive  days. He stays alive to what he teaches and seeks the new and different, even  when he teaches the same subject or grade level year after year. His students  love his compassion and commitment. Hes never burned out. Hes a spiral  galaxy teacher, full of life, eager to share and generate creative lives in others.  Yet, todays parents have to contend with a persistently invasive culture.  In response, they rear their children inside cocoons of endless directed activi ties. Children appear suspended, lifeless between two foci: one of face-to-face  relationships with family and friends and the other of a faceless relationship  with electronic friends. Children have less time to make choices, less time to play as they spend  more time alone. They shuffle from one activity to another, both after school  and on weekends. In between, they sit before televisions and computers, and  attend to cellphones, smartphones, tablets, video games, and the Internet.  They come to school less able to initiate, choose, and inquire. They wait  for direction. They are uncomfortable in face-to-face encounters and appear  adrift without electronic devices under their thumbs. Despite the glitz of ever-newer technologies, ironically, children appear to  live inside stagnant elliptical galaxies with little or no self-generated energy.  Steve recalls Susanne Rubensteins insight of more than fifteen years ago.  She wrote about her high school English students who claimed that they  could not have dinner table discussions because they did not have dinner with  their parents.3  Our latchkey culture has left children and adolescents at home alone; the  myriad of electronic technologies only adds to the isolation. Schools lament  the listlessness of increasing numbers of obese children who have little desire  to participate, to try, to engage. Teachers notice greater and greater apathy.  Art teachersin schools and in museumsexpress frustration with their lack  of imagination. Children act as texts without context. The image of them as  two foci living inside an elliptical galaxy is compelling. 

Invoke the Cosmos 155 When teachers act as spiral-galaxy teachers, they activate energy. When  they see students as elliptical dual-foci beings, they can uncover their spiralgalaxy potential. When Steve acts as an activator, he resonates at the heart of  the universe. Human consciousness is unique among all creaturesat least  on this planetas humans reflect on our place in the universe. Quantum  mechanics teaches that the act of looking affects what we seethe observer  affects the observed.  If, however, we were to see people and objects as alien life forms, we  would be denying our interconnection with them. But, as Steve wrote in his  journal, we have all been born of the same source. We exchange atoms with  everyone and everything around us. We recognize our students as integral to  our lives, as part of the extended human family, as part of the same universe. Suppose a spiral galaxy and an elliptical galaxy touched and the reverse  happenedthe spiral galaxy were to die? Would not the universe be convey ing a different message? Instead of affirming life as essential to the universe  knowing itself, it would be declaring the opposite. Thank goodness we  humans are a unique part of a creative universe, and as a part we reveal the  universe. What happens at the macrocosm echoes in the microcosm. As Ken  Wilber puts it: Theres an old joke about a King who goes to a Wiseperson and asks how  is it that the Earth doesnt fall down. The Wiseperson replies, The Earth is  resting on a lion. On what then is the lion resting? The lion is resting on  an elephant. On what is the elephant resting? The elephant is resting on a  turtle. On what is the . . . You can stop right there, Your Majesty, Its turtles  all the way down.4 

The universe favors life. It insists on its emergence. By no means could the  universe generate itself as it has in the past 13.8 billion years in random  fashion. The universe exudes intelligence. Just how this occurs, humans can  only surmise, but it appears obvious in the results it has produced. At the  same time, humans will not survive as a species any more than the Earth  will survive when the sun dies in four billion years. We live in precious  times. Already, 99 percent of all species that ever existed on Earth have become  extinct. Yet, clearly, life has been an outcome of this particular universe.  Certainly, it does not take up residence exclusively on planet Earth. Life will  live beyond our time. We begin to understand ourselves by acknowledging each of us as a  fragment of a greater whole, a single stitch in a garment. As a fragment 
Chapter 19 we participate in life around us, making our contributions and accepting  the contributions of others. Each of us emerges unique. A teacher entering  her classroom for the first time does not replace the previous teacher in the  way a new light bulb replaces a worn light bulb. Instead, she arrives as a  unique fragmentor filament perhapsthat has never been nor ever will  be again. We are, in Ken Wilbers terminology, holons, simultaneously whole and  part.5 Each grain of sand or snowflake is a holon in and of itself. But only  in aggregation as a part of the whole does one contribute to the beach or  the blizzard.6 As wholes, we act as agents, as active holons in the world  embodying the change we want. Or, in the words of Gandhi, Be the change  you wish to see in the world. At the same time, we act in communion. If we do not, we will not survive.  We find meaning in community. Solitary fragments are shards, brittle and  disconnected, like one broken off from the whole in a huge ceramic mosaic.  Not only will we be isolated, but we will also be missed. Steve Sinclairs perception of Swimmes metaphor seems grandiose at first  when he compares it to him in his classroom. Yet, the metaphor reminds  him of his universe home. He sees himself and his colleagues as part of the  continuum of the Universe Story and in particular, as conduits and creators  of human history. As Wilber wrote, Its turtles all the way down. REFLECTION When Dan Hilliard first heard Carl Sagan lecture on the Cosmos, he saw  himself in its unfolding story. His friends chide him about this perspective,  but he wont let it go. Years later, he read Brian Swimme and Thomas Berrys  The Universe Story, and Ken Wilbers A Brief History of Everything, which  only solidified his convictions. He sees himself as a teacher born of star stuff,  taking his turn in human history to fulfill hisand itspurpose. His purpose  resides in his teaching, and he gives himself to it every day. At the same time, within the grand macrocosm he pays attention to whats  in front of him. Each student, each colleague, and each grain of sandeach  fragment, if you willcounts. Lifes fullness requires his fullness. Dan tries to intrigue colleagues to read and discuss these ideas, but only a  few take any interest. He shares his thoughts in class whenever it seems to fit  and finds many of his students curious to know more. One year, he spent six  weeks teaching the origin of the universe as an elective. His students were  enthralled.

Invoke the Cosmos 157 POINTS TO PURSUE How Do You Relate to the SpiralElliptical Galaxy Metaphor? Steve Sinclair has been a budding philosopher since college. His friends saw  him as their philosopher in residence. When he heard Brian Swimmes galax ies metaphor, he immediately connected it to his teaching. He pondered the  meaning of the expansion of consciousness in the universe. That humans are  the universe knowing itself. That the universe really is turtles all the way  down.  Are you willing to take Steves perspective and teach inside questions you  can at best only surmise? Are you willing to activate your students brains and yoursin pursuit of understanding yourself and your purpose in the  greater scheme of things?  Seek to Understand Your Place in the Universe If youve never considered the universe perspective, read Carl Sagan. Better  yet, view him on YouTube, or watch Cosmos, the television series. Sagan  opened minds and hearts to the wondrous universe in which we live. Since his  teachings, astronomers and physicists have seen deeper into our 13.8 billionyear universe. For a more recent perspective, read Brian Swimme and Thomas Berrys  The Universe Story and Ken Wilbers A Brief History of Everything. Also,  view Neal deGrasse Tysons sequel to Sagan, Cosmos: A SpaceTime  Odyssey.7 Find some colleagues to join you. Invite everyone to be open to  incorporating the universe perspective into their teaching.  Reflect on Holon and Holons Take time to ponder the implications of Stacey Akes wonderful description  of Koestlers concept of holons: Each grain of sand or snowflake is a holon  in and of itself. But only in aggregation as a part of the whole does one con tribute to the beach or the blizzard.  What does this mean to you? What does it mean to your teaching?  NOTES 1.	 Brian Swimme, at the Institute of Religion in the Age of Science Confer ence, Star Island, Portsmouth, New Hampshire, August 2005. His seminal work  with Thomas Berry, The Universe Story: From the Primordial Flaring Forth to the  Ecozoic EraA Celebration of the Unfolding of the Cosmos New York: Harper 
Chapter 19 Collins, 1992, has brought forth the new creation story based on recent cosmological  research. 2.	 This phrasing comes from the thoughtfulness of Stacey Ake, associate teach ing professor of philosophy in the English and Philosophy Department at Drexel  University, in a personal communication. 3.	 Susanne Rubenstein, Wachusett High School, Teacher Magazine,  AugustSeptember, 1999, excerpted in the journal ClassWise, October, 1999. 4.	 Ken Wilber, A Brief History of Everything Boston, MA: Shambhala, 1996, 20. 5.	 Ibid., 20ff. Wilber shares Arthur Koestlers ideas of holons. 6.	 Stacey Ake in a personal communication. 7.	 Neal deGrasse Tyson, Cosmos: A SpaceTime Odyssey, a 13 part series on PBS,  2014.

Part V HOW DO WE FIND OUR CALLING? Seeking to know our inner teacher, we discover teaching as a personal and  collective calling. Part V invites teachers to embark on a never-ending search for meaning and a  willingness to transformessential qualities for becoming a complete teacher.  Successful teachinga successful liferequires understanding who we are  and what we want. We discover the deep richness that teaching can bring  usand to the lives of our students, their families, and our colleagues. We  seek our inner teacher. Know thyself, proclaimed Socrates, an unexam ined life is not worth living. We recognize the nature of our calling. We take our own path. We pay  attention to the practices we implement, determine their effectiveness, and  keep only those that work. We reexamine our philosophy and the nature of  our journey as we become the chief stakeholders in our teaching. We articu late for ourselves and for our students the knowledge, understandings, and  skills we intend to teach. Finally, we recognize the crucial role we have in the successesand  failuresof our students. We sense the differences we make every day. We  acknowledge the honor that teaching bestows. We work toward realizing our  potential to serve our students, their families, and the community.
What matters was her desire to do schoola hint of a calling perhapsthat  revealed more than the act itself. He could hardly hold back. In the middle of a department meeting, Harold  Dennison blurts out, Hardly a day passes when I am not reminded that I am  called to teach! My classroom has always been a joy. Every day something  unexplainable happens. In my relationships with students, their families and with you! I see infinite possibilities. I am blessed every day to learn as  much and often more than my students. His colleagues are not surprised. They know Harold as an enthusiast from  his first day twenty years ago. He came from a liberal arts college determined  to reform teaching. His classroom reflects his personality. He hardly keeps  the same arrangement of desks including his own. He has a couple of couches  along the back wall and three soft chairs. His walls are decorated with student  writings and drawings framed in colored paper. One of his windows appears  as stained glassmade from colored tracing paper. He has put curtains on  his windows. He has lots of plants. Harold has made his classroom a world  of its own.  Shortly after he declared his deep love of teaching to his colleagues, he  discovered James Hillman. He particularly likes Hillmans acorn theory  where each person bears a uniqueness that asks to be lived and that is already  present before it can be lived.1 Hillman has expressed how Harold feels  about teaching. I know teaching resides deep within me, he says to himself,  I feel it every day. According to Hillman, as each acorn emerges into its own oak, so each  human emerges into its own being. Identical twins are no exception. Harold  connects with Hillmans acorn concept because he has seen the uniqueness of  Chapter 20 Grow Our Seeds
Chapter 20 each child. While he hesitates to subscribe to Hillmans concept of daimon a guardian angel that guides and directs us, Harold agrees that he does have  a calling. And he agrees that events align to make it happen. How can a teacher determine whether or not hes been called? He may feel  it when he wakes up with yet another idea and rushes to write it down. He  may know it when he sees a student suddenly grasp the concept of surface  tension while watching a wiper blade move across a windshield.2 Ursula  Boyle knew it when she spent twice the required hours for a course, writing,  reflecting, and responding. Jenn Drew and Leighann Wright sensed it when  they took a course not for credit or professional development, but because  they wanted to learn and share their learning with colleagues.  Harold feels it on days when the bell rings, and wonders just where the  time went after ninety minutes of conversation with his eighth graders. He  feels it in countless other ways when lightbulbs go off in his head, when  epiphanies suddenly arrive, when students gleam with joy, when Clevie saw  the light for the first time, when Joey apologized before being asked, when  Shanaya found her first friend . . . so many ways. Harold has a persistent passion, a sense of the sacred in everything. He  asks questions with a childs curiosity. He makes a cup of coffee for the  pleasure of making a cup of coffee. He pounds a nail with joy knowing what  he is building. He serves others with delight as if he were his own customer.  He teaches as if he were his student. Each act has meaning. Each act belongs. He is surprised sometimes how he got to where he is. Why am I so blessed  to have found what I love to do every day? Why was I willing to become a  teacher when so many of my classmates were getting more lucrative posi tions? Why did my parents accept my desire to teach when they knew that I  could have gone into business with their friends? Harold has never doubted  his commitment. Sometimes he wonders if James Hillman is right: Do I have  a daimon guiding me?  From his earliest years, he loved teaching about Marxism and Communism.  The more he explored the Russians, the Chinese, and the Cubans with his  students, the more he tried to reconcile the public face of Communism to  what he thought might be lurking behind their borders. He was thrilled  when President Obama initiated talks with Raul Castro at the Summit of the  Americas in Panama in April 2015. He yearned to travel to Cuba. Through  a remarkable combination of circumstances, he secured a two-week leave  of absence from his classroom the following April to take a trip with fellow  educators to Cuba. When Harold thinks back to his childhood, he remembers what attracted  him, what pulled him in, what invited his curiosity. Throughout his life, he  would meet people who slipped into his web as if they had always been there, 

Grow Our Seeds 163 while others did not find a home with him. His likes and dislikes come and go  often with no apparent reason. He cares passionately about some issues and  ignores others, while his friends do the opposite. He became obsessed with  baseball, soccer, reading, and photography but ignored other offerings. Why  he made these choices, hes not sure. Sometimes, Harold has had nondescript moments that linger. He remem bers that once, when he was about ten years old, he was standing on a  sidewalk on Maple Street when he saw his uncle, who was a druggist, across  the street talking with Mary Donaldson. Harold was taken aback because his  friendsand everyone else it seemedsaid that Mary was different, and for  lack of a better term, slow. She often dressed in tattered clothes and had a  speech defect. Sometimes, Harold and his friends would mock Mary behind  her back. Later that evening, Harold asked his uncle why he took time to stop and  talk with Mary. His uncle said that everyone is worth talking to. This moment  stuck with Harold. He learned thenhe did not know it at the timenot only  to pay attention to professors, teachers, shop owners, lawyers, druggists, and  city officials, but also to postal clerks, garage attendants, janitors, cooks, and  the homeless. Whenever he can, Harold makes it a point to know their names  and their stories.

Do the memories we keep, such as Harolds memory of his uncle and  Mary Donaldson, instruct us toward our own calling? Are they fertilizer for  our seeds? Do we see them because they have been placed before us?  Harold has a Cuban story that speaks to this. It was an afternoon on his  April trip when he went to a school in central Havana. He saw a small  group of children in a classroom by themselves. One of them was acting as  the teacher. Her manner was stern, assertive, and exhibiting a no-nonsense  attitude. Harold stood alone, unnoticed, outside the door. He was fascinated. As the young girl stood in front of her children, she revealed a curi ous intensity. No smile. Very serious. She never saw Harold. He wonders  to this day if this child ever became a teacher. She appeared to internalize  the demeanor of an authoritarian school master. She was, after all, a child of  the Communist system. Maybe she saw herself at the moment as a surrogate  parent for the state and needed to assert full responsibility for the character  of her students. In the end, its not the way this Cuban child, or any child, plays school that  matters much. What matters was her desire to do schoola hint of a calling  perhapsthat revealed more than the act itself. This young Cuban, a product  of what Harold perceived was a conformist culture, appeared to be nurturing 
Chapter 20 her own seed by choosing what she wanted to do without pretense. At least,  thats the way Harold saw it. REFLECTION Dan Hilliard recalls his junior year in college when he was hired to take care  of thirty children of bankers attending a summer conference. It was then he  found his desire to become a teacher. For the first time in his life he had been  given responsibility without having to do someone elses bidding. His task  was to keep the children safe and happyhow he did it was up to him. By the time he stepped into his first classroom, he was where he belonged.  He has never doubted it. He knows colleagues who also have a strong sense  of their calling. They seem confident and flexibleand willing to explore  their teaching to make their classrooms engaging and exciting. He wishes all  teachers felt this way. POINTS TO PURSUE Do You Subscribe to James Hillmans Acorn Theory? Harold Dennison knew he wanted to teach. He likes to say that he did not  choose it, but that it chose him. When he came across James Hillmans acorn  metaphor that each person bears a uniqueness that asks to be lived and that  is already present before it can be lived, he understood.  As a teacher or principal, have you sensed your uniqueness? Are you aware  that you are unlike any educator who came before you or who will come after  you? Do you know what is unique about you? About each of your colleagues? Take time to reflect on your special attributes and celebrate who you are. Are You Willing to See Yourself As Special, Unique? Harold later read these words from John Updike: Theres a kind of confes sional impulse that not every literate, intelligent person has. . . . A crazy belief  that you have some exciting news about being alive . . . what separates those  who do it from those who think theyd like to do it. That your witness to the  universe cant be duplicated, that only you can provide it, and that its worth  providing.3  Are you willing to explore that notion that your witness to the universe  cant be duplicated? Are you willing to see yourself as unique, special, a  one-of-a-kind educator?

Grow Our Seeds 165 What Events Have Defined You? Harold Dennisons memory of his uncle speaking with Mary Donaldson  remained deep in his psyche. Later, his trip to Cuba convinced him even more  of his place as a teacher. These and other such experiences have stuck with  him and help define who he is.  What events have become seminal in your life? How have they helped to  define you? How do they define you as a teacher? Do you have a sense theres  more to come? Are You Willing to Invoke Play in Your Classroom? Seeing the Cuban child hold forth with her peers, Harold wondered how play  could become more a part of his classroom. He wondered if he could provide  more time for his students to play. Perhaps, play should become a larger part  of his school.  Would he learn more about who his students are, as he imagined for young  girl in the Cuban school? Would students learn more about who they are,  what they value, and what they want in life? Would teachers learn more about  them? What can you do to justify play when you feel pressured to apply more  time on task to cover curriculum and prepare for federal and state tests? NOTES 1.	 James Hillman, The Souls Code: In Search of Character and Calling New  York: Warner Books, 1997, 6. 2.	 Example from Matthew Adiletta, Intel fellow and director of Communication  Infrastructure and Architecture in the Intel Architecture Group, speaking at Clark  University, March 26, 2001. 3.	 John Updike, from his 1990 Boston Globe interview, January 28, 2009.
Showing up Your assignment for the next class will be to write a two-page philoso phy of education, said Professor Ronald Anderson, six weeks into Harold  Dennisons graduate philosophy of education class. How ironic to be asked  to write his philosophy before he taught his first lesson! And on two pages!  Harold leaned on the wisdom of Plato, Whitehead, Black, and Dewey. For  thirty-five years, Harold never considered writing another. Then, in his final year in the classroom, he did. Perhaps it was because it  was his last year and he wanted to clarify his own understandings of teaching.  Perhaps it was his effort to make better sense of his values and concerns. Per haps he was simply curious about what he would write. Whatever the reasons,  he found the exercise intriguing, insightful, and self-revealing. As he was writing, Harold understood that the core of his values came  from his life and work, rather than from the wisdom of philosophers.  He was surprised at his focus on practice. He understood himself better as  a teacherand what he wanted to bring to his students. Had he taken time  to write a philosophy periodically throughout his career, he might have had  a clearer focus on the qualitiesand deficitsof his teaching. He certainly  would have developed a stronger self-awareness. Now that Harold is a consultant, he wonders if its a good idea to ask his  teachers to write their philosophies when they are so busy. Papers pile up,  grades become due, supplies need replenishing, deadlines have to be met,  and meetings and conferences add to the workload, let alone the demands of  their personal lives. How will they find time and space to commit to write  and share their philosophies of education? What if they do not consider them selves writers? Why should they bother, anyway? Chapter 21 Rethink Our Philosophy
Chapter 21 Harold decides to propose the idea of writing ones educational philosophy in  his workshops. In the packet he gives them, he puts it this way: Do you want to know yourself better as a teacher? Do you know what your  personal core values are? Do you wonder what your students would say about  your beliefs and values? Your parents? Your administrators? Try this idea:  Agree to write your educational philosophy in only two pages or less;  Focus first on what you do, then on what you believe and value;  Include as many concrete details as you can;  Then, set up a meeting time to share your philosophy with trusted  colleagues;  Encourage each of them to write his own philosophy;  Agree to meet again to share everyones philosophy.  The first couple of times he introduces this idea Harold does not convince  many participants to write their philosophies. So, he decides to assign them  to write one as part of their portfolios. He rewrites his instructions and adds  the following: Setting down your core beliefs can be intimidating, particularly if youve never  done it. Be open to what transpires. Making the commitment is the first step  Ive done that by giving you this assignment. Doing it is the next. Once you do  you will be surprised, as you will tap into your real teacher self. When you come  to share it with colleagues, you will come even closer. The following prompts  may help you find points of entry:  When I first taught, I believed . . . but now . . .  Students used to . . . but now they seem . . .  I used to teach only whole-class lessons, but now . . .  From the first day, I believe I . . . and now I still do believe that . . .  While I average grades, I place more value work done later in the term  because . . .  I am struggling with the idea of including cellphones and iPads in my teach ing . . .  I found being alone in my classroom hard at first, but now I like it  because . . .  I used to like being alone in my classroom, but now . . .  Compared to my first years, I now learn more and share more with colleagues  about . . .  Assigning homework has become a greater challenge because . . .

Rethink Our Philosophy 169  I feel pressure to meet state tests, so I cannot teach the way I want to . . .  I read . . . and it has changed my teaching . . .  Sometimes, I wonder if I have a life outside teaching . . .  Its not as much about what I teach, but rather I am a teacher who . . . Happy writing!  After giving the assignment, Harold tells participants that if they want to read  his rewritten philosophy from his last year in the classroom it he will email  it. He suggests that they write their own before reading his. He wants them to  stay fresh in their thinking.  Statement of Philosophy, February 1998 Paying attention. After years of contemplating, reading, and discussing, my phi losophy of life and teaching is about paying attention. Paying attention allows  me to be in the present. When I listen without distraction, without preoccupa tion, without thinking of the next appointment, I become a part of those around  me. When a student asks a question and I listen, I answer with a chance to find  meaning for both of us. Otherwise, our words pass by, each of us soon without  a memory of the conversation. Philosophy at its best is practical. What one does becomes ones philosophy.  I remember the challenge in graduate school of writing a two-page statement  of my philosophy of education. I wish I could find it and see what I said.  I remember it was full of platitudes reflecting my love of Plato, Dewey, Black,  and Whitehead. I find no separation between my practice at work, at home, and  on the street. Its the challenge of living a good life, a caring lifeand it meets  me everywhere. Showing up. Sometimes thats all it takes. Being there. To be fully present.  It is not simply putting in an appearance, but being a presence. The best days  are those where I am in the midst of it all, an integral part of the swirl. Whether  leading a discussion, sharing a pun, observing a colleague, listening to a parent,  complimenting the kitchen help, thanking a friend . . . whenever I am attentive  wherever I am makes a difference. Its in the details. Setting up my chairs for the incoming class. Copying and  collating a test or a handout. Cleaning the table after having lunch with my advi sees. Saying thank you and finding opportunities to say it. Writing comments  to parents about their children. I like the business of life. Doing it well makes it  possible to do it well again. Its habit. Reading. Aldous Huxley, Jon Kabat-Zinn, Lao-Tzu, Thich Nhat Hanh, The  Dalai Lama, Ken Wilber, Brian Swimme, Annie Dillard, and others. I like enter ing others minds and trying to understand their perspective. Wilbers A Brief  History of Everything does it in a big way.  I like to invite my students to be writers, particularly on provocative, chal lenging subjects. I read their insights, which frequently touch me deeply.
Chapter 21 Seek meaning. I attend services and a weekly spirituality discussion group  at my Congregational Church. I like our ministers collective search process,  which includes many paths. I also attend a weekly Hindu meditation group and  attempt some meditation on my own with varying success. Seeking in silence is  often rich, particularly for one who likes to talk. Entering these doorways opens  me to possibilities. Doorways lead to bridges. Bridges provide a context for connecting. I thrive  on bridges where I find understandings and resolutions. A bridge is a safe place  to see into one anothers world, to explore ideas, to encourage empathy, to  resolve conflicts. Thats why I taught in England, Canada, and the former Soviet  Union during glasnost. Meeting others halfway opens creative possibilities and  invites reconciliation. I have a richer understanding of othersand of myself. Being on the edge. I think I have always been this way. Recently, when asked  to teach Ancient History in the eighth grade, I began with the Big Bang. After  all, why begin at Mesopotamia when civilization was already in place, such a  recent event in cosmic time? Ancient History is not supposed to begin with the  Big Bang. Being a messenger. Several years ago, I created what I call wisdom beads,  colored pony beads into which I inserted rolled sayings. I began by taking  quotations from the Dalai Lama and Lao-Tzu. On the day before winter break,  I invite my students each to take a bead from a bowl with the understanding to  pay attention to its particular message. We then share them. I also have a set  I share with the faculty and staff. In the end its all about commitment. A commitment to be of service to  othersto do whatever it takes for children, for parents, for colleagues, for the  school, for the community. My commitment combines competence, excellence,  rigorous attention to relationships, and a sense of the awesome responsibility  of teaching. Harolds assignment to write philosophies proved rewarding. Most par ticipants found that the process invited them to understand themselves. They  enjoyed both sharing their philosophies and listening to others. Some became  convinced that they should adapt this assignment for students as a means for  them to know themselves better. 

After sharing his philosophy with teachers, Harold revises his own. Recently,  he has begun one to share with his workshop teachers:  My Philosophy Reconsidered, February 2015  Its been more than fifteen years since I last sat with my eighth graders. On  that last day, the last class, we were sitting in a circle as usual, discussing what, 

Rethink Our Philosophy 171 I cant remember, when suddenly we were late for the final middle school  assembly. Arriving late, no one seemed to mind. Neither did Chris Barnhill, our princi pal. What a way to leave the classroom for the last time, I said to myself. So  embroiled in conversation that we lost track of time. For a few moments we beat  Time, that insidious enemy of teaching. We never had enough. My students and  I took it anyway. I wished I remembered what we were discussing. Since then, my classroom has been with you, my fellow teachers. I have  enjoyed making this shift, despite having been warned teachers can be difficult.  They tend to chat among themselves, my new colleagues told me. At first,  I saw some of this but since calling it to your attention, it has ameliorated. But, calling attention to behaviors has a short shelf life. The real operative  in my teaching is its quality. No amount of interactive, innovative pedagogies  can make a difference without quality. But to define quality can be illusive... So Harold begins another statement of philosophy. He will come back to it  another day. Meanwhile, he focuses on his teachers and writing. He thinks he  might write a book to help them find their path toward engaging and exciting  classrooms. However, he visualizes his book ultimately for students who he  hopes will be the beneficiaries of his ideas. Who knows? REFLECTION When Dan Hilliard wrote his first philosophy of education in graduate school,  he did not think it would have much meaning for his teaching. He had only  observed some classrooms during his senior year in college. He liked John  Dewey, so he based his essay on Deweys progressive ideas. He liked the  practicality of his philosophy.  Toward the end of his career, his colleague, Pat Blackman, had to write a  philosophy of his teaching for his masters degree. He invited Dan to write  one as well. At first Dan hesitated, but when he started to write, he discovered  that he shifted considerably from that first effort.  When Pat and he shared their philosophies, they discovered more simi larities than differences. It was surprising because they often disagreed with  one another at faculty meetings. Now they understand each other better and,  more importantly, know themselves better. They both agree that writing their  philosophies is a valuable exercise.  Pat and Dan decide to establish a bimonthly conversation group to reflect  on and discuss the deeper principles and values of their work with students and with each other. They hope that colleagues who join will write their  philosophies to further stimulate discussion. 
Chapter 21 POINTS TO PURSUE Reread Your First Philosophy of Education Harold arrived at graduate school fully committed to teaching. He was not  surprised when Professor Anderson asked him to write his philosophy of  education. But, having to write it showed him how little he knew. Do you still have your first philosophy of education paper? Do you remem ber your reaction to having to write it? If you can find it, reread it. Then, write  a new one, up to two pages. Invite colleagues to write one as well. If they  need help, show them the prompts in this chapter.  What Do You Do to Reexamine Your Teaching? Harold thought that writing periodic philosophies might have kept him more  aware of his teaching. Still, he had been reflective throughout his career.  Do you have an approach for periodically reexamining your teaching, such  as a diary, a blog, or sending emails to teachers in other schools? Which ones  have been the most valuable? Share your thoughts with colleagues. You may  discover other ways.  Take Writing SeriouslyYours and Your Students Writing is never easy. You should not be embarrassed to explore your  thoughts in writing, especially since you expect students to write well. By  looking closely at your practice, you make it easier to ask the same from  your students.  Just as reading makes you better able to entice students to read meaning fully, your writing enables you to better guide students when they write.
We teach who we are. Randy Pauschs fifteen minutes of fame sticks in Harold Dennisons mind.  Pauschs gave his Last Lecture when he had inoperable cancer, with only  six months to live. His theme Lessons learned: how you can achieve your  dreams and enable the dreams of others riveted listeners in the audience and  now more than seventeen million listeners and counting on YouTube.1 His  wisdom touches everyoneand Harold in particular.  Pausch spoke as though he had ascended a mountaintop, discovered wis dom, and came back to share it. As Harold listened, he wondered how many  of us have such wisdom ready to be tapped. Does the threat of impending  death, of an approaching end, awaken us? Or, does it awaken us at least to be  open to such wisdom from people like Randy before they leave us? In the spirit of Pausch, Harold writes in his journal: What if we imagine we had only six months left to teach? What if we see these six months as the opportunity  to teach as we have always wanted to? Would we discover our own wisdom and feel compelled  to share it with our colleagues and students? Would we become free to teach as our real selves rather than  feeling we must fulfill the expectations of others? Could we actually evoke this sense of urgency?  Harold figures it would be a challenge to pretend he had only six months  left to teach. After all, he will have the next year, and the next, and the  next until he retires. Yet, in the second semester of any year he has less than  Chapter 22 Achieve Our Dreams
Chapter 22 six months to teach his current students. Maybe I should think in terms of  Pauschs only six months left. Certainly not as urgent but nonetheless true. Constraints provide pressureand perhaps allow a sense of freedom.  Deadlines help keep us focused. They provide borders and keep us atten tive to what needs to be done. Without them, we can lose our place. When  teachers create constraints, students gain a clearer sense of what they need to  know, understand, and be able to do.  Harold remembers a shift in the quality of work with self-hardening clay in  his open classroom years ago. Because students were misusing and wasting  clay, his colleague, Chris Thomson, established straightforward and clear pro cedures: First, students could only use enough clay to fit in one hand. Second,  they could not make a recognizable object, such as a cup and saucer or an ani mal. And lastly, within their abstract shape they had to put at least one hole. The result was a series of remarkable sculptures, which led to the discovery  of a faux glaze when students rubbed the sculptures with polished rocks. They  did this while sitting quietly or listening to stories. Unwittingly, Harold and  Chris had found a way to build meditation practice into their home groups. In his last year in the classroom, Harold felt the meaning of Pauschs only  six months left. He became more conscious of his presence. Soon he would  no longer have a classroom in which he would hold deep conversations in  a circle with his eighth graders. He would no longer assign them to innova tive projects or unusual writing assignments like his Ivan Denisovich journal  across Russia.  Sometimes, Harold caught himself saying words and phrases for the last  time like Your assignment for tonight . . ., Today, we will read . . .;  Thank you for being here. As if to cement his departure from teaching, a  year later his school tore down the building in which he last taught.  Had Harold taken to heart Pauschs only six months left throughout his  career, would he have been a different teacher? Because he saw how impor tant Pauschs insight was, he wrote in his journal: I certainly would have had heightened awareness about who I am, why I teach,  and what I bring to the classroom. I would have paid more attention to my  students responses as I spokeand as I listened. I could have been more reflec tive and fully present every day. By seeking to discover my inner knowing available to all of usI would have brought it to the surface earlier than I did. Though I did take advantage of my freedom to create units of study and made  them imaginative and interesting, I wish I had paid more attention to how each  and every student responded. I had a tendency to become carried away with the  novelty of my ideas without always attending to their impact on each student.  As long as most of them appeared to be on board, I was happy. I would have paid more attention to how each student learned. In my early  years, I delivered academic knowledge and skills in as an entertaining way as 

Achieve Our Dreams 175 possible. And, as with my colleagues, I based my assessments on quizzes, tests  and papers; the best grades seemed to belong to the bright students and lower  grades to those at a lower level. I did not pay close enough attention to what  each student learned and to my part in it. I wish I had learned sooner about learn ing styles so I could have diversified my teaching. I wish I had been more sensitive to my colleagues before judging them.  I tended not to engage with them, particularly when I saw them teaching in  ways I did not respect. Perhaps had we had better dialogues, we all could have  become better teachers.  Impossible as it was, I wish I could have had access to recent research on  brain-based learning and other innovative methods and approaches now avail able to teachers. Had I known more about collaborative planning and teaching  as exemplified in professional learning community initiatives, my colleagues  and I would have been better teachers. I experienced glimpses of these ideas,  but, alas, they were not in place in my time. I wish I had the courage to have graded papers without names.  Perhaps this might turn into a book, he said to himself. Whether or not teachers think of teaching as if it were for their last six  months, the invitation to shift from teaching as talking to teaching for learn ing remains on the table. Teachers change when they decide to change.  Parker Palmer frames it best: We teach who we are.2 We first bring our  self-knowing into our classrooms, and from there choose our practices. What  we do, after all, starts with our intention.  The Dalai Lama said, Everything rests on the tip of intention. Teaching  is, after all, an intentional activity. If a teacher intends to push as much mate rial across during her lessons, she will do that. If a teacher intends, on the  other hand, to spend more time alongside her students rather than stand and  talk, she will find ways to do so.  If any teacher still doubts the need to create a sense of urgency to change  her teaching, perhaps this anecdote will convince: Harold was sitting in the reception room at the doctors office waiting for a ride  home when he happened to watch a local-access television program featuring a  school superintendent and three high school students. For nearly a half-hour, the superintendent and students exchanged laudatory  comments about the qualities of their high school. The students made com ments, as the superintendent nodded, including, Our campus is better than  some colleges; We have the most professional TV studio of any school; Our  school is better equipped than many universities. Harold thought the program  may have been scripted. Then, without warning a girl said, Given that we have ninety-minute class  blocks, I wish we did not have to take notes for the entire time. The superintendent did not blink.
Chapter 22 The DNA of teaching-as-talking, which requires students to take notes,  still resides deep in schools. This is the way it iswhat Michael Schmoker  calls the brutal facts.3 Harold wonders if this practice will ever change.  He became a school consultant primarily to encourage teachers to let go of  this practice. However, he knows he cannot make them change. Throughout  his career, forcing teachers to changehimself includeddid not work.  Instead, he intends to invite teachers to want to change, to want to explore  new ways to teach, new ways to engage students, new ways to be alive in the  classroomto achieve their dreams.  As the Taoists profess, a journey of a thousand miles begins with the first  step. Taking that step requires courage, commitmentand support. REFLECTION Dan Hilliard is embarrassed that his profession has been lax in enforcing  standards. However, he is tired of the rhetoric that compares the medical  profession to teaching. He wishes that the current tenure systemthree years,  and you gain a contract for lifewas a thing of the past. He prefers stricter  recertification standards, not simply taking random courses for credit or put ting in recertification hours. Students deserve more than that. He has decided to pursue National Board Certification from the National  Board for Professional Teaching Standards NBPTS.4 The work will be hard,  but will provide him with knowledge and understanding of the latest and best  practices. He wants to be challenged. Dan is concerned that some of his colleagues settle for less. He feels for  students who get stuck with teachers who use old lecture notes, who work  strictly by contract and by the clock, and who take little interest in the per sonal lives of students. Until higher standards for all teachers become man datoryas they are for other professionssuch teachers continue to receive  renewed contracts. Dan is particularly upset with those who are on the verge  of retirement and count the daysand act that way. POINTS TO PURSUE View Randy Pauschs Last Lecture Take time to watch Randy Pauschs YouTube video, The Last Lecture,  and read his book, The Last Lecture. His freshness, vigor, and sense of  humor offer wisdom that reminds teachers how they can be with students and  their families. His message is provocative, encouraging, and uplifting.  Once youve seen the video, try out the only-six-months-left-to-teach  approach, as Harold Dennison did in this chapter. See what happens.

Achieve Our Dreams 177 Pay Attention to Your Intentions Harold Dennison is a reflective teacher. He knows that he sets the tone of his  students learning. He knows, too, that he is flawed. He has had to pick up  the pieces often in his teaching years. He understands that his intentions are  his guide for what he wants to achieve, what he wants his students to achieve.  Have you considered the power of intentions as expressed by the Dalai  Lama? Are you aware of your intentions, every day, and in every lesson?  Choose one area of your teaching youd like to change the most: set your  intention; then reflect on your transition. Invite a colleague to observe and  support you. Pay close attention to your students reactions. How Can You Discover the Elephant in the Room? While waiting in the reception room at his doctors office watching a local  TV program proselytizing the glories of a suburban school, Harold had an  epiphany. He wondered how much his own school shielded its eyes to the  realities lurking below its public face. What are our elephants in the room?  he asked himself. Are you aware of the disconnections between professed practices and  what really happens in your school? Do you sometimes say one thing to your  students when you know it isnt quite right? Do you know of the elephants in  the room in your school that need to be exposed?  Challenge Yourself to Become a Better Teacher Dan Hilliard recognizes his need to become a better teacher. Despite his suc cesses, he is certain that he should know more. His decision to seek National  Board Certification may not make any difference to his Board, but it will for him. You can become a more professional teacher by following Dan Hilliards  footsteps and applying for National Board Certification. Once in the program,  you can be assured that you will become more well-rounded and knowledge able about the teaching professionand about you as a teacher. You may be  surprised at how much more there is to learn.  NOTES 1.	 Randy Pausch, Last Lecture: Achieving Your Childhood Dreams, http:www. youtube.comwatch?vji5MqicxSoA worthwhile one hour and a half! See also  Randy Pausch and Jeffrey Zaslow, The Last Lecture New York: Hyperion, 2008. 2.	 Parker Palmer, The Courage to Teach: Exploring the Inner Landscape of a  Teachers Life San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1998, Introduction, 1. Still the most  profound book on reflecting on the meaning of teaching.
Chapter 22 3.	 Michael Schmoker, Results Now Alexandria: Association for Supervision and  Curriculum Development, 2006, Introduction: The Brutal Facts About Instruction  and Supervision, 110. 4.	 See National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, http:www.nbpts.org.
The first boy said, I bring you gold.And the second boy said, I bring you  myrrh. And the third boy said, Frank sent this. Teaching to the test has bothered Harold Dennison since the early days of No  Child Left Behind. Those tests do not focus on students as students but on stu dents as receptacles. Because so many of his former colleagues spend weeks  on drill and kill, as he likes to refer to it, they lose valuable teaching time.  However, in schools that do not emphasize test prep, students can do well.1  His favorite critique of present educational practices is the now famous  TED Talk, Ken Robinson: How schools kill creativity.2 Robinson reveals  the fundamental flaw in teaching in todays pressurized, overextended, and  misdirected classrooms. Teaching to the test means to fly through facts without  regard to meaning. Children absorb fragmented knowledge that prevents them  from finding significance in the world, let alone in themselves. Robinsons  anecdote sums it up: The first boy said, I bring you gold. And the second  boy said, I bring you myrrh. And the third boy said, Frank sent this. Harold also likes a more recent Ken Robinson TED talk, How to escape  from educations death valley.3 In his inimitable style, Robinson takes the  emperor-is-wearing-no-clothes approach to the current state of education.  He makes clear that its narrowness focuses on tests that measure clericallevel thinking. Schools as they are structured are antithetical to human beings.  Teachers are put in an untenable position of having to cater to narrow-focus  tests that measure anything but what it is to be human.  Robinsons conclusion matches Harolds belief that devolving the respon sibility for schools on teachers and principals is essential. Enough of the  hierarchy.4 Robinson cites the metaphor of Death Valleywhere nothing  growswhen the Valley received seven inches of rain in 2007. The next  spring, flowers appeared.  Chapter 23 Become Stakeholders
Chapter 23 Schools are like that, seeds of possibility waiting to be nurtured. Take  power away from federal and state authorities and give it to teachers and prin cipals. Finland does it. Its schools have a broad curriculum, no standardized  tests, andRobinson emphasizesno dropouts. Harold invites his workshop  participants to see both of Robinsons TED talks.  Given the state of schools, Harold is surprised that many students still  do schoolwork, let alone homework. The ubiquitous presence of text  messaging, tweeting, Instagram, video games, iPods, cell phones, televi sion, and the Internet hold far greater appeal. On-screen interactions with  peersoften when home aloneprevail over face-to-face time and keep  students away from homework. Sometimes Harold imagines them using  their devices as pebbles skipping over water. They move quickly but not  deeply. They make innumerable contacts but do not linger. They connect  but do not embrace. They travel fast but do not saunterand do not know  how. Harold sees more and more people spending inordinate amounts of time  with them. As a result, they spend less time dwelling inside their minds. How  much time would a person who averages thirty-five thousand text messages  per monthoutside her jobhave for reflection?5 Will the relentless attrac tion of social media lure people to become conduits of information rather than  initiators of thinking? Children arrive in kindergarten as mobile kids with exploring thumbs,  natives to the electronic devices they gleefully touch. They step through  the classroom door eager to explore, but their teachers say, No, not yet.  Waiting curbs their curiosity. By third grade, theyre less curious, less inter ested, less connected. They ask fewer questions. Teachers postpone explora tion in the name of coverage, of impending state and federal assessments, of  preparing for the next year. They are teaching very different children who  process the world in new ways, appear impatient and inattentive, and seem  more urbane, yet less mature. At a summer faculty workshop, Drew Gibson, a history teacher in Massa chusetts,6 shared his wish to have students become shareholders in his class room. His argument focused on the importance of teachers in encouraging  students to take ownership in their learning. We dont want them to act as  cognitive slaves, who only do the minimum to reach their goals. Citing his  understanding of the slave South, Gibson related his unmotivated students to  slaves, who act passively in part because they have no stake in the work they  are forced to do. As the discussion progressed, others agreed that students who only do  the minimum care less about their future. They also agreed that they have  a responsibility to motivate and create ways to evoke effort. Students who 

Become Stakeholders 181 become stakeholders take ownership in what they do and focus their atten tion. Teachers who become stakeholders take ownership in what they teach.  They make their classrooms exciting. Increasingly, Harold hears teachers concerns about the influence of  Google. Many feel it is fast replacing students memories. They hear students  say, Why should I remember information when I can Google whatever  I need to know? Nicholas Carr wonders if Google will become our collec tive human brain.7 Harold hints at this conundrum. He innocently asks participants, What  is the capital of Iowa? He pauses and then says, Google! His point is  that students know they dont need to memorize states and capitals. Why  have such information in my head when I can find it instantly? But, Harold  cautions his teachers to be sure they convince students always to determine  the validity of information on the Internet and evaluate its applicabilityan  essential tool for all Internet users. Still, a larger question remains: What do people need to learn, to memorize  in the twenty-first century? The multiplication tables? Regions of the world?  Literary terms? The causes of the Civil War? Now that we live in a culture in  which Google surrounds us in ever-expanding ways, teachers need to address  what students do need to know. They need to ask the following:  What do students need to know, understand, and be able to do? What competencies must they have so they can face a changing future? What values should we nurture for them, for our communities, and for the  global world? How can studentsand we as teachersbecome stakeholders in our  learning? Focusing on standardized tests misses the point. Harold likes Susan  Engels practical thinking. She writes, Why not test the things we value, and  test them in a way that provides us with an accurate picture of what children  really do, not what they can do under the most constrained circumstances  after the most constrained test preparation? Harold appreciates Engels variable approach for testing childrens seven  abilities and dispositions: Reading, Inquiry, Flexible Thinking and the Use  of Evidence, Conversation, Collaborations, Engagement, and Well-being.  One key feature of the system, I am suggesting,Engel writes, is that it  depends, like good research, on representative samples rather than on testing  every child every year. Harold particularly likes her caveat, Wed use less  data, to better effect, and free up the hours, days, and weeks now spent on  standardized test prep and the tests themselves, time that could be spent on  real teaching and learning.8
Chapter 23 Staying focused on what matters to childrens actual learning makes more  sense than testing to determine how well they can do on tests. Harold plans to  share Engels comments with his consultant colleaguesand with his former  principal. He wants to open the conversation about outside assessments.  Previously, he has been opposed to any testing. Engels ideas are far from  passing out No. 2 pencils and filling in bubbles. He now agrees with her that  the right testing can measure the things we most value, and find good ways  to do that.9 Harold has been a fierce critic of No Child Left behind, and he does not sup port Obamas Race to the Top either. However, he has recently reconsidered  his thinking about the Common Core State Standards CCSS Initiative. He  now thinks that the Common Core supports teacher efforts to teach more  rigorously. But, teachers must be trusted to be major decision-makers in  implementing the Common Core. Every student deserves to be challenged.  Every student deserves to have skills that prepare him to teach himself. And  every student deserves to have knowledge he can apply to gain further knowl edge. Teachers can facilitate these objectives. The world is fast knitting together, its peoples all needing excellent educa tion. The Common Core may be the United States best hope. However, as  with all reforms, the results will be what actually happens in classrooms. Its  standards are reasonable and make sense. Good teachers are already teach ing to them. The Core sharpens instructional targets to enable teachers to  develop proficiency scales with explicit sets of goals. They also help align  assessments and curriculum to support knowledge development and higherorder thinking. As to its testing programsSmarter Balance Assessment Consortium and  The Partnership of Readiness for College and Careers PARCCthe jury  is out as to whether they will be more revealing. Students will take them on  computers and receive results immediately. They will have to answer more  sophisticated questions including having to synthesize information, reason  mathematically, integrate multiple sources, write coherent explanations, and  make reasoned arguments. Harold hopes that multiple-choice questions will  not play a major role. Yet, he is suspicious of Pearson Educations increasing  control of the testing process from curriculum to the tests themselves.10 Test prep by itself has little or no impact on test scores. In his workshops,  Harold sites Judith Langers important work that contrast, Beat the Odds  BTO schools with Typically Performing TP schools.11 In TP schools,  students typically work alone or in groups or with the teacher. They focus on  particular tasks without substantive discussion from multiple perspectives.  No dialogue. No opportunities to challenge one another.  In BTO schools, the learning environment is radically different. The distin guishing features of instruction in BTO schools are the following:

Become Stakeholders 183 1.	 skills and knowledge are taught in multiple types of lessons; 2.	 tests are deconstructed to inform curriculum and instruction; 3.	 within curriculum and instruction, connections are made across content  and structure to ensure coherence; 4.	 strategies for thinking and doing are emphasized; 5.	 generative learning is encouraged; and 6.	 classrooms are organized to foster collaboration and shared cognition.12 BTO teachers have a vision, in Langers words, of what counts as know ing, and they recognize the importance that all students can learnand  teachers can make a difference.13 To enact all six features, teachers have to  reassess their pedagogies. Simply using sit and get will not suffice. If a  teacher wants to beat the odds, she needs to find multiple ways to engage  and excite her students thinking and learning.  Harold includes Langers story of a BTO teacher who asks her students to  fight to teach me. This teacher wants them to disagree with her and each  other and extend her and their thinking. They practice this every day in  discussions. Is there a better way to open dialogue in the classroom? Harold  asks his participants. And the clincher for BTO teaching, he underscores, the  true test of teaching the Common Core comes when the test arrives unan nounced, students take it, and they do fine. No prep. No warning. Although the Common Core focuses on Math and Language Arts, Harold  agrees with Stephen Wineburg of Stanford that the Social Studies curriculum  is an important component in teaching nonfiction. Teaching from that 1,000page behemoth known as a history textbook . . . prepares students to meet the  challenges of the world that no longer exists.14  Wineburg argues that historical nonfiction offers a rich variety of docu ments including letters, diaries, secret communiqus, public speeches, among  others. Nonfiction also offers opportunities for close reading. History  demands that we think about the meaning of words not to us 150 years later,  but to the people who actually uttered them.15 In response to the Internets  fluidity with truth, Wineburg states, Today, when information bombards  young people from all sides, the question is not where to find it, but once  found, whether it should be believed.16  However, as with all reforms, what counts is what transpires in class rooms. When Common Core teacher trainers mimic the old sit and get  professional development, teachers will do what theyve always done. When,  on the other hand, trainers demonstrate interactive strategies that model the  65 percent student-led35 percent teacher-led classroom, teachers see the  value of this approach and have opportunities to practice. You become what  you practice, Harold reiterates. 
Chapter 23 Teachers have a responsibility to preserve eternal human values that have  developed over the past ten thousand years. They need to instill the unique  human treasure of face-to-face contact. Otherwise, technological wizardry  will supplant it and people will, ironically, become separated from one  another. Students who walk home from school with classmates while on cell  phones or texting are already living alone. When they arrive home, they find  the key, unlock the door, and lock the door behind them. They sit alone with  their media devices to befriend. Friends without breath, without touch, with out a wet glint in their eyes. However, Harold advocates that teachers make an effort to incorporate the  changing world of technology. Given the power of smartphones and tablets,  he visualizes teachers using them at sophisticated levels. By inviting stu dents to pursue meaningful questions and discussing their thoughts with one  another, teachers will slow their tendency to behave as skipping stones acting  only as conduits on these devices.  At the same time that teachers acknowledge the capital of Iowa is Google,  they also establish the crucial importance of learning the arguments in the  Federalist Papers, analyzing Orwells metaphors in Animal Farm, interpret ing the implications of Catherine the Greats Potemkin Villages, considering  the impact of sunspots on climate change, and learning processes that aid  thinking, such as the multiplication tables. And, perhaps more important, teach the joys of rigor, ambiguity, and  wondering. REFLECTION Dan Hilliard sees his students absorbed by the glitz of electronic devices.  Some even attempt to text during his classes. He has been hesitant to take  away cell phones, as he does not want to be known as a dinosaur; he does,  however, ask them to turn them off. After all, he has an iPhoneand has  used it occasionally in class to call a friend for an opinion during a discus sion, or to access Google to clarify a fact. Once, he asked his students to take  out their cell phones to contact friends for their opinion on a controversial  issue. They loved itand it activated discussion. He plans to do more with  phones. Yet, Dan continues to stress literacy: reading with pen in hand, writing  and rewriting, and encouraging rigorous discussions. He takes seriously  providing skills instruction in his well-organized classroom. He and Angela  Bernardi integrate curriculum with the tests in mind but spend only a few  lessons on the structure of the tests themselves. They believe that extensive  test prep is a misnomer.

Become Stakeholders 185 Dan keeps in touch with digital potentials. When he learned about Teacher Tube videos, Did You Know? 2.0 and later Did You Know? 3.0 updated  aka Shift Happens, he asks his principal, Margaret Fellows, if he could  introduce these videos at a faculty meeting.17  Dan is convinced that everyone should be aware of the information pre sented in these videos, as they open faculty to resources including YouTube,  TeacherTube, iTunes U, TED.com, and Bigthink.com. Dans own distaste for  textbooks has led him to these sources as a means for keeping his materials  up-to-date and being appealing to his students. Dan is convinced if all teachers watch one TED Talk every week or two,  they will discover ways to enhance their teaching. He suggests they begin  with his favorites, Ken Robinson Says Schools Kill Creativity and How  to Escape from Educations Death Valley. If Margaret agrees, he could also  show them at a faculty meeting.  POINTS TO PURSUE How Do You Respond to Children Who Constantly Skip Like  Pebbles on Their Phones? What do you notice that is different about your students from, say, five  years ago? Ten years ago? Do you see todays children as pebbles skipping  over water? Are they less involvedor appear to be less involved in your  classroom? Can you find alternative ways to engage students? Are you able to convince  them to dig deeper into what you teach? Do they resist? Do you understand  how your students learn best?  What Can You Do to Enhance Student Curiosity  and Commitment to Learning? Why is it the longer kids are in school, the less curious they seem? A school  administrator asked this question in Tony Wagners The Global Achieve ment Gap.18 What might you be doing to contribute to decreasing curiosity  in school? What can you do to recapture it, nurture it, and celebrate it? What  are the consequences if you dont? Harold Dennison has been a critic of standardized testing since No Child  Left Behind. He continues to wrestle with this issue. Is it possible that the  emphasis on testing has narrowed the potential for education to be excit ing? Is it possible that testing has disassembled the notion of teaching to the  individual student, as these tests look for the same attributes in everyone?  Interesting questions.
Chapter 23 How Do You Respond to the Concept of Stakeholders? Harold was fascinated with Drew Gibsons metaphor of seeing children and  teachers as stakeholders in their learning. He saw it as an effective way to  determine whether or not students are engaged. He found the counterimage of  cognitive slaveswho only do the minimum to get byan equally compel ling image. How does Gibsons metaphor apply to your classroom? Do your students  see themselves as stakeholders in what happens? Or are they closer to cogni tive slaves who do your bidding? Do you feel you are a stakeholder in what  transpires in your classroom? As a principal, do you see yourself as a stake holder in your school?  How Do You Respond to the Impact of Google? Google has become central in Harolds life, first as a teacher in his later years  and now as a consultant. Sometimes, he wonders what life would be without  it. At the same time, hes suspicious of its encroachment. He wonders how to  approach this problem. How has Google evolved in your teaching? In your life? Have you recon ciled the impact of Google? Do you know what your children need to know,  understand, and be able to dobeyond Google? How Will You Take Advantage of the Common Core? The work of Judith Langer cited in this chapter opens the door to richer peda gogies. She makes clear the central importance of the teacher. Her distinction  between BTO versus TP teachers deserves close scrutiny. Can you commit to implement the depth of teaching required to raise the  level of your students knowledge and thinking? How can you use Common  Core principles to make that happen? How will you engage with colleagues  to make your teaching better for your studentsand for all students in your  school?  How Can You Connect with Todays Digital  Natives or Mobile Kids? The influx of digital technologies has caused new thinking about todays cul ture. Do you see adults as digital immigrants and not as digital natives,  as Marc Prensky writes?19 Or do you prefer depicting adults as refugees and  not like mobile kids, as Neil Swidey writes?20 

Become Stakeholders 187 Whether you choose one or the other or neither, how can you reconcile  students fluency and ease with these technologies with what you intend to  teach? This is a fundamental question.  NOTES 1.	 Students at the University Park Campus School in Worcester, Massachusetts,  scored well on state tests from the beginning without test-prep sessions. Instead, its  teachers emphasized strong academic classes with plenty of time for writing and  rewriting. A classic example of this on film is Marva Collins Way 1981 where all  her students scored well above the norm. 2.	 Ken Robinson: How schools kill creativity, TED2006, February 2006, http: www.ted.comtalkskenrobinsonsaysschoolskillcreativity.html. At the time of writ ing this book, more than thirty-three million people have viewed this remarkable talk.  3.	 Sir Ken Robinson, How To Escape From Educations Death Valley  at http:www.ted.comtalkskenrobinsonhowtoescapeeducationsdeath valley?languageen. 4.	 For an extensive argument for devolving responsibility for schools to teachers  and principals, see part V, Build Trust and Respect, in Frank Thoms, Teaching That  Matters: Engaging Minds, Improving Schools Lanham, MD: Rowman  Littlefield,  2015.  5.	 Justine Ezarik, a Web designer and video blogger in Pittsburgh, interview:  iPhone: A Compact Device With a Very Bulky Bill, All Things Considered, NPR,  August 16, 2007. 6.	 Drew taught history at Berkshire Arts and Technology Public Charter School  and is currently at Mt. Greylock Regional High School. 7.	 Nicholas Carr, Is Google Making Us Stupid? The Atlantic, JulyAugust,  2008. 8.	 Susan Engel, End of the Rainbow: How Educating for Happiness not Money  Would Transform Our Schools New York: The New Press, 2015.  9.	 Ibid. 10.	 Google Last Week Tonight with John Oliver: Standardized Testing HBO,  May 3, 2015 for a scathing report. Its ironic that a comedy show articulates this issue  as wellor betterthan anyone.  11.	 J. A. Langer, Beating the odds: Teaching middle and high school students to  read and write well, American Educational Research Journal, vol. 38, no. 4, 2001,  83780. Source used here from http:www.albany.educelareportslangerlanger beating12014.pdf. 12.	 Ibid., 45. 13.	 Ibid. 14.	 Commentary: Using History to Invigorate Common-Core Lessons by Sam  Wineburg, Education Week, Online, December 10, 2013. See also Steering Clear of 
Chapter 23 the Textbook by Sam Wineburg in Education Week, December 11, 2013 Vol. 33,  14, pp. 30, 36, www.edweek.org excerpted in Marshal Memo 515, December 16,  2013, 13. 15.	 Ibid.  16.	 Ibid. 17.	 See the videos, Did You Know? 2.0, http:www.teachertube.com viewVideo.php?videoid3051titleDidYouKnow20; and Did You Know?  3.0, http:www.teachertube.comviewVideo.php?videoid115106titleDid youknowversion30. 18.	 Tony Wagner, The Global Achievement Gap, 41. 19.	 Marc Prensky, Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants. 20.	 Neil Swidey, Why an iPhone could actually be good for your 3-year old,  Boston Globe, November 1, 2009, http:www.boston.combostonglobemagazine articles20091101whyaniphonecouldactuallybegoodforyour3yearold.
Pathways. It is all about pathways. On the first day of school, teachers feel the pull of the last day whether they  attend to it or not.1 Every year they begin in AugustSeptember and end in  June. They compose their teaching inside beginnings and endings. Plans  sometimes work out as expected but other times not. Schools exist inside blocks of time and have their own rhythms. Teachers  have kids for a year. Schools schedule holidays and vacations; semesters,  terms, marking periods; lessons, units of study, courses; concerts, musicals,  plays; and sports seasons. Teachersand studentswelcome the New Year  as a chance to begin anew; beginning teachers find solace in this second  chance, as do their students.  Teachers think in weeks, as well. Many choose Thursdays as review days  for Friday tests. Wednesday for some is hump day. Mondays and Fridays,  too, have their own karma, their own energy. Fridays come too slowly and  Mondays come too quickly for some. Others look forward to Mondays and  squeeze as much as possible out of the last hour on Friday. The first day of school: a clean slate, a fresh start, a new beginningand a  level playing field. Only for that day. Nothing quite like it!  Inside these beginnings and endings, teachers keep pace even as glitches and  surprises upset their rhythm. New teachers wonder why no one prepared them  for unexpected hits. It didnt seem as confusing when they were in school.  Student teaching, they quickly discover, only touches the surface of real  school. Its impossible to replicate being alone in a classroom. How can teachers better prepare to meet the perplexities of daily school  life? How can they set priorities and not lose sight of what matters, what  Chapter 24 Begin at the End
Chapter 24 they want students to know and care about? Some teachers weather storms  well, keep their composure no matter the stress. Others struggle. There are  no magic bullets to manage the chaos, no formulas to make classrooms calm  and productive. Each teacher must find her own means, her own anchors to  stabilize her ship. A teacher drops anchor when she builds her teaching toward known out comes. She defines the roads intended, yet she discovers new and better roads  along the way. In the words of Robert Frost, she might even claim at some  later date that she took the one less traveled by and believe it has made all  the difference. But, she wont know until she commits. Many roads lead to  Rome; each teacher finds her own.

Pathways. It is all about pathways. So began Harold Dennisons letter to his  students and their parents on the first day in his last year of teaching. He often  designed pathways for the year ahead, particularly for his open-education  classroom. This letter, however, was his best effort in a long time. It not only  provided students and parents with his intentions for the year but also gave  him a clear sense.  The success of Pathways led him to develop a portfolio assignment for a  course he teaches as a consultant on backward design. He wants his partici pants to write an end-of-the-year reflection of what they want their students  to learn, understand, and be able to do. To set the proper tone, he invites them  to imagine standing at the door of their classroom on the last day of school: Its the last day of school. You are standing at your door. Your children are  leaving. They will no longer be yours. You ask yourself: Who are they now? What have they become? What have  they learned? What do they understand about themselves? What is important to  them? What do they care about? What do they value? How will they relate to  the world? What differences have I made? . . . Take some time to reflect on these questions and others you might ask. Most  likely you, too, will look for personal, emotional, and intellectual qualities in  your students; hardly anyone mentions tests or grades.  Harold pauses to give them time to ponder his proposal and ask any ques tions. After some conversation, he proceeds: You teach because you believe you can make a difference. You know what  you want for your students. Regardless of the demands for testing and account ability, you understand in your heart of hearts your deeper obligations and  responsibilities.

Begin at the End 191 You articulate what you want your students to learn, understand, and be able  to doevery class, every day throughout the year. You design instruction that  reaches out to all learners. You provide means to assess what they learn. You  do not always succeed, but you try. In writing this end-of-the-year reflection, you give yourself a benchmark.  Your lessons and units will be framed as part of a whole. They will aim for  overarching understandings, significant knowledge and skills, and essential  questions that drive your students thinking. Every day, you will give them  opportunities to connect and make sense of what you are asking.  A teacher who gives his students the final exam on the first day of school  understands this.  After sharing his standing-at-the-door-at-the-end-of-the-year idea, Harold  repeats, A teacher who gives students the final exam on the first day of  school understands this. He invites participants to examine Dan Bisaccios  Biology Final, which is in their packet Figure 24.1.2  Harold knows that most participants will not choose to emulate Bisaccio,  but he hopes Bisaccios idea will provoke discussion. During the conversa tion, Harold emphasizes Bisaccios clear vision of what he wants his students  to know, understand, and be able to do. He has an excellent idea of what his  students will have accomplished by the time they walk out the door on the  last day of schoolas they will have as well. Yet, participants hesitate to consider passing out their final exam on the  first day of school, because it defies conventional wisdom. Teachers and  professors have used exams for generations to determine gradesand some  think, to indicate students level of intelligence. Not to have exams defies  tradition. Harolds participants recognize, however, that the Biology Final indeed  becomes a vehicle for students to become biologistsnot for getting As  on the exam. In September, when Bisaccio has them define biology in their  own words, they write a paragraph or two. In May, they compose thoughtful  essays. His biologists improve in class, as athletes improve at practices.  Bisaccio visualizes his students leaving his lab on the last day as biologists,  not for what they remembered or could recall on tests. Harold hopes the discussion will provoke teachers to rethink their approach  to tests and examsperhaps reassess their rationale for teaching. Harold takes time in his workshop to stress the importance of UbD planning,  which is based on the work of Grant Wiggins and Jay McTighe.3 Usually  some participants already know about this approach. Others recognize that  they instinctively use some backward-design principles. UbDs principles  and practices are comprehensive and accessible, albeit sometimes complex.  UbD hits a sweet spot in teaching. Teachers see not only the whole but also 
Chapter 24 Figure 24.1 Biology Final. From Dan Bisaccios Biology Final, in Robert Fried, The  Passionate Teacher, 23233. how the parts fit together. They sense alignment and coherence from day to  day. They see themselves moving in harmony alongside students. Something else happens. Backward design thinking invokes the spirit.  Teachers when fully immersed not only become engaged but emotionally  committed. Unlike developing traditional curriculum units, UbD insists on  engagement, not compliance. Teachers seek to collaborate with one another.  Classrooms literally come alive. They let students in on the process; they 

Begin at the End 193 explain where they are headed, how they will be assessed, and what they will  do along the way. Some teachers ask students to join in the design process  itself, for example, creating projects and scoring rubrics.  Once participants grasp the principles of UbD, Harold clarifies how they  can approach their end-of-the-year reflection for their portfolios: Visualize the end-in-view you are aiming for? See the big picture you want for  your students? Articulate the overall purpose of your teaching in this context the purpose that all your units and lessons will point toward? What is your ulti mate backwards design? Trust that after completing this reflection, you will be  better able to design coherent units and lessons. Successful changeas I hope  I have made clear by nowafter all, begins at the end.  Remember, you are in the business of change. Your students change before  our eyes. Your lessons change, too, often minutes after beginning. You know  that once a lesson comes in contact with students, who knows where it might  go? Plan to design learning towards worthwhile and productive goals. Having  a vision of the whole is a gift to your studentsand to you. Together you will  have better opportunities to stay on track towards worthwhile learning. Write well. I look forward to reading what you have to say.4 Harold concludes his workshop by sharing the now-classic essay found on  the Internet, Big Rocks. The story speaks for itself. An expert is speaking to a group of business students, and to drive home a point,  he uses an illustration those students will never forget. As he stands in front of the group of high-powered overachievers, he says,  Okay, time for a quiz. He pulls out a one-gallon, wide-mouthed mason jar and  sets it on a table in front of him. Then he produces about a dozen fist-sized rocks  and carefully places them, one at a time, into the jar. When the jar is filled to the  top and no more rocks fit inside, he asks, Is this jar full? Everyone in the class says, Yes. Then he says, Really? He reaches under the table and pulls out a bucket of  gravel. He dumps some gravel in and shakes the jar causing pieces of gravel to  work themselves down into the spaces between the big rocks. Then he asks the  group once more, Is the jar full? By this time, the class is onto him. Probably not, one of them answers. Good! he replies. He reaches under the table and brings out a bucket of  sand. He starts dumping the sand in. It falls into all the spaces left between the  rocks and the gravel. Once more, he asks the question, Is this jar full? No! the class shouts. Once again, he says, Good! Then he grabs a pitcher of water and begins  to pour it in until the jar is filled to the brim. Then he looks up at the class and  asks, What is the point of this illustration? One eager beaver raises his hand and says, The point is, no matter how full your  schedule is, if you try really hard, you can always fit some more things into it! No, the speaker replies, thats not the point. The truth this illustration  teaches us is: If you dont put the big rocks in first, youll never get them in at all.
Chapter 24 What are the big rocks in your life? A project you want to accomplish? Time  with your loved ones? Your faith? Your education? Your finances? A cause?  Teaching or mentoring others? Remember to put these big rocks in first or youll  never get them in at all. So, when reflecting on this story, ask yourself this question: What are the big  rocks in my life or in my teaching? Then, put those in your jar first.5 As the Mad Hatter said, If you dont know where you are going, any  road will take you there. Given the short time teachers have with students,  they need to know the road they will take together for every course, unit,  and lesson. Whether or not they find a less-traveled road, they can have the  confidence that they will make a difference. REFLECTION When Dan Hilliard reads about Dan Bisaccios Biology Final, he has an  epiphany. What a difference, having a final exam as an indicator of the  quality and depth of thinking, rather than as a scorecard of what students  remember! I can take this idea and merge my teaching with the intended  outcomes for my students. I will invite my students into the circle of my intentions. We will explore the  ever-growing and changing knowledge, understandings, and skills for the twentyfirst century. We will be learning together. I will see them maturing throughout  the year. They will leave my classroom better able to teach themselves. He couldnt wait to tell his colleagues about Bisaccios Final. He sends  an email to them, with it attached. Obviously, it will raise many questions. He  wonders about the applicability of Bisaccios final-exam concept for teachers  who do not give exams. He suspects, however, that sharing it will stir every one to thinkand perhaps clarify their direction and purpose. POINTS TO PURSUE What Are the Rhythms of Your School Life? Dan Hilliard took advantage of his understanding of Bisaccios Biology  Final. He began to consider other aspects of his teaching, hoping to better  integrate his lessons with his intended outcomes. He did not want to become  stuck in outmoded patterns.  In your classroom, do you do the same thing every day, every year? Are  your rhythms based primarily on your needs? Or, do you consciously create  new rhythms to spur curiosity and inquisitiveness? Take a rhythm inven tory to find out.

Begin at the End 195 Should your school reconsider its rhythm? Would doing so upset the  community? Imagining Standing by Your Door at the End of the Year Have you ever dropped anchor by writing an end-of-the-year reflection?  Take some timeeven in the middle of the yearto imagine standing at your  door on the last day of school. Imagine your students passing by and taking  you with them. What do they leave with? What differences have you made?  This process is well worth your time. You could offer your students an opportunity to write a reflection of how  they see themselves in your classroom at the end of a month or a marking  period. It might help them focus. An interesting idea.  Consider Giving Your Final Exam on the First Day of School Despite the predicted resistance, Harold Dennison values his introduction of  Bisaccios Final to participants in his workshops. For one, it opens minds to not  only a radically different perception of exams but also to the purpose of teaching. How do you react to Dan Bisaccios giving his students their final exam on  the first day of school? How might youat any grade level, in any position implement Bisaccios thinking to deepen your teaching? Explore his idea  with colleagues to elicit their reactions. Who knows where the conversation  might lead. Consider the Impact of Big Rocks for  Your Classroom, for Your School Share Big Rocks with colleagues. It is such a simple, yet profound, story.  Better yet, share it with your students and allow time for thoughtful consid eration. Given that their lives are filled with distractions, finding their Big  Rocks might help them sort out their primary concerns.  Write your own Big Rocks story in which you set your priorities.  NOTES 1.	 This idea of being pulled comes from Rumi, The Universe Is for Satisfy ing Needs, in The Rumi Collection, ed. Kabir Helminski Boston, MA: Shambhala,  1998, 66. 2.	 Robert Fried, The Passionate Teacher: A Practical Guide Boston, MA: Beacon  Press, 1995, 23233.
Chapter 24 3.	 Grant Wiggins and Jay McTighe, Understanding by Design Alexandria, VA:  ASCD, 1998. 4.	 For more information, see Jay McTighes annotated list of free resources that  support curriculum unit planning using the UbD framework at www.jaymctighe.com  click on Resources at the top and then the websites icon. 5.	 Adapted from a story by an unknown author on the Internet. Thanks to Jennifer  Antonucci who found it.
CODA Make a Difference The real gift was one I never imagined. We teach to make a difference, as our teachers did for us. We have stories  of students who write or call to thank us. But, we demur from taking credit,  because we are modest. Taking credit, perhaps, opens us for taking blame as  well. We act on behalf of our students. We encourage them at every opportunity  and discourage them only when necessary. We see their potential, not just  their limitations. We offer opportunities rather than close doors. And, we  treat them as individuals, never the same as anyone else. We do not, however,  orchestrate to make a difference. We do not often hear from former students, particularly when we teach in  grades below high school. When we do we are often surprisedand certainly  honored. Warm comments from parents and the occasional letter from a stu dent remind us of the differences we made. One instance in my later years stands out, not only because it warmed my  heart, but also because it taught me that I was not in charge of the outcome.  I wrote this story in response to an appeal for Christmas stories from National  Public Radio NPR several years ago. The real gift came many years later. It began with my wish to give a winter coat to a newspaper girl. It was late  November 1992 when the cold hit hard in Worcester, Massachusetts. Each  Sunday on the way to church, my wife and I would pass through the intersection  of Park and Highland Streets, where she helped her father sell the Telegram  
CODA Gazette. A small, dark-haired girl, about ten, she was with him every Sunday.  Occasionally, I would buy a paper. As the weather intensified, I noticed she only had a thin fall jacket. When the  first blizzard came, she still wore the same jacket. I decided, then, to find her a  warmer coat. I did not have the money to buy a new one, so I invited my eighth  graders to help me. While I am not clear as to why I asked them, it must have  been the right idea. One of my students, Katy, arrived the next day with a lilac  down parkain the perfect size. I placed the coat in a colorful bag with an unsigned card. As I drove to  church, I was nervous about whether I was doing the right thing. At school, we  had asked students to bring Christmas gifts to be distributed by Social Services.  My students and I bought gifts at a local mall and wrapped them for a little boy.  Now, I was having second thoughts about giving the girl the coat myself.  I prayed for the light to turn red at the intersection. It did. I jumped out of  the car, ran up to her, handed her the bag, said Merry Christmas to her and  her father, and jumped back into the car. When I told the story an hour later, I  could not hold back tears. Giving her the coat had been an obsession. That she chose not to wear it for  the rest of the winter Sundays, however, became a mystery. I struggled to accept  that my gift of the coat, as all gifts, needed to be unconditional. Eight years later and a couple of weeks before Christmas, I held my final class  teaching a group of beginning teachers that I had been working with since Sep tember. As part of our closing, I gave them stationery and envelopes on which  to write a thank-you letter to someone who made a difference to their becoming  a teacher, someone whom they had not yet thanked. When I returned home that evening, I found a letter from Katy, the student  who had given me the coat. Needless to say, I was deeply touched not only  because she had taken the time to write but also by her gratitude.  After expressing thanks for helping her survive eighth grade, she wrote, At  one point when you were my advisor, you encouraged me to donate a coat to  a young girl you saw out in the cold each Sunday selling newspapers. I cannot  even begin to tell you how much this changed my life. Years later when I was  deciding what to become in my life, I thought back to that time and realized my  calling to become a nurse. The real gift was one I never imagined. I had been obsessed with giving a coat to a freezing newspaper girl.  Instead, the real gift belonged to Katy, whose action, unbeknownst to her at  the time, changed her life. As the Bhagavad Gita says, we should not become  attached to the results of our actions. Such understanding frees us to do what  we need to do and move on. It reminds us that teaching is not about us, but  about our students.

CODA 199 In essence, we simply dont know when and how we make a difference.  We can, however, make it our intention to have an exciting classroom. We do  not need to talk at our students, insist on having them take notes, and hiss at  them to be quiet. When we see them as learners, we concentrate on connect ing. If were lucky, we see their light and let it shine. We are confident that  we are creating possibilities for joyhopefully theirs and certainly ours. REFLECTION As we seek to know ourselves, we acknowledge we make a difference.  We recognize, more often than not, that we will never know when or how.  We can never underestimate the impact we have on others. Ironically, we  cannot make this our focus. Rather, we teach well each dayand trust  that we do. We may sense the differences we makeor think we may be  makingbut we do not seek to make them.
Perhaps, in the end, I write to make the invisible visible to my readersand to  myself. I awoke at four oclock in the morning and scribbled on a Post-it Note: The  time of inaction merges into action to discover the hidden expectations of  the reader. A couple of days later, I found the Post-it Note. What does this  mean? I asked myself. What was I thinking? I didnt have a clue. I could  only begin to speculate. I felt, however, it had to do with writing this book. Perhaps it was about identifying with my future readers. As I write, I often  pause to contemplate as I search to anticipate readers internal needs, wishes,  and purposes. Ironically, this is about tapping into their deepest desires, an  urge not yet articulated in my mind. Writing without readers, after all, is  like playing catch with oneself. The poet writes alone in an attic but her  poem becomes alive when read. The artist paints by herself but the painting  emerges in the viewer. Is it not the same for the writer? I sit nearly every day placing my index fingers on my keyboard and write  primarily to educators. I explore ideas and peruse the imaginableand  sometimes the unimaginable. I am speaking to my readers as I write, but all  along I am waiting for them to open the book. When they do, the book will  have arrived.  I discovered this truth when parts of my lost manuscript on teaching and  living in the Soviet Unionwhich I wrote in the late 1980sappeared on a  Kazakh blog in 2008! One September day, by chance I Googled my name and  there it wasmy insights on the ubiquitous cheating in Soviet classrooms, in  eight installments entitled, Encounters with Soviet People.  Epilogue Hidden Expectations
Epilogue A young American university professorI later discoveredhad retyped  sections that she had found to share with her Kazakh students. She hoped  to end their continuing practice of this old Soviet behavior. A piece of my  manuscript had come alive, connecting to readers awaiting its message. How  she discovered the manuscript is another story. But then I wondered, perhaps my early morning rumination on the Post-it  Note was really about me. The phrase, time of inaction merges into moments  of action, speaks to the writers process. Fingering the keyboard inside innu merable pauses, I write, so I think, to discover my readers. But perhaps I am  really discovering myself. Returning to the discovered lost manuscript, I did not invent the message  the blogger attempted to convey to her Kazakh students. Yes, I observed bla tant cheating at all levels in Soviet schools, both for tests and in prompting  one another during lessons. But my choice to write and expose this practice  did not begin with me but derived from people who taught me the value of  honestyand maybe from my distaste with my own dishonesty.  What does it mean, then, for a writer to have the urge to discover the hid den expectations of his readers? Perhaps my call to writeand its clearly  a callingcomes in part from a deep desire to tap into the awaiting minds  and hearts of my future readers. I see them waiting to make discoveries. Do  my invitations already exist in their minds but are, at this point, hidden and  untapped?  Invitations were hidden from me, too, when I began writing this book.  I write often about myself in the third person, which makes readers guess  who I am. My writing is a process of self-discovery. It is also anticipating  the self-discovery of my readers. Given that the acts of giving and receiving  are equivalent, so, then, might a similar equation exist between a writer and  his readers? In the end, I write to make the invisible visible to my readers and to me.  My purpose is to awaken, as Ive been awakened by books, teachers, stu dents, colleagues, friends, parents, childrenand by my own writing. We  arrive in this life on a mission to become one with who we already are. We  do it through our practice. Whenever we encounter a provocative book, a dif ficult child, a challenging class, or an unexpected crisis, are we not given the  opportunity to discover our own hidden expectations?  We choose our life paths as teacher, doctor, restaurateur, carpenter, writer  . . . or better yet they choose us. We enter doors of self-discovery. Maybe the  metaphor with which I awoke that morning really does cut both ways. It is  about me and about you, my future readers. 

Epilogue 203 To extend this metaphor: Could it be true that we take the time of inac tion merging into moments of action to discover the hidden expectations of  our students? Could their hidden expectations be our challenge? Are we not  responsible for teaching to these hidden expectationsat least do our best to  anticipate them? And should we not at the same time seek to discover our  own? After all, we all are heading into a changing future faster now than at  any other time in human history. Knowing ourselves anchors us as we face  the unforeseen. The time of inaction, then, is essential. We cannot carry on mindlessly.  We must pause to consider the new and unimagined. We then discover what  we know and value and integrate it with how students perceive us. We return  to inaction when what we are doing is not workingand when students tell us  its not working. Plowing on, pushing through, covering material, completing  the textbook on time, drilling for tests . . . these are the enemies of becoming  who we areand for our students becoming who they are.
To change practice from traditional habitual routines, teachers need guidelines.  By signing the Teaching Manifesto, a teacher commits to making her classroom  engaging and exciting. I sign this Manifesto as my commitment to become a better teacher: For myself:  I use invitations in my teaching and will be relentless in finding ones that  work.  I make the love and joy of learning the centerpiece of my instruction.  I listen more and talk less. I will ask more questions and give fewer  answers. My questions will elicit thinking and not right responses.  I refrain from always repeating what students say to indicate my respect  for their voices.  I listen for the wonder in each child and nourish it every day. I do my best  to see the world from a childs point of view.  I respect different learning styles and seek pathways to assure successes  for each student.  I incorporate relevant conclusions of brain research for my classroom.   I teach by invoking high expectations for all students. Every day, I will  reexamine my perceptions of each childs potential.  I articulate the learning intentions inside the big picture surrounding each  lessonand will make sure each student understands where we are headed  and why.  I teach meaningful and worthwhile content, skills, and values, including  important ideas from the past, issues in the present, and anticipations for  the future. Appendix Teaching Manifesto
Appendix  I bring big ideas and enduring understandings into the classroom and value  my students interpretations of them.  I understand my fundamental responsibility at whatever grade level I am in  to teach for lifelong learning: to teach students to teach themselves.  I seek what is authentic in myself and in my teaching, and commit to dis covering my passions and invoke them in my classroom.  I aim to understand the reality of the world in which we live so I can offer  honest and informed perspectives.  I model risk-taking to teach my students the value of frustration and strug gle in learning challenging material.  I seek to be open to innovative ideas, concepts, and pedagogies.  I build on methods that work with my students and jettison those that do  not.  I commit to stay current in the growing knowledge base of the profession  and in my content areas.   I seek to collaborate with colleagues to integrate best practices into my  teaching.  I welcome colleagues, parents, and interested citizens into my classroom.  I know I cannot teach alone and cannot teach well without feedback and  support.  I commit to encourage students to learn every day, in every class.   I see my teaching as a calling, not a job. With my colleagues:1  We pay attention to what works and what does not.  We take every word, every event, every failure and turn them to the advan tage of our students. We sweep nothing under the rug.  We recognize our part when students struggle. Together we find ways for  them to achieve success.  We do not blame officials, parents, or students for our lack of success. If we  cannot enlist their commitment, we will be relentless in doing all we can to  overcome challenges and difficulties. No excuses.  No hurdle, no matter how high, will prevent us from invoking our intel ligence, compassion, and love to serve our students best interests.  And, in addition, Iwe . . . Signed:  Date:

Appendix 207 NOTE 1.	 The ideas in this section have been inspired by The Stockdale Paradox, devel oped by Admiral Jim Stockdale during his years in prison in Vietnam, as described in  Jim Collins in Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap . . . and Others  Dont New York: Harper Collins, 2001, 8387; in particular Stockdales words:  Retain faith that you will prevail in the end, regardless of the difficulties and at the  same time confront the most brutal facts of your current reality whatever they might  be, 86.
Teachers stand on the shoulders of countless others. From first grade through  middle school. From high school to college. From colleagues and mentors.  From friends. From books, movies, and travel. The compendium of people  and places in my life are almost limitless. I have been blessed with so many  who have given me, whether they know it or not, so much to be grateful for. Let Miss Karasack represent grade school, Thomas Donovan, high school,  Orville Murphy, college, and Reginald Archambault, graduate school.  Del Goodwin, Barrie Rogers, Vin Rogers, and David Mallery, mentors. Let  these few colleagues represent the many wonderful people Ive worked with  over my forty years in the classroom: Terry Ortwein, Bill Murphy, Ford  Daley, Bonnie Miller, Irina Nicholaevna, Raisa Vladimirovna, Winslow  Myers, and countless others.  Pat Karl, Bob Milley, Jill Mirman, Rob Traver, Cheryl Bromley-Jones,  and Pam Penna from my twelve years as a consultant. And Barbara Barnes,  Barnes Boffey, Bonnie Miller, Rebecca Langrall, Mayme and Lafayette  Noda, and Misha Bauchev among countless friends.  Finally, I must acknowledge the wise and insightful counsel of the late  Christina Ward who set me on the path toward my first publication. She  wisely shepherded me through the process. And a special appreciation to my  wife, Kathleen Cammarata, whose art inspires me and her words urge me to  be honest with myselfand to my readers.  Frank Thoms San Miguel de Allende, Mexico Acknowledgments
Index Abaid, Mehmed: deep stuff for,  13738, 139; as if thinking of, 135,  136, 139 ability groupingtracking, as harmful,  83, 84, 89 acorn theory: Dennison for, 16162,  164; of Hillman, 16162, 164 ADDADHD, 7 administration: classroom interruptions  of, 103, 104, 106; coverage focus  of, 112, 137; teachers working with,  101; teaching role of, 106, 119 anchors: against classroom chaos, 190;  end-of-year reflection as, 195 Anderson, Ronald, 167, 172 Appleton, Mr., 111, 112, 113, 115 Armstrong, Coleen, 103, 104, 106 The Art and Science of Teaching: A  Comprehensive Framework for  Effective Instruction Marzano,  design questionsaction steps in,  138, 139 as if: as defining moments, 139;  teaching practices of, 135, 136;  thinking of Abaid in, 135, 136, 139 Attenborough, Richard, 57 backward design: pathway of, 190;  teachers in, 19293 Baker, Mrs., 111, 112, 113, 115 balanced-equation classroom, 2728 Beat the Odds BTO, 18283 begin at end: final exam on first day as,  191, 195; as pathway of backward  design, 190 Bernardi, Allegra: history lectures of,  3, 4; liking EisnerMarzano ideas,  138, 139; for no interruptions, 108;  10-2 implementation of, 810; using  highlighters, Flags, Post-it Notes,  16, 17 Berry, Thomas, 156, 157 big picture thinking: habitual practices  restricting, 45, 46; of innovation, 43,  45; as taking long view, 119 Big Rocks story, 19394, 195 The Big Shift, 4748, 48, 49, 52, 53 Biology Final Bisaccio, 191, 192,  194 Bisaccio, Dan, 191, 192, 194 Black, wisdom of, 167, 169 Blackman, Pat, 171 brain research, 68, 112 A Brief History of Everything Wilber,  156, 157 Bruner, Jerome, 89 BTO. See Beat the Odds the Buddha, 5, 26, 56, 59
Index calling: as Dennison teaching, 161;  as Hilliard teaching, 164; for  teaching, 159 Cassell, Ms., 111, 112, 113, 115, 116 CCSS. See Common Core State  Standards Center for Constructive Change, 147 change: Center for Constructive  Change in, 147; from culture, 1;  Gandhi on, 156; intention for, 30;  students resisting, 99; support for,  64; for teachers, 47, 63, 64, 119,  149; tenure as obstacle to, 96, 100;  unions resisting, 9395 Christianson, John, 129 classrooms: administration interruptions  of, 103, 104, 106; anchors against  chaos of, 190; as balanced-equation,  2728; control of, 3; culture beyond,  119; digital isolation of students in,  154, 180; excitement from DI, 113 14; as exciting, 1, 4, 35, 43, 112,  11314 199; as 4-star restaurants,  104, 109; gadfly for excitement  in, 122, 124; hybrid flipped model  of, 66; interruptions harmful for,  103, 104; invoking play for, 165;  isolation harming, 43, 48, 81, 121,  122; isolation lessened in, 107, 122,  123; learning inside or outside of,  114; Rip Van Winkle in, 78; routine  of, 3; as sanctuaries, 107, 1089;  as uninterrupted in Japan, 1034;  visualizing ideal of, 14749, 15051 colleagues, consult with, 30 Collins, Marva, 8687, 91, 152 Common Core State Standards CCSS,  182, 183 competency, student levels of, 4, 14, 17 Confucius, 26, 56, 59 connected world: of digital age, 4, 46,  180; student isolation in, 154 control, of classroom, 3 Cosmos, 156, 157 Cosmos: A SpaceTime Odyssey, 157 coverage: as administration focus, 112,  137; as teaching practice, 112; time  away from, 137 crabs-in-the-cage metaphor: leaping out  of, 101; principals start of, 99100;  for teachers, 93, 95, 96, 97, 99;  union role in, 100, 101 creativity: culture of, 148; How  schools kill creativity to, 179;  teachers with, 43 Cuba, girl teaching in, 16364 culture: of creativityinnovation, 148;  education needs changed by, 1; as  fast-changing, 47, 53, 98, 119; as  invasive, 154, 156; as media-driven,  46; beyond schools, 119 curriculum, as interruptions, 108 Dalai Lama, 56, 132, 169, 170, 175,  177 Damon, William, 97 David, among Goliaths, 77, 78, 79 David-Lang, Jenn, 6869, 71 Dead Poets Society, 25, 26, 2829 death, and dreams, 173 Death Valley metaphor, 179 deep stuff: for Abaid, 13738, 139; of  Eisner, 13738, 139 defining: of best teaching assignment,  61; moments of as if, 139; moments  of Dennison, 163 Dennison, Harold: for acorn theory,  16162, 164; as BTO advocate,  18283; as called to teach, 161;  for CCSS, 182, 183; daimon guardian angel concept and, 162;  defining moments of, 163; education  philosophy of, 16771, 172; for  Engel viewpoints, 18182; on  Google influence, 181; intentions of,  177; as No Child Left Behind critic,  179, 182; Pausch Last Lecture  for, 173, 176; Pausch six months  left for, 17375; as Race to the  Top critic, 182; seeing Cuban girl 

Index 213 teach, 16364; teaching Marxism Communism, 16263; for TED  Talks of Robinson, K., 17980;  for UbD planning, 191, 192; for  Updike, 164 Dewey, John, 139, 167, 169, 171 DI. See Differentiated Instruction difference making, 197, 198, 199 Differentiated Instruction DI, 111;  for classroom excitement, 11314;  teaching ideas from, 115, 128 digital age: classroom interruptions  in, 105; connected world of, 4, 46,  180; digital native students in, 4, 7,  20, 21, 25, 48, 74, 76, 180; media  literacy in, 4, 21; online learning  in, 149; potential limitless in, 66;  student isolation from, 154, 180 digital devices: classroom interruptions  from, 105; effective use of, 149;  student isolation from, 154, 180; of  students, 66 digital immigrants, teachers as, 48 digital natives: one-size-fits-all not  serving, 112; student isolated as,  154, 180; students as, 4, 7, 20, 21,  25, 48, 74, 76, 180 Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants  Prensky, 48 discussion skills, 20 DNA, 83, 84, 176 dreams, and death, 173 Durant, Paul: escaping textbook  tyranny, 128; teaching out-of-thebox, 12728, 131 Dweck, Carol, 8788, 90, 91 the easier road in teaching: activities  of, 7576, 78; letting go of, 79;  as reaching few students, 74, 75,  76, 77; teacher talk in, 73,  112, 175 education: elephant in room in,  175, 177; How to escape from  educations death valley for, 179;  Marzano reforming, 137, 138, 139;  as theocracy, 13536, 138 educational standards: CCSS for, 182,  183; Hilliard for, 176, 177 educational theocracies, 138; factoryschool origins of, 51, 81, 86, 121,  136; of Pullman, 13536 education methodologies: IEPs as, 75;  not designed for students today, 48;  staying current on, 6869; teacher student time paramount in, 103,  104 education philosophy: of Dennison,  16771, 172; of Hilliard, 171 education research, 6869, 98 Edutopia research, 98 Efficacy Institute, 51, 52 Eisner, Eliot, 13738, 139 elementary level, 10-2 at, 67 elephant in room, 175, 177 embedded practices: as anachronistic  and irrelevant, 119; breaking, 131;  gadfly against, 122; as harmful, 81,  113, 175 Encounters with Soviet People  Thoms, 2012 end-of-year reflection, as anchor, 195 energy activators, teachers as, 155 engagement: exitrecap cards for,  3233, 34, 35, 4041; give one get one for, 3538, 40, 41, 114;  listening contrasted with, 56, 25,  26, 27; media literacy for, 4, 21;  as purposeful, 113; strategies for,  3141, 40, 41, 5253; of students,  25, 26, 27; 10-2 for, 113; Thomas,  S., novelty of, 25, 26, 27 Engel, Susan, 18182 entity theory versus incremental  thinking, 5052, 51, 5354 Escalante, Jamie, 85, 8687, 152 Esquith, Rafe, 8687, 152 excitement: for classroom from DI,  11314; in classrooms, 1, 35,  43, 199; classrooms with, 4, 112, 
Index 11314; gadfly for classroom with,  122, 124 exitrecap cards, 42n4; for engagement,  3233, 34, 35, 4041; sharing  success of, 41 expectations, of readerswriters, 201,  202, 203 factory model schools: industrial  origins of, 51, 81, 86, 121, 136;  teaching principles from, 51; as  unionized, 81, 93 faculty room: collegial welcome in,  14445; Hilliard and Bernardi in, 9;  negativity of, 93, 95, 101 families, teachers connect with, 119 Fellows, Margaret: gadfly for, 124;  interruption solution of, 1078;  visualizing ideal classroom, 15051 final exam on first day, 191, 195 Fish! A Remarkable Way to Boost  Morale and Improve Results  Lundin, Paul, Christianson, 129 FlagsPost-it Notes, as learning tools,  16, 17 4-star restaurants4-star classrooms,  104, 109 Frost, Robert, 55, 61, 190 gadfly: activity of, 123; for department grade, 125; exciting classrooms  through, 122, 124; for school,  124; Socrates as, 121; teacher as,  12124 Gandhi, 57 Gandhi, on change, 156 Gibson, Drew, on stakeholders,  18081 give oneget one: for engagement,  3538, 40, 41, 114; pursuing, 41;  sample form for, 36; sample use of,  37 Gladwell, Malcolm: Golomb story by,  89; Tipping Point of, 127, 131 Golomb, Robert, 89 Gonzalez, Javier: student social  contract of, 12728; teaching out-ofthe-box, 12728, 131 Goodman, Delaney, 94, 9596, 99 Goodwin, Del: Hilliard mentored by,  144; skills teaching of, 13, 17 Google: Dennison on influence of,  181; googling as non-thinking, 46;  knowledge formula changed by,  6566; what is worth knowing and,  148, 181 grading: alternative to, 137; role of,  14849, 151 Graham, Martha, 130 growth mindset, pursuing, 91 habitual practices, as restricting, 45, 46 Hafiz, 56, 60 Haidt, Jonathan, 63 half-listening, of students, 5 The Happiness Hypothesis Haidt, 63,  64, 68, 69, 70 harmful practices: ability grouping tracking as, 83, 84, 89; digital  isolation of students as, 154, 180;  isolated classrooms as, 43, 48, 81,  121, 122; whole-class lessons as,  45, 81 Hawken, Paul, on intent, 129 Healey, Tim, 107 Heath, Chip and Dan, 12930 Herrick, Robert, 26 heterogeneous student grouping, 54 higher road in teaching: as David  among Goliaths, 77, 78, 79; as  discussions not lecturing, 73; as  exploring student thinking, 74; as  hard, 77; principles of, 77; students  reached by, 74, 75, 76; taking, 79;  as taking long view, 119; Teaching  Manifesto as, 78, 11415, 116; as  years to become good, 142 highlighters: Mezzo instruction on,  1416; as tools for learning, 1416,  17

Index 215 Hilliard, Dan, 4; activity-centered  style of, 150; best practice seminar  of, 41; Biology Final intent of,  194; A Brief History of Everything  and, 156; as called to teach, 164;  education philosophy of, 171;  engagement strategies of, 40, 41,  5253; for gadfly concept, 124;  Goodwin mentoring of, 144;  hearing Sagan lecture, 156, 157;  for as if, 138; interruption solution  of, 1078; invitation to learn of,  2829; liking DI and UbD, 131;  liking PullmanEisnerMarzano  ideas, 138, 139; The Main Idea  for, 70; Marshall Memo for, 70;  recommending Made to Stick,  131; rider and elephant metaphor  for, 69; teaching literacy, 22; for  teaching standards, 176, 177;  10-2 implementation of, 810, 78;  as tracking resistant, 90; union  concerns of, 100; The Universe  Story and, 156; as using alternative  ideas, 60, 6970, 78, 11516; using  highlighters, Flags, Post-it Notes,  16, 17; visualizing ideal classroom,  150 Hillman, James: acorn theory of,  16162, 164; daimonguardian angel  concept of, 162 history, lectures of Bernardi, 3, 4 Hoff, Benjamin, 56 holon and holons, 156, 157 holons, of Wilber, 156, 157 homework: challenges of, 4, 13, 14, 17,  26, 27; redefining, 6, 9, 45, 46 Hong, Lorraine: on classroom  interruptions, 104; 4-star restaurant  classroom of, 104, 109 Hopkins, Mark, 121 Howard, Jeff, 5052, 51 How People Learn, 49, 4950, 52 How schools kill creativity  Robinson, K., 17980 How to escape from educations death  valley Robinson, K., 17980 hybrid flipped classroom model, 66 IEPs. See independent educational  plans imagine ideal: as visualizing classroom  ideal, 14749, 15051; as what is  worth knowing, 148, 181 imagine the ideal, Sinclair, S., to,  14749 The Imitation Game, 86 incremental thinking versus entity  theory, 5052, 51, 5354 independent educational plans IEPs,  75 innovation: big picture thinking for,  43, 45; culture of, 148; habitual  practices restricting, 45, 46; sharing  success of, 123; from unions, 102n2;  unions obstacles to, 9395 Institute of Religion and Science  IRAS, 153 intentions: for change, 30; clarity of,  30; of Hilliard for Biology Final,  194; as important in teaching, 129,  175, 177; as making a difference,  197, 198, 199; as purposeful in  teaching, 114; for TAPS, 41; for  walkthroughs, 100 interactive strategies: effective teaching  through, 20, 183; TAPS for teaching  with, 3840, 42nn910; 10-2 as, 6 interruptions: Bernardi against, 108;  classroom isolation from, 107;  curriculum as, 108; data on, 108; as  harmful, 103; from invasive culture,  154, 156; PA as, 104, 106, 107, 108,  109n6; special as less, 109; special  programs as, 104, 105, 107, 108;  stopping, 103, 1078 invitation, to learn, 2729 invoking: of kaleidoscope metaphor,  145; of learning, 53; of play in  classroom, 165
Index involvement, of students, 2, 29, 30 IQ: fixedfluid intelligence in, 5052;  intelligence not determined by, 86,  88; self-control contrasted with, 52,  86 IRAS. See Institute of Religion and  Science isolation: classrooms relief from, 107,  122, 123; harming classrooms, 43,  48, 81, 121, 122; teaching in, 43,  48, 81, 121, 122, 123 Japan, classroom uninterrupted in,  1034 Jervis, Fred, 147 Johansen, Mark, 65, 68 Jones, Laura Reasoner, 7 Jones, Michael, 97 Jordan, Francis: The Big Shift of,  4748, 48, 49, 52, 53; entity theory  versus incremental learning from,  5052, 51, 5354; How People  Learn from, 49, 4950, 52 kaleidoscope metaphor: invoking of,  145; patterns emerge in, 143; of  Peters, 141, 14243, 145 Keating, John, 25, 26, 27, 152 Kemp, Janice, 88 Kingsley, Ben, 57 Klunder, Ben, 9394, 9596, 97, 99,  100 knowledge: Google changing formula  of, 6566, 148, 181; as what is  worth knowing, 148, 181 Lambourne, Marie: new teacher  challenges of, 144; Peters letter  to, 14143 Langer, Judith, 18283 language arts, 10-2 for, 6 language tyranny, 90 The Last Lecture Pausch, 173, 176 Lavine, Portia, 106 Lavoie, Richard, 4849 Lawrence, Bariyyah, 26 leaping out of bucket as, 101 learning: assessment of, 4; inside class  or outside for, 114; interruptions  harming, 103; invoking, 53; IQ role  in, 5052, 86, 88; online sources  enhancing, 149; partnership of,  27; self-control role in, 52, 86;  students invited to, 2729; styles  of, 111, 112, 113, 150; 10-2 for, 6;  as untaught skill, 13; walkthroughs  opportunities for, 106 learning disabilities, 7 learning tools: highlighters as, 1416,  17; metacognitive discussion as,  2022, 23; Post-it NotesFlags as,  16, 17 lectures: of Bernardi, 3, 4; as norm, 4;  10-2 for, 6 Lehman, Mike, balanced teaching of,  5960 lessons, processing of, 4 listening: engagement contrasted with,  56, 25, 26, 27; half-listening in, 5;  universe as if, 135, 136, 137, 138 literacy skills: developing student  thinking, 20; teaching, 1922; types  of, 45 the long view: patterns emerge through,  143; of teaching as artistry and  science, 142; of teaching practices,  119 luminaries, wisdom of, 139, 148, 167,  169, 171 Lundin, Stephen C., 129 Macon, Peter: exit card use by, 3233,  3435, 40; recap card use by,  3335, 40 Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive  and Others Die Heath: principles  of, 12930, 131, 132, 133n8;  rethinking teaching practices from,  130 The Main Idea, 6869, 70, 71

Index 217 A Manual for the Writing of Research  Papers Goodwin, 13 Mapping a Route Towards  Instruction Tomlinson, 111, 115 Marshall, Kim, 68 Marshall Memo, designated reader for  teachers, 68, 70, 71 MarxismCommunism, 16263 Marzano, Robert: design questions action steps of, 138, 139; education  reform call of, 137 Massachusetts Comprehensive  Assessment System MCAS, 26, 89 McGillis, Mary, 27 Meat, 63, 69 media-driven culture: as fast-changing,  47, 53, 98, 119; social-media in, 60;  teacher openness to, 46 media literacy, engaging students  through, 4, 21 Messiah, student as, 60 metacognitive discussion, 2022, 23 metaphors: crabs-in-the cage as, 93,  95, 96, 97, 99, 100, 101; of Death  Valley, 179; kaleidoscope as, 141,  14243, 145; rider and elephant as,  63, 64, 68, 69, 70; as spiralelliptical  galaxy of Swimme, 15354, 155,  156, 157; time of inaction, 201, 202  203 methodologies, 48, 6869, 75, 103, 104 Mezzo, Abraham, 1416 mindset, fixed versus growth, 8788,  90, 91 Mindset: The New Psychology of  Success Dweck, 8788, 90 motivation: of students, 2; teacher  responsible for, 28 Mullen, Bob, 3738 Mullens, Sean, 105, 106 National Board Certification teaching  standards, 176, 177 National Research Council, brain  research from, 112 Nhat Hanh, Thich, 56, 58 No Child Left Behind, 179, 182 note taking, 7 one-size-fits-all teaching: alternatives  to, 60, 6970, 78, 11516;  ending, 111, 11314, 115; as  ineffective, 3839, 45, 111,  113, 115; as not serving digital  students, 112 out-of-the-box teaching, 12728, 131 PA. See public address system Palmer, Parker, 175, 177n2 PARCC, 182 partnership, learning as, 27 Partnership for Twenty-first Century  Skills, 45, 22, 23 pathways: for backward design, 190;  Big Rocks story for, 19394, 195; to  Cassell, 116 Paul, Harry, 129 Pausch, Randy: discovering wisdom,  173; Last Lecture of, 173, 176;  only six months left of, 17375 Peck, Scott, 5960 pedagogy. See teaching practices performance reviews, contrast with  tenure, 98 Perkins, Ignatius, 1067 Peters, Pam: for ending one-size-fitsall teaching, 111, 11314, 115;  fixed versus growth mindset for,  8788, 90, 91; for high expectations  of students, 85, 86; kaleidoscope  metaphor of, 141, 14243, 145;  Lambourne letter of, 14143; in  take-back-the-classroom, 103, 106,  107; teacher training of, 83 Peterson, Isaiah, 2021 philosophy of education: of Dennison,  16771, 172; of Hilliard, 171; for  you, 172 Pikes Place Fish Market, 12829,  13132
Index Plato, 148, 167, 169 play, contrast with test taking assessments, 165 Post-it NotesFlags, as tools, 16, 17 potential: digital limitless in, 66; as  everyone has, 89 Prensky, Marc, 48, 186 Pressfield, Steven, 100, 101 primacy-recency, 6667, 67, 70 principals: as classroom interrupters,  103; crabs-in-the-cage starts with,  99100 processing: of lessons, 4; students time  for, 8 public address system PA, as  interruptive, 104, 106, 107, 108,  109n6 Pullman, Philip: educational  theocracies of, 13536, 138; as  if ideas of, 137, 138; listening to  universe, 135, 136, 137, 138 purpose: as important in teaching, 129;  teaching with, 113, 114 questions: Google answering, 46,  6566; Marzano design questions  as, 138, 139; teaching through,  43, 45, 46, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 65 The Rabbis Gift Peck, 5960 Race to the Top, 182 readerswriters, expectations of, 201,  202, 203 reading: fluency in, 20; for meaning  and understanding, 19; teaching, of  textbooks, 1920 recapexit cards, 3335, 4041, 42n4 research: for interruption data, 108;  staying current on, 6869 respect, of teachers, 1 rhythms of school, 194 rider and elephant metaphor, 63, 64,  68, 69, 70 Rip Van Winkle, 78 The Road Not Taken, 55, 190 Robinson, Ken: How schools kill  creativity by, 17980; How to  escape from educations death  valley by, 17980 Robinson, Sarah, 5560, 61 Rogers, Vincent: pursuing 10-2, 58,  910; for wait time, 7 routines, of classrooms, 3 Rowe, Mary Budd: 10-2 of, 5, 6, 7, 8,  9, 10; wait time of, 7 Rumi, 55, 56 Sagan, Carl, 156, 157 sanctuaries, classrooms as, 107, 1089 Sanderos, Carlos, 7677, 79 Sanders, William, 9798 Saphier, John, 5052, 51 satisfaction: of students, 2;  of teachers, 2 schools: bookfilm club for, 71; culture  beyond, 119; gadfly in, 123, 124,  125; How schools kill creativity  for, 179; industrial factory origins  of, 51, 81, 86, 121, 136; rhythms of,  194; teacherstudent time paramount  in, 103, 104; teaching principles  origins of, 51; as unionized, 81, 93;  welcoming new teachers, 14445 Schultz, Ron: metacognitive methods  of, 2022, 23; Peterson coaching of,  2021; teaching literacy skills, 22 Scortino, Angela, 7677, 79 seek out great teachers, 152 self-control, IQ contrast with, 52, 86 self-direction skill, 4 sharing success: of exitrecap cards,  41; of innovative methods, 123; of  teaching study habits, 1416, 17,  1920; of 10-2, 10 Sharma, Amir, 105 Simmons, Marie, 65, 66 Sinclair, Jennifer, 85 Sinclair, Steve: new thinking from  IRAS for, 153; spiralelliptical  galaxy metaphor for, 15354, 

Index 219 155, 156, 157; visualizing ideal  classroom, 14749 six months left, of Pausch, 17375 skills for student success: assessment  of, 14, 17, 22; classroom rearranging  as, 25, 30; gauge competency levels  of, 4, 14, 17; highlighter use as,  1416; interactive strategies as, 20,  183; learning as, 13; learning in or  out of class as, 114; literacy skills  for, 45, 20; from Partnership for  Twenty-first Century Skills, 45,  22, 23; problem-solving skill, 4;  in study habits, 1416, 1920; test  takingassessments as, 13; writing  as, 20 Smarter Balance Assessment  Consortium, 182 social media, 60 Socrates, 121, 159 Sousa, David, 6667, 67, 70 special programs: as interruptive, 104,  105, 107, 108; as less interruptive,  109 spiralelliptical galaxy metaphor,  15354, 155, 156, 157 stakeholders, teachers as, 18081 Stand and Deliver, 85 stickiness, 12930 students: brain growth of, 91; digital  devices of, 66; digital isolation for,  154, 180; as digital natives, 4, 7, 20,  21, 25, 48, 74, 76, 180; education  needs changing for, 1; education  not designed for, 48; engagement  of, 25, 26, 27; as focus of Cassell,  111, 112, 113, 115, 116; fulfill  teacher labeling, 8990; gauge  competency of, 4, 14, 17; googling  as non-thinking, 46; half-listening  of, 5; high expectations of, 85, 86;  homework challenges of, 4, 13,  14, 17, 26, 27; as invited to learn,  2729; involvement of, 2, 29, 30;  as learning partners, 27; Messiah  as, 60; motivation of, 2; potential  contrasted with tracking, 89;  processing by, 4, 8; pursuing ideas  of, 30; as put first by schools, 103;  resisting change, 99; satisfaction of,  2; self-direction skill of, 4; skills  assessment of, 14, 17, 22; social  contract with, 12728; teachers  challenging, 90; teachers connect  with, 119; teacher talk alienating,  112, 175; teaching for, 198; wholeclass lessons not serving, 4, 45, 76,  81, 83, 115 studentteacher time interruptions, 103,  104 study habits, 1416, 1920 success sharing, 10, 1416, 17, 1920,  41, 123 support: for change, 64; of new faculty,  14445 Suzuki, Shunryu, 58 Swimme, Brian: spiralelliptical galaxy  metaphor of, 15354, 155, 156, 157;  The Universe Story of, 156, 157 take-back-the-classroom, 103, 104, 106 taking higher road, 79 The Tao of Pooh Hoff, 56, 59 Tao Te Ching, 56, 59 TAPS Template for Teacher Planning:  departing from whole-class  lessons, 3839; as guiding teacher  improvement, 115, 116; intentions  for, 41; for interactive teaching,  3840, 42nn910; template of, 39 teachers: assessing student skills,  14, 17, 22; in backward design,  19293; bookfilm club for, 71; as  challenged when new, 14445; as  challenging students, 90; change  for, 47, 63, 64, 119, 149; collegial  relations for, 14445; connecting  with students, 119; as crabs-in-thecage, 93, 95, 96, 97, 99, 100, 101;  with creativity, 43; as Davids among 
Index Goliaths, 77, 78, 79; defining as  if moments of, 139; defining best  teaching assignment, 61; as digital  immigrants, 48; discussing our  place in universe, 157; as energy  activators, 155; faculty room of,  9, 93, 95, 101, 14445; families  connect with, 119; as gadfly,  12124; gadfly activity of, 123; give  oneget one for, 36, 37, 41; helping  new teachers, 14445; as lax on  standards, 176; as learning partners,  27; Marshall Memo for, 68, 70,  71; personal inventory by, 70, 138,  172; Peters for training of, 83; as  pursuing ideas of students, 30; as  putting students first, 103; respect  of, 1; satisfaction of, 2; seeking  great ones, 152; self-assessment for,  116; skills of, 1; as specialunique,  161, 164; as stakeholders, 18081;  student motivated by, 28; students  fulfill labeling by, 8990; TAPS for  improvement of, 115, 116; TAPS  template for, 39; UbD benefiting,  128, 19192, 196n4; as untrained  for students today, 48; working with  administration, 101 teacherstudent time interruptions, 103,  104 teacher success: engagement  strategies for, 3141; gadfly  for, 124; from going beyond  habitual practice, 46; homework  redefining for, 6, 9, 45, 46; outof-the-box teaching for, 12728,  131; Partnership for Twenty-first  Century Skills on, 45, 22, 23;  from sharing innovative methods,  123; sharing of, 10, 17; student  engagement as, 25, 26, 27; TVASS  on, 97 teacher talk: reducing, 4, 5, 10; student  alienation from, 112, 175; in teacher  DNA, 83, 84, 176 teaching: administrators as, 106,  119; as calling, 159, 161, 164; in  isolation, 43, 48, 81, 121, 122, 123;  reading as, 1920; as about students  not teachers, 198; of study habits,  1416, 1920 Teaching Manifesto, 78, 11415, 116 teaching practices: 10-2 principles  for, 56; activity-centered style of,  111, 112, 113, 150; as artistry and  science, 142; balanced teaching  as, 5960; best practice seminars  as, 41; breaking embedded, 131;  changing, 1; colleague consultation  as, 30; coverage as, 112, 137; DI  and UbD improving, 115, 128;  easier road of, 73, 74, 7576, 77,  78, 79, 112, 175; embedded harmful  forms of, 81, 113, 119, 122, 175;  entity theory versus incremental  learning as, 5052, 51, 5354; from  factory model schools, 51; gadfly  for improving, 124; grading, 137,  14849, 151; as habitual, 45, 46;  higher road of, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77,  78, 11415, 116, 119, 142; How  People Learn as, 49, 4950, 52; as if  as, 135, 136; for immediate action,  1; intentions important as, 129,  175, 177; in literacy skills, 1922;  long view of, 119; one-size-fits-all  ineffective as, 3839, 45, 111, 113,  115; out-of-the-box as, 12728,  131; personal inventory of, 70,  138, 172; as purposeful, 113, 114,  129; rethinking, 130; standards of,  176; for student brain growth, 91;  as taking writing seriously, 172;  Teaching Manifesto for, 78, 11415,  116; as teaching through questions,  43, 45, 46, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 65;  teach-to-the-test as, 123; tenure as  obstacle to change, 96, 100; test  takingassessments as, 3, 4, 5, 9, 13,  16, 22, 23, 26, 75, 84, 88

Index 221 technology: effective use of, 149;  social-media as, 60; teacher  openness to, 46; Unlearn, Learn,  Relearn need in, 4849 TED Talk: Dennison recommending,  17980; How schools kill  creativity as, 179; How to escape  from educations death valley as,  179 10-2 Thinking: ADDADHD helped  by, 7; at elementary level, 67; for  engagement, 113; facilitating note  taking, 7; Hilliard implementing,  810, 78; implementation tips for,  810; interactivity promoted by, 6;  in language arts, 6; for learning, 6;  principles of, 56; Roberts with,  58, 910; Rogers pursuing, 68,  910; by Rowe, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10;  sharing success of, 10; Webb, Sheila  with, 7 Tennessee Value Added Assessment  System TVASS, 97 tenure: as obstacle to change, 96, 100;  as obstacle to performance reviews,  98 test takingassessments: BTO versus TP  in, 18283; coverage for, 112, 137;  emphasis on, 3, 5, 9, 13, 16, 22, 23,  26, 75, 84, 88; Google and what is  worth knowing, 148, 181; MCAS  as, 26, 89; measuring clerical-level  thinking, 179; play contrasted with,  165; teacher peer-assessment as,  116; teacher self-assessment as, 116;  teach-to-the-test for, 123 textbooks, 1920, 128 theocracy of education, 13536, 138 thinking skills, 4; googling as nonthinking, 46; literacy developing,  20; Sinclair exploring new, 153;  tests measure clerical-levels of, 179 Thomas, Annie: DI and UbD of,  128; Made to Stick principles of,  12930, 132, 133n8; for Pikes  Place Market, 12829, 13132;  stickiness for, 12930; student  social contract of, 12728; tipping  points for, 129 Thomas, Steve, 25, 26, 27 Thompson, Mary, 106 Thoms, Frank, 2012 time of inaction metaphor, 201, 202  203 Tipping Point Gladwell, 127, 131 tipping points, 127, 129 Tomlinson, Carol Ann, 111, 115, 128 tools for learning: highlighters as,  1416, 17; Post-it NotesFlags as,  16, 17 To the Virgins, to Make Much of  Time, by Herrick, 26 TP. See Typically Performing trackingability grouping: as harmful  practices, 83, 84; Hilliard resisting,  90; as language tyranny, 90; student  potential contrasted with, 89 Turing, Alan, 86 TV, movies, video: Cosmos as, 156,  157; Cosmos: A SpaceTime Odyssey  as, 157; Dead Poets Society as, 25,  26, 2829; Gandhi as, 57; How  schools kill creativity as, 179;  How to escape from educations  death valley as, 179; The Imitation  Game as, 86; Meat as, 63, 69;  Pausch Last Lecture as, 173, 176;  Stand and Deliver as, 85 TVASS. See Tennessee Value Added  Assessment System twenty-first century student skills, 45,  22, 23 Typically Performing TP, as test prep  method, 18283 tyranny: of language, 90; of textbooks,  128 Tyson, Neal deGrasse, 157 Understanding by Design UbD, 128,  191, 192, 196n4
Index unions: Hilliard concern for, 100; as  obstacles to change, 9395; positive  example of, 102n2; role in crabs-inthe-cage activity, 101; in schools,  81, 93 universe: as if listening, 135, 136, 137,  138; our place in, 157; Pullman  listening to, 135, 136, 137, 138;  seeking and teaching wisdom of,  55, 5660; Wilber on intelligence  of, 155 The Universe Story Swimme and  Berry, 156, 157 Unlearn, Learn, Relearn, 4849 Updike, John, 164 visualization, of ideal classroom,  14749, 15051 Vreeland, Tom, 89 wait time, 7 walkthroughs: intentions for, 100; as  learning opportunities, 106; Wesson  on, 121 Webb, Sheila, 7 Wesson, George: teacher gadfly of,  12124; walkthroughs of, 121 Whitehead, 167, 169 whole-class lessons: as harmful  practice, 45, 81; not meeting student  needs, 4, 45, 76, 81, 83, 115; TAPS  departure from, 3839 Wilber, Ken: A Brief History of  Everything by, 156, 157; holons of,  156, 157; on intelligent universe,  155 Wilcox, Jesse, 73 Wiliam, Dylan, 6 Williams, Robin, 25 Williamson, Marianne, 87 Wilmot, Jared, 78 Wilson, Josh, 65; brain research  followed by, 68; primacy-recency  through, 6667, 67, 70; rider and  elephant metaphor for, 63, 64, 68,  70 Wineburg, Stephen, 183 wisdom: of luminaries, 139, 148,  167, 169, 171; Pausch discovering,  173; seeking and teaching, 55,  5660 Wiseman, Frederick, 63, 64, 69 writersreaders, expectations of, 201,  202, 203 writing skills: for student success, 20;  as taken seriously, 172 Zen Mind, Beginners Mind Suzuki,  58
About the Author Frank Thoms is a lifelong classroom  teacher, consultant, and writer. He  devotes himself to improving the teach ing profession, one teacher at a time.  Hes relentless in finding ways to meet  the challenges of todays digitally wired,  techno-literate students. He advocates that  teachers become their own change-makers.  He believes invitations offer the most  powerful impetus to effect change, in stark  contrast to federal, state, and local mandates  that often cause resentment and resistance. Frank has taught in public and private schools in the United States, as well  as in schools in England, Russia, Kazakhstan, and Mexico. He was a found ing member of the exemplary Upper Valley Educators Institute, one of the  nations first alternative teacher-certification programs, now in its fifth decade.  He developed a model open-education classroom that served as a resource to  New England schools. He has consulted for PBS, AFS Intercultural Pro grams, IDEA Kettering, Association of Independent Schools of New Eng land AISNE, and the Vermont State Department of Education. In his last twelve years as a consultant, he served in more than 125 schools,  providing keynotes, workshops, pedagogical courses, mentoring, and teacher  coaching. His unique style blends serious content and processes in an interac tive format that serves as a model for the teaching he advocates throughout  his writings. Contact Frank at frankthoms3gmail.com and visit his website www.frank thoms.com.