Uniting Europe Happy Class

Happy Class The Practical Guide  to Classroom Management Jenna Sage

ROWMAN  LITTLEFIELD Lanham  Boulder  New York  London

Published by Rowman  Littlefield  A wholly owned subsidiary of The Rowman  Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc. 4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706 www.rowman.com Unit A, Whitacre Mews, 26-34 Stannary Street, London SE11 4AB Copyright  2017 by Jenna Sage All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by   any electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval   systems, without written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer who   may quote passages in a review. British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Sage, Jenna, 1977Title: Happy class : the practical guide to classroom management  Jenna Sage. Description: Lanham, Maryland : Rowman  Littlefield, 2017.  Includes index. Identifiers: LCCN 2016042562 print  LCCN 2016043103 ebook  ISBN    9781475824810 cloth : alk. paper  ISBN 9781475824841 pbk. : alk.    paper  ISBN 9781475824858 electronic Subjects:  LCSH: Classroom management. Classification: LCC LB3013 .S238 2017 print  LCC LB3013 ebook  DDC    371.1024dc23 LC record available at https:lccn.loc.gov2016042562

 The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of   American National Standard for Information SciencesPermanence of Paper   for Printed Library Materials, ANSINISO Z39.48-1992. Printed in the United States of America

v Contents Preface	 vii Introduction	 xi 1  Organizing for Happiness	 1 2  Everything You Need to Know, You Can Learn from a   Kindergarten Teacher	 9 3  Function Junction: Why Does This Keep Happening?  Understanding the Functions of Behavior	 21 4  Myths about Consequences	 33 5  Opposites Attract: Interventions Aligned to Challenging Behavior	 41 6  Focus on What Is Right	 57 7  Data Is More than a Four-Letter Word	 65 8  Whos in Charge?	 75 Conclusion	 81 Appendix: Additional Resources	 83 Index	 85 About the Author	 87

vii Preface I pulled up in front of the large, antiquated, brick school building. I truly had  no conception of what the day might hold. I only knew that I was hired for  the day to be a substitute classroom aide. I pushed the heavy glass-and-steel  doors aside and found myself in the front office.  I had been a struggling student growing up. I was terrible at math. My brain  just didnt seem to be wired for numbers. In the first grade, I began playing  sick when math class began. I took a weekly, sometimes daily, trip to the  nurses office. Each time I missed math class, I fell deeper into the math gap. As years passed, I tried to focus on my strengths. I loved writing, dancing, singing, acting, drama, and debate. As those same years passed, fewer  and fewer opportunities to take creative courses availed themselves. School  became hyperfocused on core content areas. I became hyperfocused on my  inabilities rather than my abilities. In high school I took every elective I could. However, electives didnt earn  you the right credits to graduate. School lost its luster. Learning lost its shine.  I fell back into old habits and began skipping classes. I skipped so many  classes in tenth grade that I was told that graduation would be unlikely and I  should not return. I am the daughter of a teacher, a proud teacher. I am the product of a system that didnt focus on my skills, talents, abilities, and strengths. I am still  a person who struggles to see my intelligence as a cup more than half-full  rather than totally emptied. As I stood in the office of the elementary school for my first day of work, I  felt the electric buzz in the office, the students coming and going, the parents  dropping off their children, and a teacher running copies and sipping coffee  in a hurried pace. I felt energized. The place ran like a well-oiled machine.

viii	 Preface I was assigned to a student in a kindergarten class. I could handle kindergarten; it was probably the last grade in which I felt truly comfortable. The  day would likely be filled with tracing letters onto lined papers, playing house  and blocks, and going out on the playground. The student I was assigned to had severe ADHD. As I entered the classroom, he stood out from his peers. He was sitting on top of the desk singing  loudly as the teacher attempted to share where the big and little hands were  on the clock. The student grew bored of his own voice and began playing with  items in a storage closet. The teacher grew more and more frustrated. I received my orders during the first break in activity:  	 Keep him occupied.  	 Be sure to pay attention to him every second of the day. 	 Follow along with the class and try to get him to do some of the work.  Easy enough, I thought. Within two hours, the student had made his way into a crevasse in the wall,  and I couldnt find him. So much for learning letters; so much for me having  a job the next day. Early the next morning, my phone rang. It was the principal of the school.  We would like you to come back today and work with the same student, if  you are willing. I was confused. I dont understand. I didnt think I did a  good job of watching him yesterday. The principal explained that the teacher  had let her know at the end of the day that the student sat on his carpet square  for thirty seconds during calendar time, which was the longest he had ever sat. I worked one-on-one with that student for three years until he was fully  integrated into a general education classroom without support. During those  three years, I became a student again. Every day I learned more about the  skill and art of teaching, the process of learning, the science of behavior, the  patience of educators, the growth of children, and the importance of individuality. I had bad daysterrible daysdays in which I was hit, bitten, kicked,  yelled at, and cursed at. I had amazing daysdays where I saw the student  grow, a light bulb click on, the family give hugs, the other students accept  and welcome, and the other teachers express kindness and gratitude. I had  days when I knew I couldnt ever be a teacher and days when I knew that was  the only calling in my life.  After I was pushed out of high school, rather than remaining a highschool dropout, I graduated from an alternative school that focused on  student strengths and helped students graduate by working toward feasible  and meaningful credit-earning opportunities. It was not a traditional school, 

Preface	 ix and it was full of kids who made bad choices, some terrible choices. But it  was a school that had staff who cared about each and every one of us. They  spent time getting to know us and focused on our talents. It was a community  whose members would stop at nothing to help us so we would not become  the forgotten ones. This book is a culmination of my experiences, my learning, my growth,  and my passion for ensuring that there are no forgotten ones. Each chapter  and example are derived from personal experience and from all of my opportunities to learn from amazing educators.  For as much as I struggled in school, I want to thank those teachers who  may not have believed in me. I want to thank those teachers who didnt notice  me asking for or simply needing more help. Those teachers help to remind me  how important positivity and happiness are. My experiences helped me to be  a better person and a better educator. I especially want to thank the teacher leaders in my lifemy mom, first  of all. I grew up vicariously in her classroom. I grew up in the shadow of  her reputation. She was an amazing teacher whose impact on the childrens  lives is immeasurable. She encouraged me to take that substitute classroom  aide position, and she has encouraged me every step of the way since then.  From the day I was kicked out of high school through my graduation from the  alternative school, receiving my bachelors in psychology and my masters  degree in special education, to receiving my doctorate in special education,  she believed in me when I didnt. Her love of teaching and learning is woven  deeply in every word of this book. To my mentors: I so closely observed you and took diligent notes. I listened to advice. I spent years gaining from your experiences. When you told  me to go home and practice giving enthusiastic thumbs-up in the mirror, I did  it without question. When you asked me to present my experiences to other  teachers, I did it without fear. I knew that your trust and faith in me would  guide me toward a life fulfilledand it has. To my colleagues: Without you there would be fewer laugh lines, fewer  gray hairs, fewer tears wiped gently from my cheeks, fewer stories, and far  too few memories. I have been in education in some capacity for two decades.  I have worked with thousands of amazing educators from prekindergarten to  doctoral school. You continue to inspire me, amaze me, and push me to be  more. This book is written with every hope that your work will inspire future  teacher leaders. To my husband and family who watch my ongoing battle with my personal  academic demons: Thank you. Your belief in me is empowering. When I  revert back to that first-grader who lives so strongly in my core, I pull from  your vision of me to gain back my strength. Thank you, and I love you.

x	 Preface Most importantly, to each of you new teachers, experienced teachers, pondering teachers, struggling teachers, teacher-of-the-year teachers, wonderingif-you-can-do-this-another-day teachers: You are everything. You are strong  and skilled and able to handle the bad days and the good days. I hope that this  book finds you in a place of peace and kindness. I hope that there are lessons  learned and strategies gained. We are a band of teachers, a brother and sisterhood of lifelong learners and compassionate givers. Keep up the great work.

xi Introduction What is a happy class? A happy class begins with a happy teacher. A happy  teacher is part of a happy school community. The classroom, the teacher, and  the school help to cultivate happy and successful students.  In times of increased standardization and compliance, it is vital to refocus  on positivity and individualization. Each student who walks through the  schoolhouse doors has talent, skill, drive, ability, and possibility. Sometimes  it can be hard to findhidden under layers of struggle, challenges, trauma, or  fearbut it is all there. Children are born to learn. Humans are wired to make  ongoing neural connections. The brain is malleable and trainable.  This book is intended to share strategies to help create or regain a happy  class. 	 If you are a new teacher, there are tips and strategies to help set up a classroom for success and start from the ground up.  	 If you are an experienced teacher, there are ideas for tweaks and twists to  help build on what you already have in place.  	 If you are an administrator, there are ideas of what to look for on walkthroughs, in professional-learning communities, or during meetings.  	 If you are support staff, there are techniques to help build strong relationships with colleagues and connect interdisciplinary work in meaningful  ways. A happy class requires a happy teacher. Happy teachers feel empowered  to address challenging behavior. Happy teachers believe that every child  can learn. Happy teachers believe that families and caregivers are doing the  best that they can with what they have. Happy teachers recognize the stress  in themselves and others and find healthy coping strategies. Happy teachers 

xii	 Introduction balance work and outside life. Happy teachers are compassionate and empathetic. Most of all, happy teachers are happiest when they are teaching. Each chapter of this book is designed to help focus your energy and work  toward creating a happy class. This is done through using organizational strategies, understanding human behavior, developing strategies for challenging  behavior and interventions focused on success, utilizing positive supports,  using the right data to help make decisions, and also, keeping yourself healthy  and happy. Ultimately, each chapter should lead you on a journey of self-discovery.  Each strategy should guide you toward being strengths-based, focusing on  the good in each person and each situation. In order to be a happy teacher  with a happy class, you may need to make personal adjustments; that is okay.  No one is perfect. Perfection is not the goal; happiness is. That happiness is  defined by you but shared with everyone you interact with. Your happiness  should be contagious. Consider reading through this book quickly the first time. Take one strategy that you learned and apply it in your classroom for a period of time. Take  notes on what works and what doesnt. Make adjustments. Read the book  again and add another strategy and another until you feel you have built a  strong foundation for a happy class.  Then read it again. Read it after winter and spring breaks. Read it after  summer break and before the start of a new school year. Read it when things  are not working well, and read it when they are. Share the strategies with colleagues. Add the ideas to lesson plans and individual plans. Read when you  need motivation, and read it when you need validation. Read it to ensure you have a happy class. 
Chapter One Organizing for Happiness ORGANIZING FOR YOU The first step to a happy classroom is being organized for success. With the  demands of ongoing instruction and assessment there is often little wiggle room  in the day for extra time. In order to maximize time and ensure that learning can  happen from bell to bell, it is crucial to be well organized and well prepared.  Start with your desk or personal area. Even if you have to fake it until you  make it, clean up your area. If an expectation is that student materials are tidy  and put away, youll need to model that. Start by getting some organizational  tools such as decorative baskets, pencil holders, binders, crates, and bins. A  visit to your local resale or donation store can help to save some money on  these items. Have a personal bookshelf with space for containers, binders,  teaching materials, and personal items. Great teaching happens away from the  desk, so have necessary items within reach and strategically placed throughout the classroom. Small containers of writing utensils, extra notepads, and  student rewards can be placed around the room.  Create specific locations for different teaching and learning opportunities.  For example, if you use one consistent location for whole-group instruction,  students will learn the expectations for that location more quickly because of the  consistent routine. You can organize the classroom into sections or spaces to create simple boundaries for activities. For example, a small table can be used for  small-group instruction. A nook can be created in the classroom for special activities. Secondary students can use a designated nook area to work on projects.  Consider the theme and color of your overall classroom design. The classroom can be decorated with the school mascot, a specific color scheme or  based on student group names e.g., animal types, colors, character traits, etc.  For some students and adults, too much color can feel chaotic and uncomfort2	 Chapter One able. Create a theme and stick to it. Determine one to two calming colors and  find or create containers, materials, and decorations that complement the color  theme. Blues and purples have been known to have calming effects, whereas  reds and yellows are associated with hunger and eating. Be strategic with your  design scheme based on your students needs. You may need to keep decorations on the walls to a minimum to support focus on the instructor. Have a filing cabinet or filing baskets for past lesson plans that you can  easily access. You can also organize these electronically if you create consistent file names. Youll want to save meeting agendas, meeting notes, parent  contacts, and any professional development sessions that you attend, either  in print or electronic files.  ORGANIZING FOR OTHERS As a teacher, you work with a number of great professionals. You may coteach classes or have teachers pushing into the classroom or pulling out of the  classroom. You may have instructional assistants, teaching partners, intern  teachers, or paraprofessionals providing support. It can be helpful to organize  the classroom for their success as well.  One of the most overlooked components to working effectively with teaching partners is common planning. You may need to advocate for time to coplan with the other teachers who support your classroom. If that isnt possible, find alternatives like e-mail strands, live-streaming apps for smartphones  or computers, or document programs that allow for multiple participants. As  the teacher you are responsible for creating and designing the instruction,  but when it comes to effectively teaching all students, it is all hands on deck.  Another important piece to working with teaching partners is the creation  of meaningful relationships. After all, these are teaching partners. Having a  partner implies that you are part of a teaching relationship. Relationships often take conscious effort and work. Begin by creating a set of norms and values. Review your common beliefs about learning, achievement, and student  goals. Determine specific roles for each partner. Create plans for including  teaching partners in activities, meetings, discussions, learning communities,  planning, assessment, and so forth see table 1.1. As a teacher you will also work with a number of professional collaborators. Most schools have social workers, school psychologists, school counselors, outside agency representatives, school nurses, volunteers, and others  who will be available to provide assistance in the classroom. People in those  roles may be helping to support students with special needs, they may help  implement academic or behavioral plans, or they may consult with you on  classroom management strategies or instructional techniques. 

Organizing for Happiness	 3 To help organize those supports, have clear schedules for lessons and  activities. If there are changes to the schedule, create a communication plan  for support staff. This can be as easy as e-mailing or text-messaging your  teaching partners where youll be and when youll be there. This way, a social  worker who needs to pull a student out to provide individual counseling, for  example, will know the best times and places to do so.  Another thing to consider when working with professional collaborators is  organizing for meetings. One of the realities of teaching is that there are a lot  of meetings to attend, facilitate, and plan for. Before a meeting, communicate to those invited or involved the purpose of the meeting, possible talking  points, and any materials, items, or ideas that they should have ready. Create  an agenda and e-mail it out to all involved prior to the meeting. For expected  difficult or contentious meetings, consider pre-meeting to role-play difficult  conversations. As the teacher it may be your responsibility to facilitate the  meeting and help teams come to consensus.  Tips for Gaining Consensus 	 Understand that consensus is not about 100 percent agreement; it is that, in  general, the group as a whole agrees that something is an issue or an action  plan is needed. 	 Have a list of meetingdiscussion norms and an agenda to keep everyone  on the same page and help guide conversations back to the main concern  or topic. 	 Make attempts to hear from all parties involved through round-robin format, written input, or small-group conversations. 	 Discuss any points of disagreement and create a list of the items that everyone can agree on. 	 Refrain from voting or creating teams by hearing all stakeholder input  including families, if involved, validating that input, and including components of each persons input into a final action plan. Table 1.1.  Example of a Shared Teaching Responsibility Plan

TaskActivity Teacher Responsibility Teaching Partner Responsibility Shared Responsibility Planning Assessment Instruction Progress Monitoring Classroom Management MeetingsCommittees Family Communication
Chapter One 	 If someone continues to be in disagreement, document that participants  concerns in a way that satisfies him or her in meeting minutes, on school  letterhead, or in the action or intervention plan. 	 Recognize that gaining consensus may require multiple meetings and ongoing discussion. ORGANIZING FOR A SUBSTITUTE As a classroom teacher there is no more important person to organize for than  a substitute teacher. When developing and planning your lessons, a great tip  is to have a friend or family member read through it. If your friends or family  members had to spend a day in your classroom, could they follow your lesson plan? Most of the time a substitute is needed because the teacher is ill or  has some other emergency. If you are not ready for those circumstances, your  substitute can be lost and a days worth of learning lost with it. Create a substitute-teacher binder. In the front pocket of the binder include any classroom passes that students may need, tickets or stickers for  your classroom management token economy, and maybe some special treats  that a substitute could hand out. Include pages for the schools emergency  procedures, a student roster, the bus and walker list, school contacts, and  daily schedule. Include a list of student-specific information. Who needs  extra attention or has other special needs, allergies, specific plans, alternative  schedules, and so forth? Who are the go-to helpers? You can even include  student learning-style preferences. Include a section for extension activities  or material to help fill any gaps in the day. These may be word puzzles, a list  of websites that students can visit, or previous work that students can catch  up on. You can add your daily lesson plans as needed.  In the back of the binder, add two template letters. One letter should be a  thank-you from you to the substitute. The second should be a fillable template  that the substitute can fill out to you. Include space to write in what was accomplished during the day and what parts of lessons may not have been completed. Have lines for the substitute to write which students were helpers and  which students needed help. Allow the substitute to share his or her reflections  on the day. This simple step can be crucial to establishing a good relationship  with substitutes and may help to secure consistent subs for your classroom.  ORGANIZING FOR STUDENTS The classroom is a great place to start. Traditional classrooms with rows of  tidy wooden desks are a thing of the past. Today the focus is on authentic 

Organizing for Happiness	 5 learning and education that meets all learners needs, including different  learning modalities. In organizing the space in your classroom, consider your  last trip to the grocery store. Grocery stores are very intentionally designed.  In fact, larger retailers often consult with behavioral and social psychologists  to understand consumer behavior. Designs are intentionally planned to meet  everyones needs and to encourage specific behaviors. Items are placed strategically. Colors are chosen with care. Accessibility for all is part of the design. Now picture your classroom. Designing for all learners is a process derived  from the concept of architectural design. The grocery store has ramps for persons in wheelchairs, highly purchased items are easily accessible, soft music  may be playing in the background, and colors are bright and inviting. The classroom design should be as thoughtful. Would a wheelchair easily pass through  the aisles and open areas in your classroom? Is the classroom easy on all five  senses lights are not overwhelming, sounds are not too loud, textures are not  irritating? Can students of all sizes and ages access necessary materials? Simple changes can make a tremendous difference. For instance, if students will be engaging in collaborative work, consider arranging desks in  groups of three or four with organization tools at each grouping figure 1.1.  Figure 1.1.  Classroom Example: DeskTable Clusters
Chapter One Organization tools can be small bookshelves with binders, writing tools, and  books. Materials can also be organized in transportable totes at each grouping  of desks. Small groups of desks or groups of students around smaller tables  will encourage conversation and collaboration. If students will primarily be doing active and kinesthetic learning desks or  tables can be arranged along the perimeter of the class so that activities can  occur in the center figure 1.2. Perimeter seating can also be organized in  small clusters to encourage group work. Perimeter seating can be beneficial  to create rotating centers for activity work as well. For instructional learning, the classroom can be organized as a semicircle  figure 1.3. This arrangement allows for the instructor to easily move from  student to student and to utilize proximity control. The semicircle can also  include a center table that creates a fishbowl for learning. As the semicircle  is working on individual activities, a small group can be getting additional  instruction at the fishbowl table. All of the examples above encourage different types of interaction between  teacher and learner and between students. An important concept is to conFigure 1.2.  Classroom Example: Perimeter Seating

Organizing for Happiness	 7 Figure 1.3.  Classroom Example: Semicircle sider having multiple learning areas within a classroom. Each arrangement  described above can also create space for specific activities. You may want  to include a calming area that includes activities to support sensory needs  and self-regulation. Some items to include in a calming area are soft seating,  stress balls, a timer, coloring pages, relaxing music, softer lighting. Another important organizational need is preparing for learning through  lesson plans. Some schools and districts may have required lesson-planning  templates. If not, there are plenty of great template examples online. The  important piece of lesson-planning organization is knowing that the more  time you put into designing the lesson for all learners, the more time youll  have to focus on teaching the lesson. It is difficult to invest the up-front  time for lesson planning, but in the end it truly pays off. Ensure that when creating your lessons, you are including multiple modalities. Do a learning-style inventory with your students early in the year  and ensure that each lesson incorporates aspects of each learning preference  verbal, visual, musical, physical, logical. Simple and quick learning-style  inventories can easily be found online. Even when curricula are scripted or  have required elements, add extension activities that will help match learner 
Chapter One styles and increase engagement. For example, a scripted reading lesson can  be extended for students by adding role-playing or sequencing activities.  CHAPTER SUMMARY There are many ways to be more organized and prepared in the classroom.  Keep in mind that the ultimate goal is student success and determine the best  ways to help your students succeed by considering their environment and  classroom structure. Remember that you are the model for their organizational behaviors. In what ways can you model good organizational strategies  and help teach them strategies as well? In addition, youll be working with a  number of other professionals, and organization can help make those relationships more successful and efficient. REFLECTION QUESTIONS Q1.  In your classroom you have three students who are pulled out for a  related service occupational therapy, speech therapy, physical therapy. You  have one student who has an instructional aide, and you have a social worker  who comes in twice a week to do a social skills group. How will you organize  a schedule that includes those professionals? What changes need to be made  to your current schedule? Q2.  You have a meeting next week with a family who has been challenging to work with in the past. The family members are strong advocates for  their student, who is currently underperforming academically. Youd like the  school counselor and social worker to attend the meeting and provide input,  but you have no time to meet in advance. What strategies can you use to  prepare for the meeting?  Q3.  Your current classroom is a collection of antique inspirational posters. You havent updated your dcor in several years. How can you make  minor adjustments to the dcor in the room to support student learning? Q4.  Make a list of all the strategies that help you feel organized in your  home and personal life. How can those effective strategies be applied to your  teachingwork life? 
Chapter Two Everything You Need to  Know, You Can Learn from  a Kindergarten Teacher ESTABLISHING CLASSROOM  RULES AND POSSIBLE OUTCOMES It has likely been a long time since you have been in kindergarten. If you  havent been in a kindergarten classroom in a while, then you really should  visit one soon. Kindergarten classrooms are like well-oiled machines. There  is little downtime, high amounts of structure, and a lot of happy, positive, and  consistent feedback. Whether your students are five or fifteen, the lessons of  a kindergarten classroom can be applied at all levels. Clear and well-established academic and behavioral expectations are necessary for a happy classroom. If your school already has school-wide expectations or a clear vision, you can use that as a starting point for your classroom  rules. For example, if the school expects students to be respectful and responsible, your classroom rules can describe what that looks like in the classroom.  If the school has a vision of creating concerned citizens, your classroom rules  can specify what classroom behaviors are required see table 2.1. Classroom rules should describe the specific behaviors that are necessary  for students to be successful. Take the concept of being respectful as an  example. Respect is a very broad construct and can mean different things to  different people. To be more specific for classroom rules, respect may look  like students interacting with all students using school-appropriate language.  Being responsible may look like students having materials ready for instructional time. Classroom rules should be stated positively. Many times teachers create  rules that say what not to do. This can be confusing for students. If the rules  are focused on what to do, it will be easier to teach the behaviors and reward  students for following the rules. It is easy to see when students have their 
Chapter Two materials ready for an activity. It is easy to identify students who are using  school-appropriate language with each other. Instead of dont run in the  aisles, the rule can be stated positively as use walking feet in the classroom  at all times. No matter the age range of a particular class, one great way to create the list  of rules is to create it together as a class. This strategy will provide students  with ownership over the classroom and the expected behaviors. Youll need  to determine what the nonnegotiable rules are. Then you can create a lesson  plan that allows for you and the students to negotiate and create additional  rules as a class. A good guideline for rule-making is to keep the number of rules between  three and five. That may seem overwhelming. How can you pair down your  list of rules to less than six? Its actually quite simple. Most classroom rules  are repetitive. For instance, dont call out, raise your hand, and wait for  the teacher can all be lumped into a rule of raise a quiet hand and wait for  the teacher to respond. Go through your current rules and organize them into  themes; then create a positively stated rule for the theme. This will help to  focus on three to five positively stated, specific rules to help students know  exactly what is expected of them. The other component to classroom rules is classroom outcomes. Most people call outcomes consequences. You will learn in chapter 4 that the term  consequence does not equal what happens when a rule is broken. What should  happen after a rule is broken is discipline. Discipline is focused on teaching  and facilitating learning. So an outcome of breaking a rule may result in relearning the rule or behavior. It may result in creating an intervention plan or  engaging in a behavior of repairing any harm to the person or environment. It  may result in a traditional negative outcome like an office referral. Table 2.1.  Procedures for Arrival, Dismissal, and Transitions Expectations and Rules Matrix School Expectations Classroom Rules Be Safe.   Keep all four legs of chairs on the floor.   Use walking feet.   Follow equipment instructions when in use. Be Respectful.   Use school-appropriate language.   Treat all people with kindness and compassion.   Listen when others are speaking. Be Responsible.   Arrive to class on time.   Have materials ready.   Ask questions.

Everything You Need to Know, You Can Learn from a Kindergarten Teacher	 11 When you are creating your classroom rules, you also want to create an  outcome hierarchy. What are the tiers of support that will be provided to  students when a rule is broken? In later chapters, you will learn more about  effective consequences based on the challenging behavior that is being observed, but for the sake of creating a general outcome hierarchy, there are  several tips to consider. The outcome hierarchy should be tiered or scaffolded so that students  have an opportunity to continue toward success. No classroom should have  a strike out policy. You want students to have opportunities to relearn and  refocus toward learning. A first step in the hierarchy may include a reminder about the rule and  expected behavior. This reminder should include some reteaching and roleplaying or practice opportunity. A second step may be contacting the parent.  A good policy for contacting parents is to be sure to contact them regularly  with positive reports, so that when you have to call for a behavioral concern,  you have already developed a strong pattern of information-sharing. You can  actually schedule positive phone calls home each week to help build parent  partnerships. This way, you are not calling parents only when there is not-sogood news.  Based on your schools policies, a third step may be an individual intervention support. This may look like a behavioral agreement or goal for success for the rest of the day or an individual or small-group social skill lesson  related to the behavior. In chapters 3 and 5 you will learn much more about  aligning interventions to the function of the behavior and to specific challenging behaviors.  What you want to be cautious of is using outcomes that are not effective.  Strategies like time out, office referrals, and suspension should be used cautiously and based on student need and behavior. A good gauge for effectiveness is that if you have to use a certain outcome procedure on a regular  basis, over and over, it is not effectively changing the challenging behavior.  Another outcome procedure should probably be considered.  In some kindergarten classes you may see an outcome strategy of color  charts being used. These certainly have their place, but they may need some  tweaking to be effective in your classroom. Consider yourself as a student  who talked out of turn in class. You are asked to go to the color-clip chart  and move your clip to red, or you are called out in front of your friends. You  are embarrassed not only because your enthusiasm to answer the question  overtook your knowledge of the classroom rule to raise your hand before  speaking, but also because you have to parade in front of the entire class and  fortify everyones belief that you are a challenging student and classmate.  Plus, it is only nine oclock, or first period, and you are already on red, that 
Chapter Two is, you have already had to try to save face in front of your peers. What is the  point of behaving appropriately the rest of the day? For most students the color-clip chart process can create anxiety, stigmatization, and actualization of perceptions about behavior and esteem. However,  the clip chart can be a useful tool in the classroom with a few minor changes.  The system can also be broadened and updated to work across all grade levels.  One easy update is to adjust the number of colors. Rather than the obvious  green, yellow, and red, consider using more neutral colors or a wider array of  colors. Align the colors to your classroom colors. This will create less automatic  responses to the stoplight perception that red equals bad. It is more important to  teach students how to behave than to only imply that they need to stop behaving.  Another easy adjustment is to include in the system an opportunity for elementary students to move back to favorable levels so that a clip move is not a  full day penalty. You can also start in a neutral zone and students can move up  and down throughout the day. In a secondary classroom period, you can include more opportunities to turn the behavior around. When establishing your  classroom rules with your students, be clear about how they can earn back  their favorable standing and how quickly that can occur. This will encourage  students to persevere behaviorally and academically in the classroom. Still, a chart system is not a necessary classroom management system.  Later chapters, especially 3, 4, and 5, will help you to create more effective  strategies and updates to your classroom management system. Other ideas  and more functional and logical consequencesmore positive responses to  challenging behaviorwill be described. If you are committed to a color  chart or as a secondary teacher you use other systems, consider some simple  adjustments. If you are willing to try something new, think about more  function-based intervention strategies.  UTILIZING INSTRUCTIONAL TIME AND TIMELY  TRANSITIONS: CHOCOLATE TO CHOCOLATE One of the most challenging times in most classes is the downtime that can  occur between lessons and activities. It is vital to plan from bell to bell. The  old adage that idle hands are more likely to find trouble often proves true.  Again, picture the kindergarten classroom. There are timers to indicate when  a transition is going to occur. There are visual and verbal prompts and instructions provided to know how to transition. Materials are ready in areas that  are being transitioned to. There are songs about transitioning to help create a  smooth process. Students are rewarded for getting to their area on time and  being ready to learn.

Everything You Need to Know, You Can Learn from a Kindergarten Teacher	 13 These are all strategies that are helpful at any age and developmental level.  They may be adjusted, but what works for a five-year-old is often a strategy  that will work for a fifteen-year-old. Designing your instruction is one important component to utilizing instructional time effectively, but transition time  can eat away at instructional time.  Speaking of eating, what does chocolate have to do with classroom transitions? Chocolate may be a survival food for many teachers, but its also a  great strategy to help smooth a rough transition routine. You may be a big  fan of vegetables. They are necessary for a healthy diet. But have you ever  experienced having a child eat dessert first and then asking him or her to eat  vegetables? It is not very likely that children will eat a candy bar and then be  ready for a big plate of carrots and green beans. The same concept applies to transitions. Most students wouldnt prefer to  go from an engaging activity to a stagnant lecture. Students often have difficulty moving from high-energy classes like physical education to quiet listening for math or reading. Instead of creating transitions that go from chocolate  to broccoli, create transitions that go from chocolate to chocolate. Not all chocolate is the same. Have you ever stood in a grocery store candy  aisle? There is bakers chocolate, semi-sweet chocolate, milk chocolate, 70  percent cacao, and chocolate with every imaginable morsel added to it. When  you are building your day and planning your lessons, you want to consider  what kind of chocolate is the right one. As an example, writing is often a challenging task for students. If your lesson plan includes whole group instruction  in writingwhich is comparable to broccoli or even cabbage or lima beans  for some studentsthen add some hot fudge to the day with an activity that  includes movement and creativity.  If you use centers or stations in an elementary classroom, they cant all be  milk chocolate, or else the students would get a bellyache after the second  station and not want to continue in the following stations. Instead, mix up the  stations to address multiple learning styles. For example, students could go  from an action station to a listening station and then to a creative station. In  a secondary classroom, there may be rotations of whole-group, small-group,  and independent work.  When in doubt, sandwich it out. If you know that you have to move from  a highly preferred activity to one that may be less preferred, let the students  know that something fun is embedded into the lesson. For instance, if the  daily schedule has language arts after music or art, which are typically more  preferred classes, then create a lesson plan that includes a highly engaging, culminating activity. Some ideas might be acting out letter sounds,  re-creating an older play in modern times, or interpreting text by drawing  or dancing.
Chapter Two Its also good to build in some broccoli-to-chocolate moments. In behavior  analysis, this strategy is called the Premack Principle,1 Grandmas Law, or  First-Then. Chapter 5 provides more specifics of when and how to use the  Premack Principle. The concept works by pairing a less preferred activity  with a more preferred activity. The more preferred activity acts as the reward  for having completed the less preferred activity. Eventually, with enough  pairing, students may even begin to like the less preferred activity because  they know something more fun follows. If they eat their broccoli knowing  that they can have chocolate when theyre done, even a stubborn child may  start to like broccoli. LOST AND FORGOTTEN PROCEDURES Like transitions, attention signals are also an important part of effective classroom routines. An attention signal can include a visual prompt like switching  the lights on and off or a verbal prompt such as eyes on me or three, two,  one. Some teachers may even use an actual bell. When you deliver a transition prompt, do so in one specific place in the classroom or hallway. This is  your transition prompting spot. This area should only be used for the attention signal and not for instruction. When you are waiting for the students to  respond to the signal, wait silently so that you are modeling the appropriate  behavior. This may take patience and practice at first, but eventually students  will pick up on the routine.  Students will quickly learn that when you are standing in the attention signal  area they need to wait for instructions for the next activity. Soon, when you  start walking toward that area of the classroom, the students will begin to quiet  down and await directions. This process is referred to as stimulus control. Withitness is another aspect of a happy class and happy teacher. Strong  withitness will help with classroom routines and procedures. Withitness is the  concept of teachers being aware of what is going on with all students within  the classroom. Having good withitness means that you quickly respond to  needs and take action to address classroom behaviors. You are able to triage  needs when there are multiple students in need of assistance. You can effectively address challenging behavior before it becomes disruptive. Most importantly you can do all of this without interfering with ongoing instruction.  Withitness requires that you can easily see and move around all areas of the  classroom and actively scan the classroom on a regular basis to assess needs  and engagement. Some teachers will create routines for how to ask questions  in a way that it is not disruptive. Strategies may include having colored cards  on student desks to indicate their need for assistance, as follows:

Everything You Need to Know, You Can Learn from a Kindergarten Teacher	 15 	 Green means they can do the activity without assistance.  	 Yellow means that they need help but its not an emergency.  	 Red means that they cant begin work until they get more assistance.  Another strategy is having a designated area in the classroom where students can post or ask questions. If you have one in the classroom, a smart  board can assist in organizing student questions. You can also write them  out on a whiteboard, text them to students, or have them on sticky notes on  students desks. The most important piece is to prioritize student needs to  encourage active engagement in the activity. Table 2.2 provides a list of the procedures that should be in every classroom along with tips for how it may be accomplished. Table 2.2.  Classroom Procedure Considerations. Procedures for Arrival, Dismissal, and Transitions Entering the classroom Greet students by name at the door; orient students to  expected work or behaviors. Dismissing at the end of the  period or day Use a timed warning system prior to the end of the day  or class ten-, five-, two-minute warnings. Returning to class after an  absence Use a folder or filing system to orient students to make  up work, hand in any completed work, and request  assistance for missed work; establish a clear timeline  for makeup work and include in your grading policy. Arriving to class tardy Assign each student a work buddy to help orient  to worktaskactivity; create time to review any  instruction missed; create system for homework if  activity is missed and requires makeup. Beginning of the period or   day Create a bell work routine that consistently requires  students to engage in a starting task this may be the  first scaffold of learning for the lesson; post the bell  work in an easily visible and accessible area. Asking for help; asking   questions Use a card or clipboard system to help triage questions  based on need; create a timeline for responses if  a quiet hand is raised, the teacher will respond  within 30 seconds; use visual cues and active  student responding throughout lesson as formative  assessment to gauge understanding. Lining up; going to specials or  the library Call students by name or group to help with the flow  of lining up; for younger students, have specifically  defined area to stand during lineup process tape  marks or feet stickers to help with spacing; rotate  line positions regularly; review expectations for continued

Table 2.2.  continued Procedures for Arrival, Dismissal, and Transitions Lining up; going to specials or  the library hallway behavior prior to entering the hallway; have a  lineup song that helps with timing of transition Preparing for lunch Use a timed warning system prior to lunchtime   ten-, five-, two-minute warnings; review lunchroom  expectations prior to entering the lunchroom. Attendance Follow policies when they are defined by a school or  district. Otherwise, create system to contactnotify  parents if attendance is impacting performance;  work with families to establish routines that will  assist with attendance students can set alarms reminders on phone, provide calendar of important  events, use online planner or website to notify of  important assignmentswork. Whole-Group, Small-Group, and Independent Instructional Activities Working cooperatively Explicitly teach expected collaboration behaviors;  define specific roles for students within groups  i.e., notetaker, timekeeper, spokesperson; group  students strategically based on the task refrain from  only using skill-level-based grouping; create areas  in the classroom that are conducive to group work  grouped tablesdesks. Finding directions for each  assignment Post directions in easily visibleaccessible areas; post  directions in small steps; chunk lessons so directions  can be broken into smaller steps; for missed or  makeup assignments, include directions in a binder  or folder for makeup work. Collectingreturning student  work Use a bin or mailbox system for work; inand outboxes could be placed at each desk or a specified  area of the classroom by periodsubject grouping  in-box is for upcomingdaily work, out-box is for  turning in assignments; create a classroom job responsibility for work collector and distributor.  Having materials ready  Have materials for each lesson easily accessible for  tables or table groups; post necessary materials in  an easily accessible location on the board or online  page. Passing out materials Create a classroom jobresponsibility for material  manager; have necessary materials already placed in  the activity areas. Heading work Create a consistent system for titling work name, date,  periodsubject; teach a process last namedate subjectperiod of name logic for electronic work.

Whole-Group, Small-Group, and Independent Instructional Activities Dealing with unfinished work Determine if unfinished work will become required  homework; create a time during the week that  unfinished work can be completed; have a space   for unfinished work to be kept until it can be  completed mailbox, filing system, binder,  notebook. Managing early completers Plan for early completers by including extension enrichment activities in the lesson plan; post  activities that can be done when finished read a  book, colorwrite, complete other work; review  expectations for early finishers when delivering  activity instructions. Being a classroom helper  or learning a classroom  responsibility Define classroom rolesresponsibilities; create a  rotation process that allows for each person to  access a jobresponsibility; focus jobs toward student  strengthsinterests; explicitly teach and model the  behaviors of that responsibility. Helping peers Strategically assign classroom buddies who students  can request help from; create a classroom  responsibility of resource finderhelper; create time  in lessons for peer work and collaboration. Breaks and Downtime When and how to use the  restroom Create a restroom pass and the number of times  that pass can be used in a certain time period; be  mindful and accepting of restroom emergencies;  teach explicitly the expectation for time away from  instruction; post proper restroom behaviors and  etiquette visibly in the restroom. When and how to use the  drinking fountain or sink Create a sinkfountain pass and the number of times  that pass can be used in a certain time period;   be mindful and accepting of sinkfountain  emergencies; teach explicitly the expectation for  time away from instruction; post proper fountain sink behaviors and etiquette visibly near the water  fountain andor sink. When and how to use the  pencil sharpener Create a pencil pass and the number of times that pass  can be used in a certain time period; be mindful  and accepting of pencil emergencies have pencils  available for students to use; teach explicitly the  expectation for time away from instruction; post  proper pencil sharpener behaviors and etiquette  visibly near the pencil sharpener. continued
Chapter Two Breaks and Downtime Throwing away trash  recycling Have small trash bins near tabledesk groupings; have  multiple trash receptacles throughout the classroom;  post proper trash and recycling behaviors and  etiquette visibly near the receptacles; explicitly teach  about recycling and garbage; create a classroom  waste management responsibility. When and how to get to   locker Create a locker pass and the number of times that pass  can be used in a certain time period; be mindful  and accepting of emergencies; teach explicitly the  expectation for time away from instruction; post  proper locker use behaviors and etiquette visibly  near lockers. Other Things that Routinely Happen in the Classroom Lost and Found items Create a space in the classroom for lost and found  items; determine if the school has a process in  place for lost and found items; create a classroom  responsibility for monitoring for, collecting, and  determining what to do with lost and found items. Classroom visitors Make all attempts to notify students in advance if  visitors are expected; discuss with visitors prior to  arrival any expectations or information that may be  important; review the classroom rules with students  regarding expected behaviors; create time for  classroom visitors to interact with students at a time  that does not directly interfere with instruction. Organizing and cleaning up  area Set a timer with a specific amount of time to help with  the effectiveness of cleaning up; explicitly review  what is required for cleaning up andor organizing;  create time in the week to do a classroom cleanup;  have the plant operator deliver a lesson on cleaning  up the classroom. Table 2.2.  continued CHAPTER SUMMARY Designing and delivering lessons are major job responsibilities of the classroom teacher. Instructional time is highly coveted and necessary to ensure  that lessons and assessments are completed based on specific scopes and  sequences. Transitions, routines, and procedures in the classroom can help  to minimize downtime and effectively use instructional time. By considering  all of the possible procedures that may be needed, you can better prepare the  classroom. By planning and preparing for effective transitions and minimizEverything You Need to Know, You Can Learn from a Kindergarten Teacher	 19 ing downtime, you can create a happier class that is able to focus on the  tasks at hand. REFLECTION QUESTIONS Q1.  Your administrator has informed you that he or she will be coming  into your classroom next week to conduct classroom observations. You have  lesson plans ready but want to be sure that the students are ready for this type  of observation. What strategies can you use to prepare your students for the  administrators classroom walkthroughs? Q2.  It is the middle of the school year and you have not yet established  classroom jobs or responsibilities. What would be a few classroom jobs that  you could start with to help with classroom procedures? Q3.  You have a lesson plan ready for tomorrow that includes some activities that may not be highly preferred by students. They are required, districtscripted lessons with assessments. Last time the students were not engaged  and struggled to transition to the next activity. How can you adjust the activity before or after the required district lesson to encourage a better transition  and engagement? Q4.  Your teaching partner currently has fifteen classroom rules. Many  of them are stated in the negative. Your classroom rules have been slimmed  down to four and they are positively stated. How can you work with your  teaching partner to help create a more effective set of classroom rules? NOTE 1.  D. Premack, Reversibility of the Reinforcement Relation, Science, New Series 136, no. 3512 April 20, 1962: 25557.
Chapter Three Function Junction Why Does This Keep Happening?  Understanding the Functions of Behavior For practical purposes, it is important to understand the four basic functions  of behavior. So, lets take a trip into Function Junction. The function of a behavior really just means that we need to understand  why a behavior is occurring. Once we understand the why, well be able to  build better interventions. If we dont understand the why the function, then  well likely be working ourselves and the students in circles. In many cases,  people give up on behavior analytic practices because what they attempt is  not successful for any number of reasons, but most often because they have  not identified the correct function of a given behavior.  All behavior occurs for some reason. No one truly does anything out of  the blue. We typically engage in a behavior because we get an outcome that  we like. We may get a smile back when we smile casually at a stranger in the  grocery store, so well likely smile kindly at the next stranger as well, hoping  for the same outcome.  When were thirsty and craving caffeine, well put our 1.25 into the soda  machine, push the big soda button, and listen as the can clinks to the bottom.  The next time were thirsty, well go to the same soda machine that worked  for us last time. If we dont want to get wet in the rain, well put up a hood or  an umbrella each time we see sprinkles. If we dont like loud noises or crowds  of people, well avoid going to certain places.  We do those things over and over because we like the payoff. We like the  attention of nice, happy people. We like to avoid angry, mean people.  Consider this scenario: Melissa, a student in your class, calls out every time  you begin to ask a question, whether she knows the answer or not. The calling  out is often disruptive to you and the other students, and it makes it hard to  get through a lesson. Sometimes, as a response to her calling out, youll give 
Chapter Three her verbal reprimands, use proximity by standing by her desk, or maybe even  send her to the office to speak to an administrator about her behavior. The  calling out happens over and over throughout the day to the point where you  become frustrated and even raise your voice. Now consider this: Melissa lives in a home with six other siblings. Her  mom is often busy with two jobs and her father is not available to assist with  family issues. The siblings are often busy and do not give her much attention  at home. She loves attention and likes to be right.  When Melissa is in class, she wants nothing more than the adult attention  that she isnt able to get at home. At school she has noticed that the teacher  will say nice things to students, but it is often in passing and usually has a  flat affect. But, when the teacher gets upset, shell raise her voice, shell stand  next to the student, and shell even flail her arms and lean in close. Neither the student nor the teacher is doing these things consciously, but  both have an impact on the continuation of what can sometimes be a challenging behavior. The student calls out because she is craving attention, and  the teacher is inadvertently providing it by talking to her when she calls out,  standing by her, or sending her to the principal. As teachers, it is our response  to a students maladaptive attempt to gain attention that we need to change.  Thats right, it is our response that needs to change. FOUR FUNCTIONS OF BEHAVIOR Lets first learn the four main functions of behavior so we can then learn  some effective strategies to address challenging behavior that may occur in  the classroom.  Attention Attention, the desire or intent to have or gain a persons awareness,  concentration, notice, or interest, is usually desired from a specific person  or persons. The attention can be sought from adults or peers. You are more  likely to see attention-seeking behavior in the presence of a person or persons, especially one or more who are preferred. This function is most often  person-specific, not locationor time-specific. Classroom Example:  Suzanne tells inappropriate jokes when her friends  are seated next to her because her friends all laugh at her jokes. Escape or Avoidance Both reflect the desire or intent to remove oneself from a place or  persons presence that is aversive or undesirable. Escape implies that the 

Function Junction	 23 removal occurs during the event or in the presence of the person, while avoidance implies that the removal occurs prior to the undesired event or persons  presence. This function is most often associated with a specific event, person,  time, or request to engage in a non-preferred activity.  Classroom ExampleEscape:  Jimmy takes a long bathroom break each  time writing activities are presented. Classroom ExampleAvoidance:  Jimmy takes a long bathroom break just  prior to scheduled writing time. Tangible This is the desire or intent to gain access to a preferred item or activity.  Tangible is most often associated with something that one can holdmanipulate toy, food, game, etc. This function is most often associated with the  absence of or removal of a preferred item or activity. Classroom Example:  Felicia cries, stomps her feet, and takes a toy car  away from a peer or an e-reader off another students desk. Sensory Input This is the desire or intent to either gain or remove sensory input e.g.,  light, sound, touch, etc. This function is not dependent on the presence of a  person or event and will occur anytime or anywhere. This function may also  occur more often if a person is experiencing a perceived stressor. Classroom Example:  Alexander hums and taps his pencil on his desk  when it is quiet. We already talked about an example of attention-seeking behavior. Lets  get a clearer picture of the other functions in the classroom. Again, the foundation of effective change strategies begins with understanding why the challenging behavior is occurring. EXPANDING CLASSROOM EXAMPLES Escape and avoidance occur frequently in classrooms. As teachers, we ask  students to engage in any number of non-preferred tasks throughout a day,  such as get out your math book or begin your morning writing work.  Face itall of our students cant like all of our lesson plans every day!  We may see challenging behavior when a student has a skill deficit in an  academic area. Lets walk through an example of escapingavoiding a math  worksheet.
Chapter Three It is 9:20 a.m. You make an announcement that the class will be transitioning to math in two minutes. Sarah, a second grade student, has been quiet and  focused all morning during the creative writing lesson. You glance up and  notice that she is out of her seat sharpening her pencil. She didnt raise her  hand or ask permission.  You give her a verbal warning in accordance with your outcome hierarchy  well see examples of this later in the book. She promptly sits back in her  seat, but begins talking with her neighbor at a level above an inside voice.  You remind Sarah that she will have a time out if she continues to break the  classroom rules. Sarah then sticks her tongue out at you. You quickly go over  to Sarah and begin talking with her about her behavior.  The transition bell rings and most students know to open their math book  and begin working on the next worksheet. Meanwhile, you and Sarah are  going back and forth in conversation about her behavior. After five minutes,  you remind Sarah to open her book and begin working on the decimal place  worksheet.  What has happened here? Sarah has avoided the math worksheet for at  least five minutes. If the lesson segment time is twenty minutes, that is a  quarter of the instructional time that she has successfully avoided. Now lets imagine that Sarah is stuck on a problem on the worksheet. Remember, she has a deficit in foundational math skills. Sarah begins singing  loudly in the classroom and it is disrupting other students. You walk over  and let Sarah know that she has a ten-minute time out for her violation of the  classroom rules. Sarah huffs, moves to the back of the classroom, and you  set a timer for ten minutes. When the timer rings and Sarah walks back to her  seat, the transition timer rings as a reminder that math time is almost over.  Sarah managed to avoid and then escape the non-preferred task of changing  decimal points. When the function is escapeavoid, typically students are trying to get  away from something. When the function is tangible, most often students are  trying to gain or get access to something. When we think about tangible as a  function, the first thing that typically comes to mind is the more elementary  example of a student wanting a preferred toy or a particular food item. In this  next example, however, lets look at a secondary school example.  Tommy is a student who wants access to the perfect chair next to the  perfect girl. He enters health class just before the bell rings and slides into a  chair toward the back of the room. This is typically where he sits, because  he thinks he wont be called on as much to answer questions. Hes wrong  about that!  As the bell rings, a new student enters. She is asked to introduce herself  to the class, and then she promptly takes a seat near the teachers desk in the 

Function Junction	 25 front of the room. Tommy stares at her the rest of the class period and carefully watches to see if her next class is across the hall with him. When she  does begin walking toward Mrs. Ashleys class across the hallway, Tommy  immediately rushes into that room and attempts to take the seat next to the  new girl. But Jimmy quickly sits down in that same seat.  Tommy and Jimmy begin a verbal altercation over who was there first  and who the seat belongs to. None of this seems to impress the new girl, and  Tommy ends up with neither the seat nor the girl but, instead, a discipline  referral. Tommy didnt get what he wanted when he wanted it. Sensory input is the function that is most often confusing for people. It is  the only function where you are either trying to gain or remove something. It  is easiest to understand in terms of the five senses. What happens when you  have a mosquito bite? In most cases, if you feel a physiological need to itch,  you will scratch to remove the itchy feeling. If you have a headache, you may  take an aspirin to remove the painful sensation of the headache.  For example, some people like to have noise when they study or write, so  when they sit down to begin a task, they will often gain access to sensory  input by turning on the television or music. Conversely, there are also people  who are unable to concentrate or focus when there is background noise. They  will likely try to remove the sensory input by moving away from the sound  source, putting on quieting earphones, or turning off the music.  In the classroom, we will see students who fidget, flap their hands, rub their  clothing, pinch their skin, tap the desk, and so forth. The function of sensory  input is typically brought on by some perceived physiological need. You will  know if it is sensory because it will occur anytime, anyplace, and is not dependent on the presence of any person, activity, or item. In other words, you  can feel the need to itch in a sterile room. Its automatic.  REPLACING THE CHALLENGING WITH WHAT WORKS:  REPLACEMENT BEHAVIORS Now that we have toured the station at Function Junction and you have a good  grasp on understanding the whys of behaviorthe functionswell need to  mosey on over to the next stop. We need to know how to intervene, that is,  how to address the challenging behavior and begin to make change. The most  important lesson at this Function Junction stop is that we cant make anyone  do anything. We are going to work on setting up the environment based on  our understanding of why the behavior is occurring, so that we can either  increase a behavior that we want to see a replacement behavior or decrease  the challenging behavior.
Chapter Three Well start with the replacement behavior. The goal is to substitute the  challenging behavior with a more socially appropriate behavior that matches  the same function and provides virtually the same outcome. In its simplest  form, the action answers the question, what is it that we want the student to  be doing? Sounds easy, right? It should be if we consistently think about the function  of the behavior. A student is calling out in class and we have identified that  the function is attention. So what is it that we want the student to be doing?  Your first response may be, I want the student to stop calling out. Well, that  is true, but what do we want him or her to do? A behavior is something that  we do physically or verbally.  You may be thinking to yourself, I want students to raise their hand!  Yes. Raising a hand is a behavior. Remember the functionI want them to  raise their hand to be called on by the teacher, thereby getting attention for  the socially appropriate replacement behavior. Ding! Ding! Ding! Thats the  best answer in this scenario. There are so many instances where our best intentions inadvertently reinforce or reward and thereby maintain the challenging behavior. Think about  the attention example with Melissa that we first discussed. The teacher had  the best intentions of working with the student. Had she understood that the  student was seeking to gain attention, however, the teachers responses may  have been different. Replacement Behavior Classroom Examples The trick to the behavior in the raising hand example above is that you the  teacher have to be able to provide the attention that is being sought when the  student engages in the replacement behavior. What do you think would happen if students raised their hand the behavior we want, but were ignored by  the teacher? They might get frustrated and act out or lose interest in trying to  gain your attention and become disruptive by seeking to gain peer attention. In this example, lets also examine the fact that raising ones hand is not a  complicated behavior. Surely students are able to raise their handso why  dont they just do that? Lets go back to Melissa, our student who is starved  for attention. Her teacher didnt provide animated attention for appropriate behavior, but did so for inappropriate behavior. Which would you work  harder for?  A replacement behavior for escapeavoidance would allow the student to  be removed from a non-preferred task or person in a socially appropriate way.  Consider this: If a student is avoiding writing tasks by having a meltdown  crying, yelling, throwing items before writing time begins, how can the 

Function Junction	 27 student appropriately avoid writing instead? I know . . . they have to write,  right? Yes. They do.  Even as adults, though, we create our own replacement behaviors for nonpreferred tasks. When youve been staring at the computer screen for too  long and your eyes are starting to cross and the words just arent forming  anymore and youre beginning to become agitated, you stand up, stretch,  walk away for a brief moment, refresh, and come back to the task at hand.  You take a short breakthe socially appropriate way to temporarily escape.  For students, we can create break passes or cool-off cards that they can use to  temporarily escape or avoid a task.  What about for the function of tangible, you ask? This one may seem a bit  tougher, but again, think about the simplest terms. If a student is trying to gain  access to a tangible item but is doing so by taking it away from someone else  without permission, what is the socially appropriate way to access that item?  Asking for it, right?  This brings up another valuable lesson that will be studied in a later chapter: All behavior is a form of communication. In many cases we teach a  student the socially appropriate way to request what it is that they want. We  have to understand the function, what it is that they want first, and then we  can build the skills to identify when it is wanted and how to request it. Sensory input is a bit more challenging because it is not dependent on outside intervention; remember, it can occur in a sterile room. However, there  are strategies that we can use. For the student who fidgets, flaps hands, taps  on the desk, and rubs clothing we can provide more socially appropriate sensory items. Velcro can be attached to the underside of the students desk or  table so that it is not visible and is potentially less stigmatizing for the student  to use in front of peers. The student can quietly rub the soft or rough side of  the Velcro strip to gain sensory input. The student could also carry a small  token or item in a pocket, to rub when needed. Chronic fidgeters can have  exercise cords tightly wrapped around the legs of their chairs so that they can  bounce their legs or quietly tap their feet on the cord.  The important thing to remember when you are pulling into Function Junction is to identify why the behavior is occurring so that you find the functionally equivalent replacement behavior and understand what your response  needs to be to help meet that functional need.  INTERVENTION STRATEGIES ALIGNED TO FUNCTION A good, well-thought-out intervention to address challenging behavior needs  to include a replacement behavior. There are other intervention strategies that 
Chapter Three can be used as well, some that can be put in place before a challenging behavior preventative, and some that can be put in place afterward reactive.  If the function of the behavior is understood and considered, then multiple  intervention strategies can be used. Below are a few more examples of ideas  that can be implemented in the classroom.  Attention and EscapeAvoidance When it comes to attention-seeking behavior, consider providing noncontingent attention throughout the day. To do so, youll want to create a wellthought-out schedule of reinforcement.  For instance, if you know that a student seeks attention nearly every ten  minutes throughout a day, youll want to create a plan of providing attention  more often than every ten minutes, maybe every five minutes. You can set  a quiet timer on your phone or computer to remind you to check in with the  student, look up and give a thumbs-up or wink, or ask a prompting question,  such as are you doing okay? or do you need any help? By providing attention on a regular basis you can avoid the student engaging in challenging behavior to receive that attention. Eventually, youll want  to spread that five minutes out to ten and then twenty, and then at some point  the attention can be more random and periodic. A student who commonly seeks attention may also benefit from being a  class leader or having a classroom job. One strategy is to have the student  work with classmates especially if the student is motivated by peer attention  and to provide lots of positive praise to that student for performing the class  job. The student can appropriately gain peer attention, peers can assist in the  process and learn valuable empathy skills, and the whole class can benefit  from the positive intervention. You may also have a student who commonly tries to escape or avoid; this  is a student who tries to get out of doing work or is a professional procrastinator. For the escape artist, one of the most practical strategies is to make  learning engaging and meaningful. You can do this by gathering information  about student learning styles, preferred topics of interest, and abilityskill  levels, and incorporating that information into your planned lessons.  For instance, you can let a student who typically procrastinates have some  choice of topic for a paper or writing assignment. You can turn assignments  into games or friendly classroom competitions. You can also incorporate  multiple learning styles when designing your lesson a visual component, a  movement component, an extension activity, etc.  Another consideration is to combine easier tasks with more complicated  tasks so that the work does not become overwhelming. Or you can provide 

Function Junction	 29 opportunities for choice with regard to schedule or activities. Students may  not be able to rearrange the time that Reading takes place, but perhaps within  Reading they could choose to go to the listening station first and then read  the passage. In a secondary classroom, students could have more choice in  which part of the work to begin or different ways to complete the task e.g.,  instead of writing a paper, they could create a presentation, poem, brochure,  or song. You can also help the student to recognize when to plan or schedule  small breaks before, during, or after tasks. Remember, with escape-maintained behavior, the student must always complete the initial or requested task. If students are given the opportunity to escape  once, they will likely do it again. So, if a student takes a break, she or he must  be taught to go back, once the break is complete, to the original task or request  and finish that task. It is necessary for students to know that even if they avoid or  escape a task temporarily, the task doesnt go away.  Think about your own behavior. If you are working on a big project for  work that has deadlines and maybe even consequences for not completing it,  you can take short breaks when you get frustrated or you need to spend time  with your family or watch your favorite reality TV show, but you still have  to go back and complete it to meet your deadline. TANGIBLE AND SENSORY INPUT: COMMUNICATION When it comes to accessing preferred items, it makes sense that most people  want what they want when they want it. But we have to learn how to ask for  items appropriately. That is the most effective strategy to address the need to  gain preferred items. Teach students to communicate their wants and needs to others. Initially,  that may not even be with words. For students who have difficulty communicating, consider having pictures of preferred items that they can use to request  them. Technology can also be used in this instance. An e-reader or smartphone can be loaded with pictures or spoken requests for preferred items.  It is also important to utilize verbal praise when you observe students using  the appropriate request or sharing preferred items with others. You also want  to remember to ignore instances when the item is not requested appropriately, use a verbal reminder of how to ask for the item, and then provide the  item when it is requested appropriately and teach other students that same  response pattern. You may have to do this multiple times before it becomes  part of the students repertoire.  Again, sensory input as a function is a bit more complicated, as the response is automatic: Have itch, scratch, and itch disappears or is temporarily 
Chapter Three relieved. But we can provide items that make it difficult to engage in some of  those automatic behaviors.  For students who have difficulty keeping their hands to themselves while  walking in the hallway or during in-class transitions, they can hold onto an  important envelope or keep their hands in their sleeves. At their desk, students  can place their hands onto construction paper cut-outs of hands taped to the top  of their desk.  Remember to provide verbal encouragement when you see students using  the appropriate behavior, such as great job keeping your hands on top of  your desk! Older students can have silent earbuds in their ears if noise is  overwhelming in certain circumstances just be sure to check with your administrator for approval if use of technology is a rule violation.  On the opposite end, students can listen to quiet music if sensory input  is needed. Music that is near sixty beats per minute is the equivalent of the  resting heartbeat. You can search YouTube and other music venues for music  that is sixty beats per minute. Classrooms can also use mood lighting with  soft lamps instead of fluorescent bulbs to cut back on both the visual and  sound stimulation that they produce. Be sure to check with your administrator  if the lamps are fire-marshal approved.  CHAPTER SUMMARY In this chapter you learned about the four basic functions of behavior; attention, escapeavoidance, tangible, and sensory input. You read multiple classroom-based examples and scenarios of how these functions play out in the  classroom and what your response can be. It is important to remember that,  as the teacher, your response to the behavior either increases or decreases  the likelihood of the behavior occurring again in the future. You also learned  about replacement behaviors. Replacement behaviors will provide the same  outcome and meet the same functions as inappropriate behaviors, but they  will be socially and age appropriate. In the next chapter you will learn more  about how the response to the behavior, or consequence, can influence the  behavior and your overall classroom management practices. REFLECTION QUESTIONS Q1.  In Melissas scenario, do we need to make changes to her home life in  order to impact her overall quality of life, or will our responses in the classroom make a difference? If so, how?

Function Junction	 31 Q2.  If we identify the function of a behavior and a significant life event  occurs in a students life, will the function change or is it permanent? If so,  in what ways? Q3.  Think of the common intervention strategies that you currently use in  the classroom. Take a moment to align the intervention into the four function  categories attention, escapeavoidance, tangible, and sensory input. Will  you utilize those intervention strategies differently now? If so, how? Q4.  If you notice that a colleague is using a strategy that may not be  functionally related to the challenging behavior, how will you help that colleague to understand the function of the behavior and identify a replacement  behavior?
Chapter Four Myths about Consequences WHAT HAPPENS AFTER One of the biggest myths in education is that consequences are effective.  The first thing that is important to understand is that in behavioral theory, a  consequence is what occurs after the target behavior, typically within thirty  seconds. Consequences can be positive or negative. You have to take the  connotation away from the word. The consequence is merely the result or  outcome of the behavior. What most people are attempting to do is punish or eliminate the behavior.  The process of punishment implies that the behavior will be less likely to  occur in the future. A punisher can be positive adding something to the  environment or negative removing something from the environment. An  example of a positive punisher would be the addition of a loud noise or pain  from touching something hot. An example of a negative punisher would be removing recess or taking away a toy see table 4.1. The only way to know if it  is a punisher is if the behavior occurs less often or does not repeat in the future. Table 4.1.  Description of Positive and Negative Reinforcement and Punishment Positive  Negative  Reinforcement Adding something to the   environment to increase the   likelihood of the behavior Removing something from the  environment to increase the   likelihood of the behavior Punishment Adding something to the   environment to decrease the   likelihood of the behavior Removing something from the  environment to decrease the  likelihood of the behavior
Chapter Four The concern is that often teachers attempt to use punishers that do not  decrease the occurrence of the behavior. In fact, in many cases the behavior  occurs more often. If that is true, the behavior is being reinforced rather than  punished. The best or most common example of this is the use of time out or  exclusionary practices.  TIME IN OR TIME OUT:  THE OVERUSE OF EXCLUSIONARY PRACTICES What practitioners and researchers have learned about the use of exclusionary  practices such as time out or removal from class is that they are not effective  in decreasing challenging behavior. Exclusionary practices can be detrimental to student engagement and can limit access to necessary instructional opportunities. Removal from school via suspensions from school is more often  given to students who are already below grade levels, have special needs, or  represent subgroups of students who experience disproportionate discipline. The use of exclusionary practices has been linked to the process termed  the school to prison pipeline. This process is one in which students who  experience the overuse of removal from school are also those who are more  likely to drop out of school, be involved in the juvenile and potentially  adult criminal justice system, and require agency supports such as mental  health, medical, and substance abuse supports, and the use of entitlement  programs. The students who experience removal from class from time out  procedures, office referrals, and suspensions are also most often the students who already struggle to engage and enjoy the educational process.  They may come from families and communities who experienced struggles  in schoolgenerational disengagement.  Can time out or time away work? Yes. The use of time out can be very  effective if used meaningfully. Consider this: In the game of hockey, there  is a process of penalties. Those penalties result in a player temporarily being  removed from the ice and having to watch the game played without the removed players involvement or assistance. Such a player really wants to be on  the ice, sticking slap shots, attempting goals, and scoring points for the team.  Now consider the student who experiences academic challenges or deficits  in writing or math. Engaging in writing or math is not enjoyable. The student  is not itching to start that worksheet or draft a paragraph. Time out or time  away only works if the child is removed from something she or he wants to  be involved in.  Use time out or time away in moderation. Pay attention to whether the behavior decreases or is eliminated after the use of a time out procedure. Utilize 

Myths about Consequences	 35 time out only when you are confident that the student wants to be engaged  in the activity. Examples of how to use time out effectively will be provided  later in this chapter. But whenever the behavior does not decrease or if it  increases, consider a different strategy. WHEN CAN TIME OUT WORK IN THE CLASSROOM? Before describing a number of alternative strategies to use in lieu of exclusionary practices, it is helpful to understand the different kinds of time out  and how they may be applied more effectively and strategically. There are  two common types of time out procedures. The first is exclusionary; the second is non-exclusionary. Both can be effective if used appropriately. Exclusionary time out procedures are what the phrase implies. The student  is temporarily removed from the environment. The use of exclusionary time  out may be done by sending the student to the back of the class, to another  teachers classroom, the office, or out of school. The removal should consist  of a predetermined amount of time. A common practice is that a time out  should not exceed in minutes the age of the student in years. So if the student  is six, the time out should not exceed six minutes. A key to consider is that the  use of any punishment procedure should be based on the needs of the student  and not based solely on the convenience of the staff member.  Non-exclusionary time out is a bit more complex. The concept is the same.  It is a process of removing something pleasurable or preferred temporarily  in an effort to decrease the challenging behavior. Essentially the student remains in the classroom but is removed from some aspect of the activity that  is occurring. A non-exclusionary time out may be as simple as planned ignoring, which will be described in greater detail in chapter 5. The student may  be asked to sit in the back of the room and watch the activity. Think of the  hockey penalty box. If a student is not following directions on the playground  or in the hallways during passing, he or she may be required to sit passively  and watch the other students engage in the activity.  Non-exclusionary time out may also consist of temporarily removing the  reinforcer for that student. A full description of a token economy is provided  in chapter 8. In a token economy, symbolic money or points are used to signal  appropriate behavior. Non-exclusionary time out may include reminding the  student that while engaged in challenging behavior, she or he cannot earn  points, tickets, tokens, or the like.  It is important to note that students are not able to earn items during the  pre-determined non-exclusionary time out, but items are not removed from  them. If you were to remove or take away an item such as points, tickets, or 
Chapter Four stickers that have been previously earned, you might instigate a power struggle and imply that you are responsible for the outcomes of the behavior. This  can be done by stating, You are not currently earning your points. When I  see that you are sitting appropriately, you will be earning your points again.  By letting the children know that their own behavior prevents them from  earning a reward, they are able to connect their behavior with the outcome.  This is an important step toward self-awareness. ALTERNATIVES TO EXCLUSIONARY PRACTICES There are hundreds of other strategies that can be used instead of time out  or time away, especially if you are finding that exclusionary practices arent  working. The first thing to explore is functional or logical consequences. As  the name implies, this is a process of matching the function of the behavior  to the logical result of the behavior. An example of a logical outcome or consequence is when a student who  tips over a desk, knocks papers off the table, or tears down items on a bulletin  board is made to clean the mess up. A student who hurts someones feelings  is required to apologize to that person or write a letter of apology. A student  who runs in the hallway would be asked to go back to the beginning point  and walk. A student who performs that logical consequence should then be  verbally praised for engaging in the appropriate behavior. In other examples of functional outcomes, a student who is attentionseeking would be actively ignored or a student who is attempting to escape or avoid would have to complete the task. Some of these functional  consequences may also be natural or occur in the natural environment. A   child who tips his chair back may tip too far and fall. A child who runs  in the hallway may slip. A child who yells in class may be rejected by his  peers.  There are also numerous strategies that can be used to deter future misbehavior or to teach appropriate behavior. Some readers may feel that without  the traditional punishers students will run amuck. Again, the science of  behavior has shown that if the behavior continues to occur, it is being reinforced. Ask yourself if, each time a consequence is provided, the behavior  has decreased or stopped. A more holistic and effective strategy is to align  the consequence to the behavior and focus on teaching the behaviors that we  want to see.  Descriptions of some of the strategies listed below table 4.2 are included  in future chapters. 

Table 4.2.  Possible Alternatives to Exclusionary Practices Possible Alternatives to Exclusionary Practices   1.  ActivityPrivilege loss 26.  Parent conference   2.  Administration check-ins 27.  Parent supervision   3.  After-school detention 28.  Peer mediation   4.  Behavior agreement 29.  Phone call to parents   5.  Behavioral self-monitoring 30.  Positive behavioral supportsMultitiered  systems of support   6.  Campus beautification 31.  Precise requests   7.  Check InCheck Out behavior   education program 32.  Premack Principle   8.  Classroom consequence  hierarchy 33.  Problem-solving process with student   9.  Community service 34.  RedirectionReminderPrompting 10.  Conflict resolution 35.  Referral for school-based evaluation In-school staffing 11.  Cool offBreak pass 36.  Referral to building-based support staff 12.  Corrective feedback 37.  ReferralRecommendation to outside  counseling agencyDiversion program 13.  Daily home note 38.  Reflection activity 14.  Early intervention strategies 39.  Restitution 15.  Errorless learning 40.  Restorative JusticePractices 16.  FamilyCaregiver involvement 41.  Reteach behavioral expectations 17.  In-class detention  In-class suspension 42.  Role-play activity 18.  In-school suspension 43.  Saturday school 19.  IndividualSmall-group  counseling 44.  Schedule changeAlternate schedule 20.  Letter of apology 45.  Service learning 21.  LevelPoint system 46.  Social skills training 22.  Limiting social time 47.  Structured behavior intervention plan 23.  Lunch detention 48.  Time outTime away 24.  Mini-courseSkill module 49.  Violence prevention program 25.  Overcorrection  Repeated practice 50.  Youth courtMock trial
Chapter Four PREVENTION IS THE BEST MEDICINE Can punishers be effective in the classroom? Yes, they can. They need to  be done intentionally, strategically, and with compassion and awareness.  However, the best practice is to avoid the need for the use of punishers or  exclusionary practices. The following fable best depicts the importance of prevention:  Three men were spending the day relaxing by a riverside. As they ate their  lunch, one man noticed a child in the river. The men assumed the child was  playing and swimming in the river, and they continued to attend to their lunch.  Soon after, another child was seen floating in the river. The men suddenly realized the children in the river were not playing. They were in fact struggling to  stay above water. Before long, the river was full of small children struggling to swim. The three  men jumped up, fearing for the lives of the children and hopeful that they could  save them. Two of the men quickly ran toward the riverbank and began devising a plan. The third man began running upstream. The other two men, eager to  jump in and pull the children out, were confused by his actions. They wondered  why he would be running away from where the children could be seen drowning. The third man continued to run upstream, determined to find the place  where the children were and stop them from falling into the river.  As an educator, you often have to react to the circumstances. You have to  put out the fires, save the drowning children, and respond to the crisis or  concern of the moment. And that will always be needed. However, there are  many instances in which, with the right strategies, plans, procedures, and  techniques, you can prevent the crisis from occurring. We could proverbially  prevent the children from falling into the river. Ask yourself: What would you  rather spend your time addressing? Prevention is difficult. It requires that you heavily invest in a process on  the front end. It necessitates spending more time and effort to plan, organize,  and schedule. But if you consider the amount of time consumed by addressing  challenging behavior, the time spent on planning to avoid disruptive, challenging, or aggressive behavior becomes well spent. CHAPTER SUMMARY The consequence of a behavior is what occurs immediately after the behavior. Often you are not responsible for delivering the consequence; the natural  environment does so. But when you can affect an outcome, you must do so  if an undesirable behavior continues to occur. You can do it by strategically 

Myths about Consequences	 39 setting up punishment procedures that intentionally address the challenging  behavior and effectively work to decrease it. The procedures may be exclusionary, however, the most effective process  is to establish an environment of prevention. If the environment is predictable, safe, engaging, and differentiated, it is less likely that you will experience difficult behavior and have to rely on consequence procedures. On the  occasion that consequence procedures have to be used, ensure that they relate  to the behavior, teach appropriate behavior, and focus on the needs of the  student.  REFLECTION QUESTIONS Q1.  How much time, on average, do you feel you spend addressing challenging or disruptive behavior reprimanding or correcting behavior, writing referrals, reteaching expectations, etc.? How much time would you be  willing to invest in changing routines, procedures, and processes to be more  preventative? Q2.  Pick two of the alternatives to suspension and apply them to a situation in the classroom. How did they work? Q3.  If you utilize a process of time out and a student continues to engage  in the challenging behavior, how can you adapt the process so that it is more  effective? Q4.  What are strategies that you have used to decrease challenging behavior? Why do you believe they worked? How can you apply those strategies  to other situations?
Chapter Five Opposites Attract Interventions Aligned   to Challenging Behavior This chapter is going to walk you through several common challenging  behaviors, the matching desired behaviors, and several strategies to use to  address the behaviors. The idea is that for most challenging or disruptive  behaviors, there are easy-to-implement techniques to decrease the behaviors.  There is nothing magical here; these are merely suggestions to add to your  toolboxapproaches to take that may help you in the classroom and assist  students in being more successful. DEFIANCE 	 Challenging Behavior: Defiance resistance, opposition, lack of obedience 	 Desired Behavior: Accepting Responsibility Intervention 1: Verbal De-Escalation Verbal de-escalation is a process of identifying stages of challenging behavior and meeting the needs of the student in that stage. Verbal de-escalation  requires that the adult remain calm and in control. This can be accomplished  by using a relaxed volume and tone of voice. De-escalation techniques are  best used when a student is still rational and has not lost control. You want to provide relevant and realistic answers to questions that the  student may have. If a student asks why he or she needs to do math, it is  better to respond with a straightforward answer such as, this is the time of  day when math is scheduled, as opposed to a lecture about the importance  of math for future employment. Children live in the moment and desire responses that address their immediate needs.
Chapter Five A student who challenges you is likely attempting to drag you into a power  struggle. A challenging student is most likely working to gain control of a  situation or environment. Ignore the challenge but not the student.1 Do not  reprimand or give directives about the challenging behavior; instead focus on  the needs of the student. This can be done by setting limits that are clear and  enforceable, while reminding such students to use coping strategies such as  taking deep breaths, removing themselves to a calming area, utilizing sensory  tools, or counting to five. This can also be accomplished by briefly addressing  the students concern in one to two sentences: Be clear, refrain from using  any jargon, provide single-step directions, and then walk away. It is harder  to pick up the rope on the other end of a power struggle if you are not close  enough to continue to be engaged in the argument. Intervention 2: Redirection Redirecting the behavior is the process of placing the focus away from the  challenging behavior and toward something or somewhere more productive.  Redirecting the behavior quickly often allows the brain to reset, to readjust  and refocus on more appropriate behaviors. Redirecting can be as simple as  changing the focus of the conversation to more complex procedures. Distracting for cooperation consists of briefly completing a more-preferred  task or topic as a bridge to the less-desired activity. If a student has to engage  in a complex math sequence and is becoming frustrated, you could discuss a  topic that you know the student is interested in, for example, motorcycles. In  the process of the conversation direct the topic back to the task. How many  pounds is a cruising motorcycle compared to a dirt motorcycle? What would  that convert to in kilograms? How much faster does the dirt bike go compared  to the heavier street bike? Accepting an alternative behavior requires that you allow the student to  engage in the behavior but in a more appropriate manner. For instance, if a  student is coloring or writing on the desk, give him or her a piece of paper  to continue. It may not be the ideal behavior, but by allowing a student some  brief time to engage in a preferred activity, she or he may be more apt to join  the classroom activity. To students who are calling out answers in an attempt  to always be first, provide a stack of sticky notes and a timer to gauge how  quickly they can write their responses. This may address their want to be  competitive and correct. An antiseptic bounce is when you provide the child a temporary activity  that is in another location. This can be an errand to another teachers classroom or the front office. You can put a small note in an envelope and have  the child deliver it to someone. The student could be asked to staple important 

Opposites Attract	 43 papers together or collect and dispose of the recycling. You can create a Top  Secret mission that the student has to perform.  It is important to do any of these activities at the first sign of defiant behavior.  You want to be attuned to the triggers or precursor behaviors that signal that  challenging behavior is likely. By waiting too long or until the behavior is directly challenging, you may be inadvertently reinforcing it by providing escape  from non-preferred tasks or activities. If you catch the defiance in the beginning  and redirect it, you can avoid more significant and disobedient behaviors. NONCOMPLIANCE 	 Challenging Behavior: Noncompliance engaging in behaviors other than  those instructed 	 Desired Behavior: Following Directions Intervention 1: Behavioral Momentum Behavioral momentum2 is a strategy derived from applied behavior analysis. The  idea follows the same logic as physical momentum. An object in motion will stay  in motion. In behavioral momentum you rely on the same resistance to change of  physical momentum but also include matching rates of reinforcement.  With behavioral momentum you want to begin with a series of behaviors  that are likely to be completed and include frequent reinforcement for engaging in those behaviors. You then gradually increase the demand toward the  less-preferred behaviors. In technical terms, you use high probability demands things the student already likes doing prior to using a low probability  demand things the student likes less or does not like at all. A classroom example of behavioral momentum is to request small, simple  tasks to be completed. It is best to use three high probability requests before  the lower probability request. For younger students you can even use a Simon  Says approach touch your nose, touch your ears, touch your forehead,  open your book, being sure to include verbal or tangible praise when each  task is completed. For some students, just by virtue of making things more  playful, you can encourage more compliance toward non-preferred activities,  like opening a book and beginning to read. You can also use a natural progression of tasks in order to build behavioral  momentum. An example may look like the following:  1.  Please help me hand out these papers.  2.  Great job handing out papers. Thank you.  3.  Now please help me straighten out the desks. 
Chapter Five 4.  You are very good at straightening desks. Good work.  5.  Please erase the work on the board.  6.  Wow! The board is so clean.  7.  Thank you for all of the help. Now you have a clean space on the board  to begin your work.  8.  Please do the first two problems from the worksheet on the board. Notice that each higher probability request was made as a statement as  opposed to a question. Also notice that each behavior was followed with  specific praise for compliance. Once the student is fairly proficient with the  higher probability tasks and engaging in the lower probability task, you can  consider decreasing the number of higher probability requests. Remember to picture in your mind how physical momentum works. A ball is  already round, so it will roll easily. The high probability tasks need to be easy for  the student to engage in. You need to start that ball rolling down the hill so that  it picks up speed. Be specific with your initial requests. The hill has to be long  enough to build up speed. Use at least three high probability requests initially.  The hill doesnt have a wall at the bottom. Work in the lower probability task  so that it doesnt stop the ball from rolling but helps to keep moving it along.  Intervention 2: Precise Requesting Being precise in your requests3 is a technique to help increase consistency in  how requests are made. Consistency is one of the essential components to creating happy and healthy classrooms. For students who thrive on consistency,  using precise requests can assist in creating a consistent and safe classroom  environment. Being precise means that you use simple, brief directions. This  can also help you as a teacher build healthy relationships with students. Before using precise-requesting procedures, youll need to have a solid  consequence or outcome hierarchy as described in chapter 2. Precise requests  rely on using a pattern to make requests and using the same pattern to respond. It is important to be prepared for the student to either follow through  or not follow through with the task. To use a process of precise requests, first start by using a please request:  Please open your reading book and begin with the first chapter. Allow five  to ten seconds of wait time to allow the student to process and follow through  with the request. If the student begins the task, provide specific praise. If the  student does not begin the task, you use the next step in the process. After a please statement and wait time has been used, you may need to  use a need to statement e.g., you need to open your reading book and  begin the first chapter. Again, allow wait time. If the student begins the  task, provide specific praise. If the student does not begin the task, inform 

Opposites Attract	 45 the student of the first step in your consequence hierarchy. This is typically  a verbal warning. You can begin the process again from the please request after taking that  first step on the consequence hierarchy. You wont want to repeat the process  more than three times for the same request. You will think you sound like a  broken record, but that is what makes the procedure effective. It is most effective when the student is aware of the items on the consequence hierarchy,  because the student may be discouraged by harsher outcomes for not complying. Just as important is providing verbal or tangible praise when the student  does comply with the request. LACK OF MOTIVATION 	 Challenging Behavior: Lack of Motivation struggling with goal orientation, and task initiation and completion 	 Desired Behavior: Intrinsic Motivation Intervention 1: Do This, Not That There are several strategies that can be used in a do this, not that technique.  The simplest way to increase motivation is to use topics, activities, and tasks  that are aligned to students interests, skills, and strengths. Another common  strategy is to reduce the length or difficulty of the task by differentiating the  lesson based on the students learning style, ability, interest, and attentiveness. Along those lines is a technique of strategically reducing assignments so  that students are able to do this, not that. The strategy works by allowing  students to complete portions of the work to earn the reduction of the assignment length. For each predetermined number of problems or portions of  material that are successfully completed, the student earns the opportunity to  choose which portions or problems to skip. This strategy is best used when material does not have to be learned or  practiced sequentially, such as math problems, letters, or isolated sentences.  You will need to determine the amount of work that must be completed and  the subsequent amount of work that can be skipped. For example, on a math  worksheet, students who complete five math problems can choose three to  skip. Students given ten sentences to modify can choose four to skip. Youll  want to begin with a small ratio that you can increase once you find the student  to be more likely to persist in a non-preferred task. You may have to start with  a one-to-one ratio initially: one problem completed, one problem skipped. This technique allows a student who struggles to persist in tasks and lacks  motivation the opportunity to control the amount of work and feel less pres46	 Chapter Five sure by the volume of work. You want to work up to greater and greater  amounts of work being completed at one time. Dont be worried if you have  to start small and there is not a great deal of work being completed in each  session. If you are able to persist with the technique you should be able to  strategically build toward the full task within a few weeks.  Intervention 2: Interest-Boosting Interest-boosting is aligned to differentiating instruction. When you differentiate your instruction you are planning for a variety of abilities, interests, and  skills. When you are boosting interest you are focusing on the topics that you  know the student is motivated by or interested in.  To begin the technique, you want to understand what the students are  interested in. This can be done through conversation, an interest inventory,  or survey. The goal is to show personal interest in the student and align  your instruction to what the student in interested in. For instance, does the  student like comic books, a specific TV show, motorcycles, sports, clothes,  or beauty? Engage the students in a discussion about their topic of interest.  When you have a consistent, reciprocal flow of conversation, introduce the  non-preferred activity by tying it to the topic of interest.  As in the earlier redirection example, if the student is interested in cars and is  required to complete a complex math problem, begin a conversation about cars.  Ask what kind of car the student likes. Does he or she have to do repairs on the  car? When doing repairs, does she or he have to calculate the correct torque or  liquid combination? At that point you may be able to introduce the less-preferred  math problem. The process requires some knowledge of the students topic of interest but  can also be done using a series of questions to learn more about that interest.  The hardest part is working in the less-preferred topic. Practice this technique  with other staff to become proficient at knowing how to introduce the academic topic into an interest conversation. NEED FOR CONTROL 	 Challenging Behavior: Need for Control difficulty with schedule changes,  unfamiliar routines, new or novel tasks or people 	 Desired Behavior: Acceptance of Options Intervention 1: First-Then All humans desire control over their environment. That should not be a  privilege saved only for adults. Children also thrive when their environment 

Opposites Attract	 47 is predictable, transparent, and safe. In all possible circumstances, it is important to maintain the procedures and routines that have been established for the  classroom and be consistent in applying rewards for appropriate behavior and  outcomes to challenging behavior. An additional strategy that can be used to help students feel in control is  based on the aforementioned Premack Principle.4 The Premack Principle, or  Grandmas Law, occurs when a high probability highly preferred activity  serves as a reinforcer for a low probability less-preferred activity. In other  words, as Grandma would state it, you can eat your dessert after you eat  your vegetables.  The principle can be applied by using the phrase first-then or when-then  see table 5.1. The principle can also be applied either visually, using a firstthen board, or verbally, using the words first-then to explain the routine to the  student: First write two sentences; then you can take a two-minute break; or  first clean your area; then you can join the group activity. Intervention 2: Preferential Seating A commonly underutilized technique is strategically adjusting where a student is seated. Teachers are amazing at making seating charts, rearranging  groupings, and identifying needs based on the lesson or assignment. One  area that may be forgotten is where a student is seated based on social or  emotional needs. Is the student seated in an area where there is significant distraction such  as near a window, door, or high traffic area? Is the student seated in an area  that is safe, with a view of the door, a quick escape route, a calming atmosphere? Is the student seated so there will be minimal transition? Can you  quickly scan the room and see the student from all angles? These may be  additional questions to consider when designing the seating charts. They may  be especially important for a student who is struggling with control, based on  a history of trauma or traumatic events. When considering seating arrangements, ask where they feel they will be  most productive and comfortable.  Converse about pros and cons. Consider  offering choices for seating based on specific tasks to minimize distraction  or encourage calm and safety. Create a zone or area in the class that the student can go to remove himself or herself from something that is overstimuFirst Then Complete 5 math problems. Take a 5-minute break. Write 2 paragraphs on desert animals. Earn a sticker for your sticker chart. Table 5.1.  Examples of First-Then Strategy
Chapter Five lating. A safe zone or calming area could be a small corner of the room that  has comfortable items, a timer to encourage returning to the instructional  environment, relaxing music, and the like. Intervention 3: Equal Choices Offering a choice in seating is one strategy to assist with control issues. Another example of providing strategic control is providing equal choices. It  allows the teacher some control over what can be offered and the student a  sense of control by being able to pick between items. It is really a win-win. Equal choices can be as simple as having a student pick between the red  chair or the blue chair, the pencil or the pen, a seat at the circle rug or at a  desk. Equal choices can also be working out the math problem on the whiteboard in the front of the classroom or at the students desk, or allowing the  student to start a worksheet at the top or the bottom. If this strategy is applied effectively and consistently, it can allow students  to feel they have some opportunity to be in control of the decisions that are  made. Many students who struggle with control are often seeking their voice,  their ability to have a say in what happens around them. Especially those  students who have experienced challenges in life or trauma are making every  effort to gain back a sense of control and power that has been removed from  them. The often quick and easily implemented strategies described above  help students to gain back that sense of control and belonging. DISRUPTION 	 Challenging Behavior: Class Disruption calling out, being verbal at inappropriate times, excessive joking or talking 	 Desired Behavior: Working QuietlyRaising Hand Intervention 1: Planned Ignoring An old adage is that it is best to water the roses and ignore the weeds. In  behavioral terms, you want to attend to the things that you want to see and  ignore some of the behaviors that you dont want to see. An important caveat  is that it is necessary to attend to behaviors that pose a safety risk. If there is  imminent danger or a safety concern, follow the classroom procedures and  consequence hierarchy or the crisissafety plan that has been established. But you can ignore minor behaviors, such as calling out, talking excessively, and class clowning. This works when the behavior is identified as 

Opposites Attract	 49 attention-seeking behavior. This also works when you have a consistent  strategy in place and all staff are implementing the plan across settings. It  may even be necessary to teach the other students in the class when and how  to ignore some behaviors. To implement planned ignoring, begin by knowing and understanding the  target behaviors and function of the behavior. Do the adults or the peers in the  classroom primarily maintain the behavior? Does the behavior ever escalate  to a safety risk so that planned ignoring may not be effective? Will all staff  be willing and able to ignore the minor behaviors? With that information in  hand, a plan can be developed that will pinpoint what behaviors should be  ignored, by whom, when, and where. This plan should be communicated  with the student. Remind students that when they are following the classroom  rules and expectations, they are working toward earning their reward.  Be prepared for what is called an extinction burst. Know in advance that  the behavior will likely get worse before it gets better. This occurs because  the student has grown accustomed to getting a reaction from the adults or  peers. A student who no longer gets that reaction may try harder, longer, or  in more unique ways to get that attention. Be consistent, be persistent, and be  prepared. If the strategy is applied effectively, you will water the beautiful  roses and have a lovely garden of good behavior. Intervention 2: Pivot Praise The use of praise in general is more consistently applied at the elementary  school level than the secondary level; however, praise is an effective tool to  use with all age groups, children and adults. Praise in general should be specific, consistent, and aligned to the classroom rules or school expectations.  For example, I like the way that Cesar has his materials ready, is facing the  teacher, and is following our class rule of being ready to learn. It is important  to determine if you are praising effort, ability, or performance, to ensure the  praise is meaningful to the student. Pivot praise works on the theory of positive peer pressure. That being said  it will be most effective with students who revere their teacher and peers approval. Pivot praise works by reinforcing the appropriate behavior of the students in the class to encourage other students to engage in the same behavior. To use pivot praise, simply identify the students in the class who have followed the directive and provide specific praise aloud to those students:  	 I like the way that Gene is sitting.  	 I like how Lilliana is sitting at her desk with her materials ready.  	 I like that Tyrese is seated now. 
Chapter Five The intent is that students will hear the positive praise being provided to  the other students and want that same praise once they have followed the  direction.  Intervention 3: Behavioral AgreementContract The challenging behavior that a student is exhibiting to gain control may be  so intense or occur so frequently that a more formal agreement between the  student and the teacher needs to be created. Creating a behavioral agreement  or contract can accomplish this. The agreement should be a goal for the student to work toward that the student is willing to work toward. One component of a behavioral agreement should include the desired behavior. The student has likely heard plenty of times what challenging behavior is. The agreement should focus the attention toward the desired behavior. The agreement should also have an attainable goal and time frame. The  goal can always be adjusted as needed, but consider that it should be something the student can accomplish in two to three weeks. The goal should  be aimed at increasing the desired behavior the undesired behavior should  naturally decrease with replacement of the desired behavior.  In addition, the agreement should have what the student is working toward. What will the student earn at the end of the agreed-upon time frame  for following the parameters of the agreement? The agreement should also  contain the specific conditions to earn that reward, and it can include any  consequences for not following the agreement. Both the teacher and the student review the agreement and sign it. The  family can also be included and sign the agreement. A sample agreement is  below, in figure 5.1. Figure 5.1.  Example of Elements for a Behavior Agreement

Opposites Attract	 51 IMPULSIVITY 	 Challenging Behavior: Impulsivity fidgeting, being easily distracted, difficulty following directions in a timely manner 	 Desired Behavior: Think FirstWait Intervention 1: Proximity Control Impulsivity may have a number of causes. No matter if the cause is medical  or hormonal or developmental, there are techniques that can be used to support students who have difficulty with impulsive behaviors. There may be a  medical component to a childs impulsivity, but it is also true that impulsive  behavior is also developmentally appropriate at certain stages of adolescence.  Understanding the root causes of impulsive behavior can be helpful, but it is  not necessary when developing interventions to help students be successful. A quick and easy intervention is proximity control. The saying when the  cat is away, the mice will play is precisely what can ring true if a teacher is  not utilizing proximity. Proximity control means moving closer to students in  need of encouragement for appropriate behavior. In order to monitor behavior, address challenging behavior, and provide corrections and rewards, you  need to be near the student.  One technique for proximity is using a process of random-patterned  movement in the classroom. This process will assist in determining student  behavior and engagement with the lesson. Random patterns will also create  the opportunity to monitor triggers of challenging behavior, allow for easy  access to assist students in need, and provide the ability to quickly praise and  reward appropriate behaviors. When using proximity control be sure that you are close enough to the  student to provide support but not so close that you are invading privacy or  personal space. If you are using a random pattern, you will likely discourage students from being off task or off topic. If you are strategically placing  yourself by a student who is experiencing challenging behavior, be sure you  are not providing too much attention to inappropriate behavior. It may be  necessary to combine planned ignoring with proximity control in some cases. Intervention 2: Shaping Impulsivity is correlated to the ability to wait for a preferred item, activity,  or person. A tool to increase students ability to wait is derived from the behavioral principle of shaping behavior. Shaping involves the reinforcement of  successive approximations toward a desired behavior. In the case of shaping 
Chapter Five wait time, it is a process of teaching a student to anticipate and tolerate longer  periods of time before a reinforcer is delivered.  To begin the process, the desired wait time and appropriate behavior should  be determined. In most cases the wait time should be determined based on  the intensity and frequency of the behavior. A student should not be expected  to wait for a week to receive the preferred item or activity. Consider what is  developmentally appropriate and what is typical of most students in the class. Once the chosen wait time has been established it is necessary to plan  for what the approximations will be. If the desired wait time is ten minutes,  consider increments of two minutes. Begin the process by immediately  providing the desired itemactivity. This will need to be done several times  or over several periods of time or days. For example, if the student requests  the item, provide it to him or her immediately. Once the student is fluent  in asking for the desired item appropriately then you can begin lengthening the time between deliveries. That time may need to be shorter in the  beginning, a few seconds, and then extended to minutes. This timing will be  dependent on the behavior and the student. If the student engages in challenging behavior after an extended period of time, shorten the time again  for several trials.  Another strategy to shape wait time is to begin by placing the item on the  students desk. Gradually, with successive approximations, the item would be  moved farther and farther away to create both visual and temporal distance.  This is best for students who learn with visual modality or who struggle with  abstract concepts.  OFF-TASK BEHAVIOR 	 Challenging Behavior: Off-Task Behavior attending to other workactivity that is not relevant to the instructed taskactivity 	 Desired Behavior: On-Task Behavior Intervention 1: Chart Game The chart game5 process turns learning appropriate behavior into a game.  Students have a visual game board that they are earning moves on, in order  to win a reward at the end. This is a great strategy for students who like competition and games. An easy way to create the game boards is to download connect-the-dot  pictures from the Internet and print them out. Each time the student engages  in a predetermined appropriate behavior, he or she earns the opportunity to 

Opposites Attract	 53 connect one dot to the next. Once students have completed the connect-thedots image, they earn the reward they have been working toward.  Another easy example is an image that has sections that can be colored  in, such as a snake with different segments or a thermometer that students  can color until it is fully colored in. The difficulty, complexity, and number  of segments or dots should be determined based on the challenging behavior and the students ability. A good rule is that the frequency of connecting  a dot or coloring a segment should closely align to how often the student  engages in the challenging behavior. For example, a student who calls out  every five minutes in a thirty-minute period should have an image with  approximately five to six dots or segments to color in. The complexity can  also be increased based on the students age or grade level. At the secondary level the dots can be for sections of work or complete assignments. It  would still make sense to have the student start small and work up to larger  chunks of work. Intervention 2: Token Economy One of the most common behavioral strategies employed in classrooms is  the token economy. Token economies work on a premise similar to the chart  game and the technique of shaping. The desired behavior is reinforced with  symbolic items that can be turned in for a larger or more-preferred item, much  the way money is turned in for preferred items such as shoes or nice dinners  after a paycheck is earned. The most common example for understanding the token economy comes  from dolphin training. Anyone that has been to an aquarium and watched a  training show has seen token economies at work. The trainer begins by pairing the dolphins favorite food, fish, with a sound, typically a whistle. Eventually the dolphin learns that the sound equals food. The trainer can then use  the sound more frequently and periodically give the dolphin a fish. In the classroom, it is often much easier. Determine what will be used as  the symbolic whistle. Most token economies use fake money or tokens. Stickers and points can also be used, but since most students already understand  money, it is an easy place to begin. Different denominations and images can  be found online to download and print.  Create a school store or list of items that can be purchased with the money  once it has been earned and establish how often or when money can be turned  in. For example, a catalog of items could be created that students can view  on Wednesday and purchase on Friday. A school store could be created for  students to shop during lunch periods. A treasure box could be available at  the end of each day. 
Chapter Five When designing your store, be mindful of what items students would want.  Would they prefer school supplies or trinkets? It is also important to consider  how much items cost compared to what the students are earning. If students  can earn up to one hundred dollars a day, the items in the store should be appropriate for someone earning up to 500 in a week. Be prepared to have savers and spenders. Some students will buy a lot of low-priced items and some  students will save money to buy one high-priced item. The cost and content  of the store will likely need to be adjusted based on use and student interest. Another common consideration is what to do when students counterfeit  money. And they will. First, celebrateyes, celebrate. This means that they  have bought into your token economy and are willing to do something against  the rules to get a desired item. Then make adjustments: 	 Change the color or image on the money.  	 Sign and date the back of the money upon delivery.  	 Create a bank where you deposit the money instead of handing it directly  to the student. 	 Utilize old or donated checkbooks to have students keep track of money  earned and money spent.  	 Consider purchasing one of the online programs that use the same principles as a token economy.  The best part about a token economy is you can target multiple behaviors  across the classroom, meet the needs of a diverse group of students, and  implement the process with minimal effort or interruption to the learning  environment. It also teaches valuable lessons in earning through economics. CHAPTER SUMMARY In this chapter strategies to address challenging behavior were organized  based on common classroom concerns. While these strategies are a starting  point, it is important to focus on the function of the behavior and interventions  that address that function. When designing interventions based on a challenging behavior, always be mindful of the needs of the student. It is important to  consider age, developmental needs, abilities, and ease of implementation. The  best intervention will fail if it is not done with fidelity or integrity. REFLECTION QUESTIONS Q1.  Trinity is struggling to focus in class. She is often off-task and frequently calls out during instructional times. Other teachers have suggested 

Opposites Attract	 55 that she is impulsive and unable to sit for periods of time. Based on this information, Trinity has multiple challenging behaviors. What strategies from  this chapter would you attempt and why? Q2. Jocelyn has a history of abuse and neglect. After reading her file, you  know that she was left alone for extended periods of time as a toddler. Her  grandfather physically abused her, and she was malnourished as an infant.  You have noticed that she will react to loud noises and become easily frightened throughout the day. You are adjusting your seating arrangements for the  second semester. What changes do you make for Jocelyn based on her needs?  Q3. Philipe is new to your high school class. It is clear that he can be defiant and often argues when he is presented with a task or direction. Until now,  your current rules, expectations, and classroom management strategies have  worked for your class. With Philipe in the class now, other students are also  becoming more defiant. What strategy or strategies could you use to assist  Philipe and the other students in the class? Q4. You have been asked by your administrator to assist a colleague who  is experiencing student behavior challenges in the classroom. You have been  allowed to observe the teacher for one day and then spend one hour providing  feedback and strategies to assist him or her. What would you look for when  observing? What strategies would you discuss? How could you present all of  the strategies described in this chapter to the teacher in a short amount of time? NOTES 1.  Crisis Prevention Institute. crisisprevention.com 2.  Mace, C. F., Hock, M. L., J. S. Lalli, B. J. West, P. Belfiore, E. Pinter, and  D. K. Brown, Behavioral Momentum in the Treatment of Noncompliance, Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 21, no. 2 Summer 1988: 12341, doi: 10.1901 jaba.1988.21-123. 3.  De Martini-Scully, D., M. A. Bray, and T. Kehle, A Packaged Intervention  to Reduce Disruptive Behaviors in General Education Students, Psychology in the  Schools 37, no. 2 2000: 14956. 4.  Premack, D., Reversibility of the Reinforcement Relation, Science, New Series 136, no. 3512 April 20, 1962: 25557. 5.  Jenson, William R., Ginger Rhode, and H. Kenton Reavis, The Tough Kid Tool  Box Longmont, CO: Sopris West, 1994.
Chapter Six Focus on What Is Right   4  2  6   5  2  3   4  3  8 10  2  12 What is the first thing that you notice in the list above? Did you quickly  see that 4  3  8 is incorrect? Most people do. What most people dont focus  on is that the other problems are correct. We tend to focus more on what is  wrong as opposed to what is right.  This example was done to better understand the power of positivity. As humans, we are wired to instinctively focus on what is wrong in our environment.  In the survival of the fittest, it makes sense. If you see a large predator, run. If  you see flames, move. In todays society and in our collaborative and global  culture, however, it does not suit us well to focus so much on what is wrong. Researchers and scientists are beginning to understand positivity in greater  detail. When you focus on positivity, you see more positivity. Some call it  the nature or law of intent. Some consider it part of metaphysics. Experiments  have been done at a molecular level to see the impact of positive mental energy on items and substances, including water and rice. To test the theory, you can do the rice test. The steps are listed below. Step 1:  Cook plain white rice following the manufacturers instructions. Step 2:  Place half of the rice into two airtight, sealed containers. Label one  of the containers Positive and the other one Negative. Place the containers in a dry, cool location. Step 3:  Each day pick up the container labeled Positive and say something positive to it. It is important to believe in the positivity; make the 
Chapter Six statement genuine. Pick up the container labeled Negative and yell at it; be  angry and mean. Step 4:  Repeat this each day for one week. You should start to see a difference between the containers of rice. In most  cases the container that is yelled at and receives negative energy will spoil  faster. You will often see mold form much faster on that rice than on the rice  that you say positive statements to. Now imagine that rice as yourself or your students. After all, we are all  made up of molecular energy and we are susceptible to being influenced by  the energy around us. If we focus on what is right, we see more of what is  right and vice versa. One process that you can utilize is called reframing. Reframing is the  action of changing the lens through which you see a situation. It is an active  process of honing in on the positive.  Take your fist and make a tight circle that you can look through. Find a  small object in the distance and focus your fisted circle toward that item. All  of your concentration goes toward that object. If your fist has formed a tight  circle, it may be all that you can see through your lens. Now widen your  circle slightly by opening your fist. Other objects should come into focus,  giving you a bigger picture of the surroundings and environment. Now remove your hand. You can see the entire setting, the whole picture.  We often focus our attention too tightly on what is wrong. By doing so, it  becomes difficult to see the entire picture, the setting, the circumstances. By  reframing and opening your lens to all of the factors that may impact a student, such as academic deficits, trauma, self-esteem, fear, pressure, anxiety,  and so on, as well as strengths, skills, talents, hopes, wishes, and dreams, you  are better able to fully address any concerns or challenges. Reframing allows  you to view the whole child. Reframing can also do the opposite by closing  your lens to see only the good in a student. BEHAVIOR IS COMMUNICATION What you say and how you communicate is a large part of the work in education. You likely spend a large part of your day communicating with others,  speaking to your students, talking with colleagues. The process of learning  and growing requires children to expand their communicative repertoires.  Communication is key. Communication is also a behavior. And behavior is communication. When  working to understand a persons behavior it is critical to recognize that he or  she may be attempting to communicate something that she or he does not yet  have the skills to communicate appropriately.

Focus on What Is Right	 59 In chapter 3 you were introduced to the world of functional behavior. In  chapter 5 you explored a number of interventions to address specific challenging behaviors. Now you are going to confront the concept that challenging behavior occurs as a means of communicating. The challenging behavior  is often a maladaptive way of requesting something that a person is unable to  express through words. Imagine yourself in a foreign country, unable to speak or understand the  language. While there may be some requests you can make using body language, there are many nuances that you would miss. For example, you could  move your hands toward your mouth as if using eating utensils and likely receive information about food or where to eat. But you probably wont be able  to convey to the other person that you are lactose intolerant and cant have  any dairy. You can probably use your hands to ask where a bathroom is, but  you may not be able to ask for a family restroom with a baby-changing table.  This process of working so diligently to express your needs or ask a question would likely get frustrating after a period of time. It may even cause  rational adults to lose their temper. Now, imagine having to go through this  process every day to meet your basic needs. It would be exhausting. In the developmental phases of childhood, full maturity is often not  reached until the early to late twenties. For the entire school career of most  children and adolescents, they are still developing. Along with that development comes the practice of learning how to ask for what is wanted or needed,  how to identify feelings and let another person know about internal thoughts  or feelings, and how to express likes and dislikes. You may even know adults  who still find this challenging.  A child who yells during class may be experiencing pain from a headache  or frustration due to a skill deficit. A teenager who leaves class may be dealing  with thoughts of depression or the experience of a traumatic event. Kindergartners who stomp their feet on the ground may be scared of the unknown. When developing plans to address challenging behavior, one step may be  to teach the appropriate way to request what is wanted or needed. For many  students this begins with identifying internal feelings, both physical and  emotional. There are some tools that can be used to help students make a link  between what they are feeling and what they may need or want. One idea is a wheel of emotion. Make a game-board type of spinning  wheel using two pieces of paper. Divide it evenly into multiple parts, and  label the parts with different emotions happy, angry, frustrated, embarrassed, thankful, etc. Prompt students on a regular basis or when you feel  they need to be reminded to identify how they feel in that moment. Be sure  to have conversation with them about the emotions, why they chose particular emotions, and what it feels like inside their body when they experience  those emotions.
Chapter Six To help younger students link the physical with the emotional, create an  image of a blank cartoon body. This can be done on a piece of notebook size  paper for an individual student or poster paper for an entire classroom. If  you notice a student who seems to be frustrated or happy, have the student  point to the body chart and explain where he or she feels that emotion. For  example, a student who is frustrated may feel a knot in the stomach or a lump  in the throat. A student who is happy may feel light-headed or have a rapid  heartbeat. You can try this with toddlers through adolescents.  Another strategy is a feeling log. A timer can be set in the class to beep  periodically and randomly. When the beep sounds, students can write or draw  how they are feeling at that moment. This can also be coupled with a practice of mindfulness, a deliberate practice of stopping throughout the day and  recognizing the subtleties in the environment, how you feel, what you notice  by sight and sound. Mindfulness helps you to be present in the moment and  cognizant of yourself. Once students are more aware of their feelings and emotions, they can be  taught the skill of communicating what they want and need. Students who  exhibit challenging behavior for attention need to learn how to appropriately  ask for attention. Do they need to learn to ask for help? Do they need to ask  for one-on-one time? Do they need to ask peers to participate in a game or  activity with them? A student who is trying to avoid or escape a task needs to learn to request  a break or ask for time away from a challenging activity. A student who takes  items from another student can learn how to ask to share or for more time with a  preferred item. A child who needs to stand up, listen to music, or doodle to help  with concentration would benefit from knowing how to ask for that assistance.  BRAIN SCIENCE AND WHAT  WE ARE LEARNING ABOUT POSITIVITY Once a child has the tool of communication, the challenging behavior is less  effective. The communication part of the brain is activated and new neural  paths are created. The more developed and active part of the brain is working. As humans, we essentially have three brains. The oldest part of the brain  is located just above the spine and is typically known as the reptilian brain.  That part of the brain is responsible for fight or flight, stimulus and response.  A newer part of the brain is the mammalian brain, the reward and punishment  center of the brain. And, the frontal lobe, the most newly developed part of  the brain, is responsible for language, organization, executive functioning  skills, and abstract thought.

Focus on What Is Right	 61 Scientists continue to learn about the exponential abilities of our brains.  Some researchers are investigating how positive thoughts, communication,  and actions affect persons and the environment. One of those scientists is  Dr. Martin Seligman, who studies the science of positive psychology.1 While  much of the world of psychology has traditionally been concentrated on how  the past impacts a person, the field of positive psychology seeks to identify  the influence of positivity.  Positivity is most often categorized into concepts of hope, optimism, and  happiness. Students today experience symptoms of mental health disorders  and experiences of trauma at astounding rates. As a teacher you are likely  to find that nearly one in four students in your class has experienced some  form of traumatic event.2 The effects of trauma and mental health can greatly  impact student performance and well-being.  An environment in the classroom and in the school that is focused on  positivity, hope, optimism, strengths, the ability for growth, and the like  can be beneficial for both students and staff. Achieving this may require a  concerted effort by staff to build upon optimism and hope. You may need  to practice focusing on what is right and believing that all students are able  to grow and learn. INCORPORATING POSITIVE BEHAVIORAL  INTERVENTIONS INTO THE CLASSROOM One of the most effective strategies to incorporating more positivity into  the classroom is the use of Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports  PBIS.3 PBIS applies behavior analytic principles to classroom and school  settings. PBIS also incorporates foundational principles from positive psychology and infuses them into processes to be proactive and preventative.  PBIS has several foundational components, including leadership and staff  commitment, data-based decision-making, expectations and rules, recognition processes, lesson and implementation plans, and an evaluation system.  PBIS is also a tiered system of support with much of the prevention and proactive work occurring at a school-wide level. At the classroom level, there  are some simple strategies that can be incorporated to increase positivity and  focus on prevention. The first step to take, as with any good plan, is to collect data. These data  should focus on the ratio of positive to negativeneutral statements in the  class. Have a colleague or peer observe your class several times during different subjects or activities. Ask them to monitor the number of times that you  say or do something positive praise a student, compliment someone, give a 
Chapter Six high five, smile, etc. and each time you do something negative or neutral  express that an answer is incorrect, give a directive, reprimand or scold a  student, etc. The ideal ratio is four positives to every one negative or neutral statement. The positive statements and behaviors should also be genuine,  specific, observable, and focused on progress and effort. As described in chapter 5, the token economy allows us to focus on what  we want to see and to reward appropriate beharior rather than focusing on  decreasing challenging behaviors. Many of the processes and components of PBIS in the classroom were  described in earlier chapters: 	 In chapter 2 you learned about classroom procedures and rules. When  developing or revising these processes, consider how to incorporate a positive framework.  	 In chapter 3 the focus was on the functions of behavior. Understanding the  functions of challenging behavior will assist in creating classroom-based  plans to address the maladaptive behavior and create effective replacement  behaviors.  	 In chapter 4 the important message of prevention was emphasized.  	 In chapter 5 intervention strategies were provided.  	 In chapter 7 you will learn about making data-based decisions.  All of these strategies, tips, tools, and ideas are delivered in a way that  incorporates PBIS. After all, PBIS should not be something separate or different; rather, it should be a framework for the classroom, the foundation that  drives the work you do. CHAPTER SUMMARY In this chapter you refocused and recalibrated to focus more on positive  events and behaviors that occur in the environment. While it is often not an  intuitive action, focusing on positivity can reestablish a more inviting and  nurturing classroom. The act of intentionally concentrating on what you want  to see and reinforcing appropriate behavior will have an overall positive effect on you and your students. There are numerous ways to increase positivity in the classroom from  more structured strategies such as PBIS to less structured techniques like  reframing. As a classroom teacher you can attend to students strengths and  skills, reward appropriate behavior, build positive foundational frameworks 

Focus on What Is Right	 63 for procedures and routines, and embed structures in the classroom that emphasize positivity. REFLECTION QUESTIONS Q1.  What are three things that you can do tomorrow to be more positive? Q2.  If you intend to build a token economy, what strategies will you utilize to ensure that students can access preferred items in a timely manner and  at an effective cost? Q3.  If you have a coworker or colleague who tends to be negative and  pessimistic, what strategies could you use to help build optimism and hope? NOTES 1.  Dr. Martin Seligman, Authentic Happiness, https:www.authentichappiness  .sas.upenn.edu 2.  ACES Study: Adverse Childhood Experiences, www.cdc.govviolenceprevention 3.  Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports, http:www.pbis.org
Chapter Seven Data Is More than  a Four-Letter Word In the world of accountability, evaluation and assessment data have become  more like curse words than parts of a helpful strategy to use in the classroom.  Data-based decision-making has become more of a trendy term than a truly  useful process for teachers and students. For data to be helpful it is necessary  to understand why we collect data and what we can do with it. Data are facts. Without data, teams and teachers often spend an exorbitant  amount of time guessing and second-guessing the best solution to a problem.  With so little time to spare in the teaching day, it is vital to have data to help  solve problems. Data is so much more than just a four-letter word; it is a  four-letter solution.  Collecting data allows you to identify patterns in student and staff behavior. Behavior may occur frequently within a short period of time. Behavior  may also occur infrequently, making it difficult to determine why it is occurring. Consider a child who becomes anxious and defiant once or twice a  month. The behavior may be seldom, but when it does occur the intensity is  high: The child can become aggressive. It is only after collecting data across  multiple weeks that a teacher may be able to connect, for example, the childs  parental visitation schedule during reunification from a foster family with the  aggressive behavior. Data help to communicate information. Legislation for students with  disabilities even requires that data be presented so that families can easily  interpret it. Graphic displays of data such as graphs and charts help to communicate clearly and easily the extent, frequency, and intensity of behaviors.  Data also help to communicate among colleagues how a student may be doing on a given day, the students progress toward goals, or how often a new  behavior or strategy is utilized. Clear communication about behavior will  help collaborating professionals consistently implement plans, understand 
Chapter Seven the effects of changes to the plan or environment, and adjust the plan as  necessary. Data-based decisions are more than just good practice in the classroom.  Data are also necessary when working with students who have special needs  or are in the response-to-intervention process. Data assist in making reasonable and attainable goals for individual education plans, behavior intervention plans, and classroom behavioral agreements. By utilizing classroom and  instructional data, you can understand the impact of your teachingof each  planned lessonon student learning. Most importantly, data help to build confidence. If you are able to see that  the plan that you create, the lesson that you develop, the goals that you set,  the strategies that you explore, the environment and culture that you establish  have meaning in the classroom, you will be more confident to continue on  your positive path. Practical data will assist in enlisting support from colleagues because the data may clearly reflect your need for support; at which  times, for which students, where, and when. Data will support your ability  to stand by your decisions as a teacher and to learn and grow in the process. USING A FOUR-STEP PROBLEM-SOLVING PROCESS Data collection for problem-solving is not a one-man band. Data collection  and making data-based decisions require a team process. Multiple people can  collect data, and a team should be reviewing those data to help make decisions.  This can be especially helpful if data are collected across multiple settings and  people. The team can work together to analyze and understand the data. The team can also utilize a problem-solving process at any point in the process described below, to determine the target behavior, to decide which data  collection tool to use, and to identify what the data are saying. The problemsolving process is a tool that teams can use to interpret and analyze the data.  Problem-solving can also be used to better understand when to fade or begin  weaning a schedule of reinforcement. For example, students are earning reinforcement stickers every five minutes that they are in their seat, and the goal  was sitting for five minutes within two weeks. The students have met that goal,  so the team may determine that for the next two weeks the time should increase  to seven minutes. The team may decide to meet again after another two weeks  until eventually it is only reinforcing the sitting behavior every fifteen minutes.  Step 1:  Identify the problem. Just as was described in earlier chapters it is  crucial to determine what that actual problem behavior is. This can be applied  on a grander scale to determine school-wide, personal, or global concern, but  for the purposes of this book the focus will be on identifying the challenging 

Data Is More than a Four-Letter Word	 67 behavior or the challenging issue. It is all too common that you will want  to jump to finding a solution, but elaborate plans are often drafted and resources spent on misinformation or an incorrect identification of the problem.  Become a detective. Ask and interview people who know the student or the  situation. Look at records and historical information. Work together as a team  to clearly define what the hypothesized problem is. Step 2:  Analyze the problem. To analyze the problem, it will be necessary  to understand the why. One way to establish the root cause1 of an issue is to  ask why multiple times. Asking why more than three times requires the team  to look beyond the surface of whys and create a list of possibilities. The hope  is that after several whys the team will be able to determine a root cause of  the concern.  If a student is becoming verbally aggressive and our first assumption is that  the student is defiant or oppositional, that does not give us much information to create an effective plan. If we ask why again, perhaps the team will  uncover that the student has a challenging home life and is often responsible  at home for his or her younger siblings. If you ask why again, the team may  discover that the student and his or her younger sibling often go without food  while the parents are working double shifts in fear of losing their home.  In asking why again the team discovers that during a social work visit to  the home the student revealed a fear of losing the home and often hears his or  her parents fight over money and who will be responsible for the children, as  they would likely have to give them up or split them between family members. The team now can create a plan to help the student feel safe at school,  develop coping strategies, and ensure that the student and sibling are fed  multiple times a day.  Step 3:  Create a plan. The next step is to take all the gathered information  and create a plan that will help the student be successful. In most cases it is  best to keep the plan simple, in keeping with the old adage that the simple  answer is typically the best. Again, all too many times teams create elaborate  and extensive plans that are based on information that is inaccurate, not easily implemented, or not based on the function of the behavior. In order to  ensure that a plan will be implemented, be sure to have the entire team agree  to the plan, know the roles and responsibilities, have a timeline, and prepare  for both consistency and flexibility. The plan should be implemented consistently across people and settings. The team should also be prepared to review  the plan and make adjustments as necessary based on the data collected.  Step 4:  Determine if the plan is effective. Just as academics are progressmonitored, so too should behavior be. In order to know how and if a student  is responding to an intervention, data should be collected i.e., frequency,  duration, intensity, etc. and reviewed on an ongoing basis. The timeline for 
Chapter Seven review should be based on the intensity and severity of the behavior. The  more intense or severe, the more frequently it is reviewed.  This same four-step problem-solving process can be used at the class-wide  level as well. If you are struggling with a noisy classroom and having difficulty getting students to pay attention during instruction, you can use the four  steps to work toward a solution: 	 Step 1.  Identify that the students are noisy during bell-work and lesson  plan introduction.  	 Step 2.  After asking several students to assist in determining why and  after collecting data for two weeks, conclude that the bell-work and lesson  plan opening activities are not engaging for students.  	 Step 3.  Working with several partner teachers in the same grade and reviewing sample lessons on the district website and Internet, make changes  to the bell-work and lessons. An interest inventory survey would also better connect lessons to students pursuits.  	 Step 4.  Take additional data over two weeks and find that noise levels  have decreased and students have expressed greater interest in the content.  Note that classroom tardies have also decreased and students have been  more likely to arrive to class early or on time. THE FIVE WS OF DATA To begin a process of sound and effective data collection, it is necessary to  identify the target and impeding or challenging behavior that is going to be  measured. There are several points to consider when determining the target  behavior. What challenging behavior is interfering most with the students  learning or the learning of others? What positive behaviors are you trying to  increase? Is the behavior measurable and observable? The data collection process is only as good as the behavior being measured.  A behavior is considered measurable and observable when it passes the potato  test. If a potato can do it, then it is not a behavior. To be measurable and observable, two independent observers should be able to count the same behavior  at the same time from different angles in a room. To ensure consistent data collection on a behavior, an operational definition of the behavior can be created. An operational definition takes a broad definition of a behavior and creates more categorical and specific guidelines. For instance, many teachers  use the term temper tantrum. Temper tantrum is a very broad term that can  encompass hundreds of different behaviors. No two temper tantrums look the  same. An operational definition is a definition expanded to say that a temper 

Data Is More than a Four-Letter Word	 69 tantrum begins with clenched fists, crossed arms, and tears, and can escalate  to include punching, dropping to the floor, high-decibel screaming, profanity,  and flailing fists and feet. Would a stranger who saw this definition be able to  collect data on the temper tantrum behavior? It may feel like the challenging behavior occurs all of the time. The only  way to better understand when the behavior truly occurs is to take frequent  or constant data for a period of time until a clear pattern is established. Data  should be collected often enough to be able to notice trends and make decisions. This will vary based on the severity and frequency of the behavior  and the intent of the data collection. If the behavior occurs infrequently monthlyand is being collected as part of a students annual educational  plan, the data collection may occur less frequently. For a behavior that occurs up to ten times in a minute and is being monitored as part of a behavior  plan that is reviewed weekly, the data will likely be collected on an ongoing  basis.  Data on the behavior that is being monitored should be collected in any setting in which it occurs. Data on a behavior that occurs across multiple settings  but is only collected in the classroom does not provide sufficient information  to make good data-based decisions. Collecting data across settings can also  help to identify areas at which the behavior is more or less likely to occur.  Once it is established where the behavior is most and least likely to occur,  the data collection can focus more on those areas. Problem-solving can center  on why the behavior is less likely to occur in a setting and how that may be  replicated across multiple settings. 	 Who are the top one or two students with needs in the classroom? 	 What are the challenging and positive behaviors? 	 When is the challenging behavior occuring most and least? 	 Where is the challenging behavior occuring most and least? 	 Why is the challenging behavior occurring? Types of Data Collection Once the operational definition is clear and when and where data should be  collected have been established, the next step is creating the system for data  collection. The data collection system should be useful to the team that will  be using it to make decisions. The data collection system should be relevant  to the behavior being measured. The data system should be easy to use for all  persons collecting data. In some cases, the student may also be collecting her  or his own data. Data collection can be used for an individual or a classroom  depending on what the concerns or challenges are.
Chapter Seven With regard to types of data collection tools, the options are endless. Rankordered from most to least effective, the data collection methods below are  most often used by teachers. 1.  Databehavior sheets and associated graphs or charts event recording,  interval recording, frequency, duration, latency, etc. Figure 7.1.  Types of Classroom Data to Assist with Problem-Solving

Data Is More than a Four-Letter Word	 71 2.  Teacher-developed checklists 3.  Formal observations 4.  Anecdotal records 5.  Academic gradescredits 6.  Student workpermanent products This book will focus on the first set of data collection options: the observational recording systems figure 7.1. They will provide the most accurate and  consistent data to problem-solve. Observational recording data is also more  objective than the other types of data. Two additional helpful data collection tools are scatterplot and ABC data.  Both help to organize data into clear patterns. Scatterplot and ABC data can  be used in congruence with other types of data collection to get multiple perspectives and sources of data to make efficient decisions.  ABC data is important to the functional behavioral assessment process.  ABC is an acronym for Antecedent, Behavior, and Consequence. Collecting ABC data is as simple as creating a three-column chart and collecting  anecdotal information for each column. For a period of time the teacher can  collect information about what happens immediately before antecedent and  after consequence the target or impeding behavior. Collecting ABC data  can also help to understand more about the behavior that is being observed.  If there is little consistency in the antecedents and consequences, is the target  behavior accurate? Clear patterns in the antecedents and consequences should  develop quickly in the data collection process. Scatterplots are another good means of identifying patterns in behavior.  A scatterplot is a grid or table broken into specific time periods. The time  periods could align to class periods or subjects. When the behavior occurs  within a time period that frame of the grid is colored in or tallies are placed  in that grid. By doing this, patterns in the grids can be identified. A scatterplot  collects and graphs data simultaneously. The scatterplot can be a useful tool  to use when determining the most and least likely times a behavior occurs. ASKING THE RIGHT QUESTIONS: ANALYZING YOUR DATA There are a number of reasons why it is important to become a data lover.  Now that data is no longer a curse word, you have the opportunity to fall in  love with what data can do for you. The process of collecting the data can be  cumbersome in some cases but the analysis should be liberating.  The team should collect data on both a baseline data prior to intervention  and ongoing progress-monitoring data during intervention basis. Create a  spreadsheet and graphs using a graphing program and watch the data come 
Chapter Seven to life. Scatterplots and line, bar, or pie graphs should paint a clear picture of  what is happening with the student. Is there improvement? Is the intervention  being implemented consistently? Are there times of day or subjects that are  more challenging? Are there people who the behavior is more likely to occur  around? Are there days of the week that create concerns? Data can allow the team to understand the effectiveness and efficiency of  the interventions that have been put into place. Data help to determine how  the student is responding to the intervention. The data can also ensure that the  team is working smarter not harder. In more extreme cases data analysis can  help a team to determine a students readiness to reintegrate in more general  education opportunities. The team will need to determine if the student is making progress toward  the established goals. For example, a behavior that is typically occurring forty  times a week a goal may be to decrease to thirty in a week and then twenty  in a week so that in a month it is near zero. You can show that by creating  a goal or aim line on the graph. A rule of thumb for determining progress  toward a goal of decreasing a challenging behavior is that if four of the last  six data points fall below the goal or aim line the student is making progress.  This would be vice versa for a behavior that is intended to increase replacement behavior. The team can review the data for trends and patterns or the general direction of the behavior change. The team can review and discuss if the behavior  is having an impact on the overall quality of life or social significance for the  student. The team may need to determine if, based on the data, the intervention is providing more independence, inclusion, access, and ability to communicate needs effectively. If adjustments are required the team can alter the  classroom environment, instructional methods, or transitioning process.  The team can also include the parents in the data process. After providing  parents with graphs of data showing progress, call or meet with them to discuss what the data have shown. If appropriate, show parents the effects of different instructional strategies and describe how decisions about instructional  strategies are made. Ask parents if they are satisfied with the progress that  their child has been making on his or her goals and objectives. If satisfied, do  they see any changes that could be made to increase progress? If not satisfied,  do they have any suggestions about how to increase their childs progress?  CHAPTER SUMMARY In this chapter the intent and purpose of data collection were described. While  data collection can be time-consuming there are strategies that can be used 

Data Is More than a Four-Letter Word	 73 to help streamline the process and help to ensure consistency and accuracy.  With good data, good decisions can be made and quick progress toward success can often be seen. Data can be collected and displayed in a number of  ways to help in the plan development, implementation, and evaluation process. The better the data, the better the plan, and the better and happier the  student and teacher. REFLECTION QUESTIONS Q1.  Thora is frequently out of her seat. The Language Arts teacher has  come to you and expressed that Thora is constantly moving around the classroom and never gets work done. She is requesting that you develop a plan so  that Thora will stay in her seat and complete work. What are your next steps?  Q2.  You have a meeting scheduled with a family because they are concerned about their childs current grades, and several referral notices that  have been sent home. You have been collecting frequency data on how often  the child is either on task and off task during instructional times. How will  you review those data with the family? What will your conversation sound  like? Q3.  Go through the four-step problem-solving process using a current  concern in your classroom. Be sure to include asking additional why questions to determine a root cause.  Q4.  You collected baseline data for two weeks and have concluded that  the behavior of concern occurs an average of twenty times per day. The team,  the parents, and the student agreed to set a goal of less than five times per  day within two weeks. After two weeks of the intervention the behavior is  occurring fifteen times per day. What are questions the team could ask? What  are possible next steps?  NOTE 1.  Ohno, T., Toyota Production System: Beyond Large-Scale Production Portland, OR: Productivity Press 1988, p. 17.
Chapter Eight Whos in Charge? CHANGING OUR OWN BEHAVIOR Your health and happiness are the most important components to a long-lasting and fulfilling teaching career. Think of the last time you flew on a plane.  You were likely reading a gossip magazine or getting in one more round on  your candy game app while the flight attendant provided the in-flight instructions. One of the most poignant and important pieces of advice is given  hundreds of times a day in midair: In the event of a loss of cabin pressure an  oxygen mask will drop from the ceiling. . . . Be sure to adjust your own mask  before helping others. It is in our nature as humansand especially as educatorsto help all of  those around us before ourselves. In the event of a loss of cabin pressure,  there are only seconds available and you cannot help another if you are not  safe first. The same concept applies to teaching. Place your health and happiness first and the health and happiness of your classroom will follow. AVOIDING BURNOUT:   PATIENCE, THANKFULNESS, AND MINDFULNESS The first hurdle to overcome is the idea that putting yourself first is selfish.  Day in and day out we are selfless. Selflessness is one of many amazing traits  that teachers seem to intrinsically possess. You have to practice being more  conscious of yourself and your needs.  It is also true that teaching is often a thankless profession. It is often a  job that is done day in and day out without nary a whisper of external gratitude. You may see the lightbulb go off for a student or see some measurable  
Chapter Eight successes, but that is not the same as personal thank-yous. Whether it is to be  recognized publicly with loud cheers in a stadium or quietly as you pass a colleague, student, or parent in the hallway, it is natural to want to be recognized  for the hard work that you do on a daily basis. Affirmation and recognition are fuel for your spirit and perseverance. The  words that you tell yourself are just as important as the words that you hear  from others. In fact, being mindful of congratulating yourself can be even  more powerful and lasting. Below are several tips to build thankfulness and  gratitude toward yourself. 	 Keep a gratitude journal: Document at least three things at the beginning or  end of each day that you are thankful for. Focus at least one of those items  on your teaching work. 	 Be mindful and meditative: Set a timer on your phones calendar or clock  to gently remind yourself several times a day to stop and be thankful. Take  a deep breath when you hear that chime; then orient yourself toward the  great work you are doing in that moment or repeat a phrase of kindness  e.g., I am grateful to myself for the work that I do. I am thankful for my  persistence and resilience. I am honored to teach. 	 Flip your thoughts: If you find yourself letting negative thoughts in or  blaming yourself for a lesson that didnt go well, a student that is being  challenging, or a difficult conversation with a peer or colleague, take a  deep breath, apologize to yourself for the negative thought, and replace  that thought with a thank-you e.g., thank you for being strong enough to  voice your opinion even though it challenged anothers or thank you for  taking the time to create an engaging lesson full of rich activities that will  simply need to be shortened to be more effective. 	 Count to three and ask, Is it good for me?: In a fast-paced world quick  responses are often expected. Instead of reacting automatically, take three  seconds and ask if what you are thinking, what you are going to respond  with, or what you intend to do is good for you. Taking that three seconds  allows you the time to be reflective and self-aware.  MY PERSONAL BEHAVIOR PLAN Another strategy is to understand that you are just as human and fallible as  the students whom you work with. Many of the techniques that work to help  with students behavior will also work for yourself. Create a behavioral plan. At the beginning of each new year, many people undergo the process of  reinvigorating their diet or exercise regimen. If you begin a new diet plan, 

Whos in Charge?	 77 you start counting calories and reading ingredient lists. If you start running,  yoga, or cycling, you track the days that you exercise and the length of time  that you practice. These are data to help you make better decisions. These are  your baseline data. These are the same data that you collect in the classroom  to improve student behavior. You can track the number of negative thoughts that you have in a day,  the amount of time that you spend planning for meetings, or the number of  e-mails that you respond to after work hours. With that information you can  engage in the four-step problem-solving process that was described in chapter  7 and create a plan. 1.  Identify the problem and the function. 2.  Develop a plan. 3.  Implement the plan. 4.  Understand and evaluate the plan. For example, imagine that you have been staying up late at least three nights  a week responding to e-mails, grading papers, and working on a project for  two of the committees that you support at school. Staying up late is affecting  your personal and professional life because you are tired and not focused. 1.  Identify the problem: You are staying up late to finish undone work. A  probable function of the behavior is avoidance and attention i.e., you are  avoiding the consequences of colleagues and parents being upset that emails have not been responded to and work has not been completed. You  also desire the attention for the work being done and being accepted and  appreciated by your peers and administrators. 2.  Develop a plan: You are going to commit one hour each day after work to  responding to e-mails. You are going to delegate some of the work for the  committee projects to colleagues. And you are going to send a letter home  to families that a weekly e-mail update will be sent home on Fridays in  lieu of responding to individual e-mails of a similar nature. 3.  Implement the plan: Set timers and reminders each day to help stay focused  on the plan. Create a simple newsletter template that can be easily updated  and sent home weekly. Check in with colleagues on the project work. 4.  Understand and evaluate the plan: Ask friends and coworkers if they see a  difference in your energy and focus. Look at data on the number of hours  spent working after work hours. Be reflective on aspects of the plan that  may need to be tweaked. Make any adjustments and continue to implement and evaluate the plan.  Voila!
Chapter Eight BEING THE BEST ME IN A GROUP OF WE In the example above, committee work and responsibilities were mentioned.  In the field of education there are often a number of additional duties that  teachers perform on a daily or weekly basis. Many of those are committees or  professional-learning community responsibilities. The work of these committees and groups is vital to the progress of the school and district. And, while it  is vital, it is also time-consuming and requires a collaborative culture. Collaboration is most often described as cooperating andor working with  another person or as part of a group. As a teacher, you likely orchestrate  group work like a maestro in the classroom. You are able to identify groupings or pairings by learning style, reading level, or need. However, as adults,  groups are often arbitrary and the work is likely not personalized based on  interest or skill. So you may often feel stuck doing work that you are not passionate about. You may feel a lack of teamwork. Two things most often occur in group work. Neither is collaborative in nature and neither will yield meaningful results. One is that no one takes responsibility for the work. Participants sit passively. No action plans are created. Little  actionable work occurs. The other is that one or few people accept the burden of  the work for the group. Actionable work occurs but it is not evenly distributed.  If you are participating in one of these group scenarios, make several  simple shifts for the greater good. 1.  Identify an aspect of the work that you enjoy, have passion for, or are  skilled at. Focus your energy toward that piece or component of the work.  If you are on a safety committee and you love riding bikes, focus your  skills and strengths toward making the bicycle rider area safe and effective. You could organize a fundraising event for new helmets for the riders  who cannot afford them. You could get volunteers to paint new lines in  the parking lot for bike riders to follow. You could help build new safety  racks for riders to park their bikes. 2.  Actively participate. Others will see you engaged and may feel encouraged to be more active in the process. Be a role model. Ask questions.  Listen intently. Take notes. Create plans. Encourage others to engage in  the work. Allow positivity to be contagious. 3.  Facilitate and delegate. Ask to become the leader of the group. Yes, it will  require more time and commitment. However, you will also have more  opportunity to make a difference. Use facilitative skills to allow the team  to work collaboratively. Facilitation skills include:  	 guiding a group through a process 	 drawing upon the opinions and skills of others

Whos in Charge?	 79 	 being a neutral participant 	 creating a comforting environment 	 developing structures and procedures 	 supporting and cultivating ideas Once the process is facilitative a structure for ensuring that work is distributed equitably can be introduced. Ask members to share out in round-robin  formats during meetings. Have action plan templates that are used and reviewed on an ongoing basis. Utilize the teams strengths to determine roles  in the group. CHAPTER SUMMARY This chapter focused on you. You are the most important piece of this puzzle.  It is vital that you care for yourself so that you can be strong and healthy to  care for others. Make plans and be a problem-solver to help in being productive and reflective. Focus your energy on being thankful, being a problemsolver, and being a true team member. Create plans, put plans into action, and  evaluate their effectiveness on an ongoing basis. Stress and a lack of solutions  to challenging classroom behaviors are most often cited as the reason for  teacher burnout. Be the light that shines strong, not the light that burns out. REFLECTION QUESTIONS Q1.  Make a list of the ways that you help to alleviate stress. How many of  those items on your list are focused toward positivity? If some items are not,  what are simple changes that you could make to refocus? Q2.  Use the four-step problem-solving process on a current issueproblem  that you are having at school. What problem did you identify? What plan did  you create? What plan did you put into place? How did the plan work? Q3.  Make a list of the committees or groups that you participate in. Does  any of the work overlap? If so, could you assist in creating a more streamlined  way of work? What would that committeegroup look like? Q4.  What three things are you thankful for in this moment? Write them  down.
Conclusion Remember that you are the key to your happiness. You cannot rely on any  other person or thing to bring you joy, hope, optimism, and happiness. The  happiness that you carry with you can spread like moss on the sunny side of  a tree. Each person can be touched by the happiness that you create. A happy class is led by a happy teacher. A happy teacher uses the tools in  his or her toolbox to build a successful foundation, strong walls, and a solid  roof. That happy classroom will allow students the freedom and space to learn  and grow into happy adults. That is ultimately the goal of educators.  While we conform to the demands of systemic teaching, testing, compliance, and committees, ultimately teachers love to teach and children love to  learn. The key to cultivating and maintaining that love of learning is focusing  on positive, strengths-based, individualized, and functional strategies. As mentioned in the introduction, this book is intended for all teachers  across all grade levels to build a toolbox of strategies, ideas, and interventions  that will help in building a happy class. You are encouraged to try strategies  for a period of time, collect data, determine effectiveness, and tweak strategies positively to make them work best for you in your classroom.  The chapters in this book have guided you from the foundation up. You  have learned about organizing yourself and your classroom for success. You  have learned about behavior and how to focus on the function of the behavior.  You have been given strategies to address common classroom challenges.  You have learned how to add positive strategies into the classroom. You have  been guided through a problem-solving process and how to use data to help  make decisions. And, most importantly, you have been brought back to the  root of a happy class: you. If you find yourself falling back into an old habit or routine, its okay. It  takes months to learn and integrate new behaviors. Dont give up. Refocus 
Conclusion on the positive strategy and find small successes that help to motivate and  encourage. Ask colleagues to provide feedback and recommendations. Rely  on the strong community of partners that you have as an educator.  You can be the teacher of a happy class. You can even help others to create  happy learning environments. You have the knowledge, skills, and willingness, and now you have a few more tools.  Go now, and grow your happy class. 
Appendix Additional Resources Authentic Happiness: https:www.authentichappiness.sas.upenn.edu Behavior Doctor Seminars: http:behaviordoctor.org Center for Mental Health in Schools: http:smhp.psych.ucla.edu International Institute for Restorative Practices: https:www.iirp.edu Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports: http:www.pbis.org Positive Psychology Center: http:ppc.sas.upenn.edu Vanderbilt University IRIS Modules Resource Locator: http:iris.peabody  .vanderbilt.eduiris-resource-locator
Antecedent, Behavior, and Consequence  ABC data, 71 annual education plan, 69. See also  individual education plan antiseptic bounce, 42 attention signals, 14. See also  transition prompt attention, 2223, 25, 26, 28, 30, 36,  4849, 51, 60, 77 attention seeking, 2223, 28, 48;  non-contingent attention, 28; peer  attention, 26, 28 avoidance, 2124, 2630, 36, 38, 43,  60, 77 baseline, 71, 77 behavioral plan, 66, 69, 76 behavior intervention plan, 66. See also  behavioral plan behavioral agreement, 11, 50, 66 behavioral momentum, 43 calming area, 7, 42, 47 chart game, 52 classroom management, 2, 4, 12, 30 classroom rules, 911, 19, 24, 49 collaboration, 6, 78 common planning, 2. See also planning consequence, 1012, 33, 36, 38; logical  consequence, 12, 36 data-based decisions, 61, 6566, 69 discipline, 10, 25, 34 equal choice, 48 escape, 2224, 2630, 36, 43, 47, 60 exclusion, 11, 24, 3436, 38;  exclusionary practices, 3436, 38;  non-exclusionary, 3536; time out, 11,  24, 3436; time out procedure, 3435 expectations, 9, 49, 55, 61. See also  school-wide expectations extinction burst, 49 First-Then, 14, 4647. See also Premack  Principle; Grandmas Law; WhenThen functions of behavior, 1112, 2122, 26,  28, 30, 36, 49, 54, 62, 67, 77 functional behavior assessment, 71 Grandmas Law, 14, 47. See also  Premack Principle; First-Then;  When-Then Index
Index hierarchy, 11, 24, 4445, 48;  consequence hierarchy, 24, 45, 48;  outcome hierarchy, 11, 44 impulsivity, 51 individual education plan, 66. See also  annual action plan interest boosting, 46 intervention, 4, 1112, 21, 2728, 51,  54, 59, 63, 68, 7172 intervention planstrategies, 10, 2728 learning modalitiesstyles, 5, 7, 13, 28,  45, 78 non-contingent attention, 28. See also  attention observational recording, 71 office referrals, 11 operational definition, 6869 partners, 2, 65, 68, 82; teaching partner,  2; Collaborating professionals, 65 peer attention, 26, 28. See also attention planned ignoring, 4849, 51 planning, 2, 4, 7, 13, 18, 23, 38, 46, 68,  77; Lesson plans, 2, 4, 7, 10, 13, 23,  68 positivity, 912, 28, 33, 4950, 5758,  6162, 66, 68, 8182 Positive Behavioral Interventions and  Supports PBIS, 6162 positive psychology, 61 praise, 2829, 36, 4345, 4951, 6162;  pivot praise, 49; positive praise, 28,  50, 62; specific praise, 44, 49; tangible  praise, 43, 45; verbal praise, 29 precise requests, 44 preferential seating, 47 Premack Principle, 14, 37. See also  Grandmas Law; First-Then; WhenThen problem solving, 66, 6869, 71, 77, 79 professional collaborator, 23 progress monitoring, 71 proximity, 71; proximity control, 71 punishment, 3336, 3839 punishment procedure, 35, 39 redirection, 42, 46 reframing, 58 reinforcement, 1, 9, 12, 14, 26, 28,  3436, 4345, 47, 4953, 60, 62, 66;  rates of reinforcement, 43 rewards, 1, 9, 12, 14, 26, 36, 47, 4953,  60, 62 replacement behavior, 2527, 30, 62, 72 response to intervention, 66 scatterplot, 7172 schedule of reinforcement, 28, 66 school-wide expectations, 9, 61, 67. See  also expectations sensory, 7, 23, 25, 27, 30, 42 sensory input, 23, 25, 30	 shaping, 51, 53 stimulus control, 14 successive approximations, 5152 tangible, 2324, 27, 30 token economy, 4, 35, 5354, 62 transition prompt, 14 verbal de-escalation, 4142 When-Then, 47. See also Premack  Principle; Grandmas Law; FirstThen withitness, 14
Jenna Sage has worked in multiple capacities in the field of education for  nearly twenty years. She began as a classroom paraprofessional for a student  with special needs. She then went on to graduate with a bachelor of science in  psychology with a specialization in behavior analysis, a master of education  in special education, a doctorate in special education with a focus on systems  change for students with disabilities, certification in applied behavior analysis, and certification as a professionallife coach. As a consultant, speaker, and writer, Sage has written several published  articles, the focus of which has been practical strategies for teachers. She has  coauthored a chapter in an edited textbook on positive behavioral supports.  She has presented at local, national, and international conferences on topics  including behavior supports, classroom management, dropout prevention,  and support for students with disabilities. She has also worked with a number  of school districts on utilizing effective systems-change processes to support  ongoing implementation and sustainability of programs. As an instructor at the college level, Sage works with pre-service and current  educators to hone their skills in applied behavior analysis, functional behavioral  plans, positive behavior supports, integration of students with special needs into  general education classrooms, and collaboration and consultation skills. Her most important contribution to education, however, has been as a student.  Sage considers herself a high school pushout. She was a student who silently  began disengaging from school as early as first grade, which culminated in tenth  grade when she was told that due to chronic absences she was not going to be  able to graduate. She attended and graduated from an alternative high school  and prides herself on her continued learning accomplishments. Sage has a deep  passion and understanding for education from the student, teacher, and administrator perspectives and through the lens of a researcher and lifelong learner. About the Author