The Impact of  Classroom Practices A volume in Contemporary Perspectives on Access, Equity, and Achievement  Chance W. Lewis, Series Editor

The Impact of  Classroom Practices Teacher Educators Reflections  on Culturally Relevant Teachers edited by Antonio L. Ellis American University Nathaniel Bryan Miami University Yolanda Sealey-Ruiz Teachers College, Columbia University Ivory Toldson Howard University Christopher Emdin Teachers College, Columbia University INFORMATION AGE PUBLISHING, INC. Charlotte, NC  www.infoagepub.com

Copyright  2021 Information Age Publishing Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a  retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,  photocopying, microfilming, recording or otherwise, without written permission  from the publisher. Printed in the United States of America Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data   A CIP record for this book is available from the Library of Congress     http:www.loc.gov ISBN:	 978-1-64802-398-9 Paperback

978-1-64802-399-6 Hardcover

978-1-64802-400-9 E-Book

This book is dedicated to Mr. Linard H. McCloud,   who is the longest employed teacher at Burke High School in Charleston,   South Carolina. We celebrate his 40 years of effective teaching at the same school.  To honor his commitment to education, we share our reflections   on effective teaching through critical storytelling.

vii CONTENTS

	 Foreword.ix William F. Tate IV 	 1	 Mr. Linard H. McCloud: Clarifying Excellence in Teacher  Education Practice. 1 Antonio L. Ellis 	 2	 Turning Up With the Torch: The Transformational Power   of a Legacy of Male Warm Demanders. 7 Anthony Broughton 	 3	 Inspiration and Motivation: How One Teacher Changed the  Course of My Educational Trajectory. 19 Kenneth D. Brown 	 4	 Defying Media Stereotypes: Resilience and Inspiration  Fostered by an African American Teacher.29 Chaz T. Gipson 	 5	 Ernest Smith: Transforming Students Lives for 50 Years. 41 Cleveland Hayes 	 6	 I am Because You Are: The Importance of Being Given Roots   to Grow and Wings to Fly. 55 Tiffany Hollis

viii    Contents 	 7	 Trying a Different Approach: The Influential Power of Mrs.  Taylor and Mr. Johnson in Seeing an Ugly Duck Turn   Into a Swan.65 James T. Jackson 	 8	 High Expectations: The Key Ingredient of Academic Success. 77 Jubria Lewis 	 9	 In Honor of Selma White.85 Marvin Lynn 	 10	 Music Education as a Vehicle to Dream, Empower, Explore,  and Inspire: The Life and Legacy of Mrs. Arcelia Simmons. 93 Brian L. McGowan 	 11	 Mentor Teachers Impact on Educator Identity and Racial  Literacy Development. 105 Yolanda Sealey-Ruiz and Lum Fube 	 12	 A Retrospective Narrative on Effective Teaching After Moving  From Segregated to Integrated Schools: Implications for Policy  and Practice on Effective Teaching.117 Zollie Stevenson, Jr. 	 13	 Love Many, Trust Few; Learn to Paddle Your Own Canoe:  What Teacher Practitioners Can Learn From Racial  Counterstories of a Master Teacher in Rural   North Carolina. 127 Terrell L. Strayhorn 	 14	 Teacher Effectiveness in a Predominantly White Public School  in West Virginia. 141 Jason A. Ottley

	 Afterword: The Impact of Classroom Practices: Teacher  Educators Reflections on Culturally Relevant Teachers. 151 Dawn G. Williams

	 About the Editors. 155

	 About the Contributors. 157

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages ixxi Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. ix FOREWORD William F. Tate IV I love biographical stories. Throughout my professional career, I have enjoyed reading rsums, CVs, bio statements, and other documents that  provide insight into the lives of my colleagues and associates. I aspire to  understand better the relationship between their accomplishments and the  various forms of sponsored mobility in their lives. How did the individuals  learn to navigate their situation? Who helped them move to the next phase  in their lives? My fascination with stories about life-course started early. Biography the  American documentary television series was a staple during my youth. As  a child, I loved the reruns of the show This is Your Life. The origin of the  show dates to 1940s radio. The television show experienced fits of starts  and stops on the airways from the 1950s to earlier 2000s. One of my favorite episodes highlighted the life of Muhammad Ali. Most of the episodes  followed a formula. And the Ali episode was no different. The star of the  hour arrives at the television set thinking he is headed to an important  engagement unrelated to the story of his life. Shocked when he arrives at  the set, Mr. Ali professes his love for the show and cant believe his life will  be shared for all to see. As you might imagine, the Muhammad Ali episode evolved with a series  of guests arriving to share their part in his life. His wife, parents, children,  professional trainer, amateur and professional boxing opponents, friends, 

x    Foreword fellow Olympians, and youth sports leaders paraded onto the set to offer  perspective and tales. There were two major takeaways from this episode.  The first take away entailed Muhammad Alis desperate attempt to interject  his views. He wanted us to hear how he interpreted the story. Time and the  shows protocol prohibited his contribution. A second take away involved  one of the guests. She provided tremendous insight into the boxers life.  And of all the guests, she is the one person that offered a perspective on  the champion from both his youth and his adult life. Mrs. Carter, his thirdgrade teacher, bridged the seasons of his life. She described his temperament as a child. And Mrs. Carter offered a view into the logic underpinning  her instruction to the 8-year old version of arguably the greatest boxer of all  time. Specifically, she discouraged him from street fighting. She told him  that fighting would not take him far. Alis look of respect and admiration  for his former teacher was apparent. Mrs. Carter continued by discussing  her career transition to head the YWCA. She sent for her former student  to make a speech at a YWCA event and he had obliged. Mrs. Carter added that the boxer wrote a check for 10,000 on the spot to help the kids  in the YWCA program. It is here that the multigenerational effects of the  studentteacher relationship emerge. The teacher who sponsored a young  Alis mobility reaches out to him to give back to his community. And he  responded. Mrs. Carters words illustrate the importance of this multigenerational transaction. This volume provides the field a retrospective view of a group of Mrs.  Carters who impacted the lives of educators and scholars. Unlike the protocol of This is Your Life, the authors narrate the story and shape our understanding of how teachers influenced their life-course, worldviews, and  approaches to education. We hear their voices reflecting on childhood and  the adolescent years, enabling us to grow in our understanding of the multigenerational nature of the studentteacher relationship. Specifically, we  learn more about how a group of intellectuals interpret past engagement  with impactful educators and the influence of these interactions on their  practices, thinking, and scholarly outlook. Years ago, I argued that my schoolboy experiences in urban schools with  great teachers represented important lessons for the field. However, custom and tradition prohibited these experiences from inclusion in the literature. Specifically, the paradigmatic boundaries of my field of study aligned  with the documentary series, This is Your Life. It was acceptable to interview  others about my experiences and to synthesize their views as a form of evidence. However, crossing the standing protocol of excluding my story and  my interpretation of events posed a threat to the validity and trustworthiness of the information. I countered with the need to examine the lives  of rare birds in the academy. In the case of this book, I invite the readers 

Foreword    xi to examine each chapter and to glean lessons from the experiences of my  colleagues. They have navigated the scholarly road to the highest levels of  graduate education attainment. This is their life.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 16 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 1 CHAPTER 1 MR. LINARD H. McCLOUD Clarifying Excellence in Teacher  Education Practice Antonio L. Ellis For over three decades educational researchers and scholars have largely  written about teacher effectiveness using quantitative research methodologies Darling-Hammond, Holtzman, Gatlin,  Heilig, 2005; Ingersoll   Strong, 2011; Wilson  Hallum, 2006. There is a dearth of literature available that defines teacher effectiveness using the reflective voices of former  students Ladson-Billings, 1995; Siddle Walker, 2001, 2005. Debates regarding the qualities, skills, and dispositions of effective teachers and teaching have raged in teacher education for several decades. Ladson-Billings  2009 The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African American Children was  a pathbreaking work that has become a foundational study that informs the  work of culturally relevant Ladson-Billings, 2009 and culturally sustaining Paris  Alim, 2017 teaching. In her book The Dreamkeepers, LadsonBillings describes effective teachers who are able to draw from the cultural  wealth of Black communities. These Dreamkeepers ensured that their  Black students were academically successful and grew both in terms of their 
A. L. ELLIS cultural competence and their sociopolitical awareness. In other words, according to Ladson-Billings 2009, these effective teachers possessed both  pedagogical and relational dispositions, which leave lifelong impacts on the  academic and social lives of their students. As some scholars have noted,  what remains missing from the research on culturally-relevant and even  culturally-sustaining teachers are narratives read: stories, cuentos, testimonios, etc. related to how the race of particular K12 teachers positively  impact the lives of their students because they either served as windows or  mirrors Bryan, 2020; Howard, 2001; Irvine  Fenwick, 2011; Milner, 2011.  This volume aims to help fill this gap in educational research literature. The foundation of this volume stems from the classroom experiences provided to me by my high school music teacher. In August of 1995,  I entered Burke High School in Charleston, South Carolina; as an urban  student who was placed in speech therapy, special education, and lower  tracked courses Ellis  Hartlep, 2017. I lacked motivation towards education and the majority of my teachers did not have high expectations of me.  Members of my family averaged an 8th grade education. While growing  up, I was encouraged to do enough just to get by academically and in life.  From my recollection, all of my family members who raised me did not  complete high school. Some dropped out prior to high school. Based on  my surroundings and the odds that were against me, my chances for success  appeared to be extremely dismal. Many people in society gave up on me, including school teachers, guidance counselors, clergy, and community leaders. Eventually I felt like all hope was lost and never imagined that I would  graduate from high school. Upon entering Burke High School, I decided to seek membership into  the marching band. At that time I knew very little about musical instruments. I simply thought that joining the band program would be a fun  thing to do. As I reflect on the first band practice of that school year, I recall the music teacher and marching band director, Mr. Linard McClouds  pep talk. Everyone was completely silent as he talked in a very low and  firm tone, explaining his expectation of all band members. He was very  clear about what he expected from all students. Not only did he express  his expectations of band students, he also talked about his expectations for  the alumni of the band program. That was the first time I heard the term  alumni. Later I learned that alumni meant students who had graduated. Mr. McCloud showcased the success of alumni who once were members  of the marching band. In some cases, he invited alumni to speak during  band practices. In other instances, it was normal for alumni to randomly  stop by to visit Mr. McCloud and encourage students. During those times,  Mr. McCloud typically introduced them by telling band members when they  graduated and what they did post high school graduation. Unbeknownst to  my peers and I, being exposed to successful alumni was another method 

Mr. Linard H. McCloud    3 our music teacher used to model his high expectations of us. I recall meeting marching band alumni from various fields including education, art and  entertainment, medical science, carpentry, law, theology, political science,  electrical engineering, auto mechanics, just to name a few. In addition to professional fields, I remember meeting alumni who  joined the United States military. Subconsciously constantly being exposed  to generations of successful people who once were students inspired me to  aim for success so that I could one day return to inspire students. When former students visited, I observed the proud look on Mr. McClouds face and  the spark in his eyes, as if they were his own children. In those moments, I  became determined to make him equally as proud after I graduated. Mr. McCloud made it clear that he expected all his students to achieve  at least a 3.0 grade point average. In addition, he made it known that students would not be allowed to participate in the band if they consistently  failed academically. In order to ensure that students succeeded, he hosted  study groups at the band room an hour before school began, during lunch,  and up to 3 hours after school. Due to Mr. McClouds track record for producing highly successful students, he was highly revered in the community  and among families. Therefore, if he recommended that students come  to school an hour earlier and stay later for academic assistance, parents  complied. In many cases parents and legal guardians were also alumni who  viewed the music teacher as a father figure. Broughton this volume highlights the importance of educators building relationships with students and  their families, just as Mr. McCloud championed. In addition to Mr. McClouds relationship with his students and their  families, he also established strong partnerships with local businesses,  which provided internships and paid work-based learning opportunities for  students. Those partnerships helped fund band trips to colleges and universities and new uniforms. Local partnerships were vital because several  students, including myself, could not afford to pay for these trips without  additional financial support. Because Mr. McCloud believed in fostering  independence and a strong work ethic in his students. Hed ensure that  at least 50 of the trip was paid for, while he created opportunities for  students to raise the remaining balance with structured fundraisers such  as fruit drives, candy sales, soul food dinners, and bake sales. In retrospect,  I understand that he supported his students while also ensuring that we  earned everything we received. In order to ensure that students needs  were met, Mr. McCloud was one of the first persons who arrived at school  daily and among the last to leave. Out of my 4 years in high school, I do not  remember him being absent no more than once or twice. I do not highlight his attendance record to suggest that teachers should not take off as  needed. Self-care and mental breaks are important for teachers. However, 
A. L. ELLIS I highlight Mr. McClouds attendance record to show the depth of his commitment to his students. Mr. McCloud was the first adult in my life who influenced me to aim high  academically. He refused to settle for less from any of his students regardless if they were in special education, general education courses, or the gifted and talented program. His level of expectation remained consistent for  all of us. As a result of his demand for excellence, I eventually started rising  to his expectation. By the time I became a sophomore, my respect for Mr.  McCloud climaxed and I loved being a member of the band. Thereafter, I  worked hard academically so that I would not disappoint the band director,  who was also my music teacher. Before I knew it, I was a junior and finally  a graduating senior. Mr. McCloud ensured that all seniors auditioned for  music scholarships at several universities. To my surprise, I received full music scholarships to Benedict College, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical  University, and South Carolina State University. Shortly after receiving the  music scholarships, I became the first person from my family to graduate  from high school and enter college. While in college, I often reflected on Mr. McClouds expectation of  alumni. He always said, We send you to college to graduate. Therefore,  in the back of my mind I always told myself, I better do well in college  because I cannot return home to Mr. McCloud without a degree. By that  time, I had started to believe in myself as a young adult and engaged in selfempowering activities such as reading extensively, building relationships  with progressive people, and pursued memberships into organizations on  campus such as Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity and the gospel choir. Eventually,  I became interested in furthering my education through graduate school.  Upon completing my undergraduate degree in philosophy, I entered graduate school programs at Howard University and The George Washington  University, earning three masters degrees consecutively, followed by a doctoral degree in educational leadership and policy studies. It is because of the culturally responsive and effective teaching that Mr.  McCloud delivered in the classroom and beyond, that I went from being  a special education student at a Title I school to possessing a doctoral degree. His pedagogical practices directly aligned with Ladson-Billings 1995  culturally relevant pedagogy tenets, which includes academic success, cultural competence, and critical consciousness. I encourage all pre-service  and in-service teachers, educational leaders, and policy makers to use Mr.  Linard McCloud as a model for educating children. As a current school  administrator, I frequently tell stories about Mr. McCloud to my teachers,  particularly to improve our family engagement, classroom management,  teaching practices, and studentteacher relationships. Similarly, as a university professor who develops future teachers and school administrators, 

Mr. Linard H. McCloud    5 I consistently present Mr. McCloud as a model of excellence for culturally  responsive and relevant teaching. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR TEACHER   EDUCATION PRACTITIONERS Each chapter in this volume will share similar stories about teachers whom  the authors deem as effective, while concluding with practical recommendations for current and pre-service teachers to employ in their practices.  Likewise, I share my practical recommendations for teachers and those  who are studying to become teachers based on my experience with Mr.  McCloud, whom I consider to be a Dreamkeeper. I recommend teachers  employ the following practices that do not require hierarchical permission  or district funding, but do require intentional planning, intrinsic motivation, and a strong work ethic: 	 Be clear about your expectations and build capacity for students to  meet them. 	 Be fully present for your students i.e., physically, emotionally, and  mentally. 	 Show students various forms of successful outcomes i.e., alumni  and mentors. 	 Build relationships with families and partnerships with community  stakeholders. 	 Be culturally relevant and culturally responsive inside the classroom  and beyond. 	 Support students while also teaching them self-sufficiency and independency. 	 Provide opportunities for your students beyond the classroom setting i.e., fieldtrips, internships, and workforce development. 	 Be consistent. REFERENCES Bryan, N. 2020, April 28. To me, he teaches like the child learns: Black maternal caregivers on the pedagogies and schooling practices of a Black male  kindergarten teacher. The Urban Review. https:doi.org10.1007s11256  -020-00577-9 Darling-Hammond, L., Holtzman, D. J., Gatlin, S. J.,  Heilig, J. V. 2005. Does  teacher preparation matter? Evidence about teacher certification, Teach for  America, and teacher effectiveness. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 1342,  151.
A. L. ELLIS Ellis, A. L.,  Hartlep, N. D. 2017. Struggling in silence: A qualitative study of six  African American male stutterers in educational settings. The Journal of Educational Foundations, 3014, 3362. Howard, T. C. 2001. Telling their side of the story: African American students  perceptions of culturally relevant teaching. Urban Review, 332, 131149. Ingersoll, R.,  Strong, M. 2011. The impact of induction and mentoring for  beginning teachers: A critical review of the research. Review of Educational  Research, 812, 201233. Irvine, J. J.,  Fenwick, L. T. 2011. Teachers and teaching for the new millennium:  The role of HBCUs. Journal of Negro Education, 803, 197208. Ladson-Billings, G. 1995. But thats just good teaching! The case for culturally  relevant pedagogy. Theory into practice, 343, 159165. Ladson-Billings, G. 2009. The dreamkeepers: Successful teachers of African American  children. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Milner, H. R., IV. 2011. Culturally relevant pedagogy in a diverse urban classroom.  Urban Review, 431, 6689. Paris, D.,  Alim, S. Eds. 2017. Culturally sustaining pedagogies: Teaching and  learning for justice in a changing world. New York, NY: Teachers College Press. Siddle Walker, V. 2001. African American teaching in the south: 19401960. American Educational Research Journal, 384, 751779. Siddler Walker, V. 2005. Organized resistance and Black educators quest for  school equality, 18781938. Teachers College Record, 1073, 355388. Wilson, M.,  Hallum, P. J. 2006. Using student achievement test scores as evidence of  external validity for indicators of teacher quality: Connecticuts Beginning Educator  Support and Training program. Berkeley: University of California at Berkeley.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 718 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 7 CHAPTER 2 TURNING UP   WITH THE TORCH The Transformational Power of a Legacy  of Male Warm Demanders Anthony Broughton Amid the oftentimes drab nature of daily desk work, the soothing sound of  Mr. Joseph Browns keyboard in my elementary music class imbued upon  me a passion for music in the classroom. As my first Black male educator,  Mr. Brown affirmed my affinity for music as early as first grade. He was my  other father Lynn, Bacon, Totten, Bridges,  Jennings, 2010; Milner,  2013 in school, who would often say, Im watching you Broughton! Although he is not the focus of this chapter, and I do not remember many  details from my early childhood experiences, I do recall that he was very  attentive. As a child I believed that he possessed eyes in the back of his head  because he could see my every move. Consequently, I strove to always make  Mr. Brown proud; because he paid attention to me; and ensured I was always  being and doing my best. This made me feel valued and visible, because  he saw me. Mr. Brown and I had something in common. We were both 
A. BROUGHTON former students of Mr. Mack Guice, II. Mr. Guice was my middle and high  school music instructor who told me what I was going to become; and  what I was going to do to get there. As custom for many African American  educators historically Foster, 1994, Mr. Guice demanded excellence; and  consistently devoted his time and energy to mandating that I drew forth  my own potential. Educare is the root word for education, which means to  draw forth. Thus, Mr. Guices ability to draw out my potential made him  an educator, rather than just teacher. Mr. Guice cultivated a seed me;  and now he is able to see the fruits of his contribution to the collective labor  of my community. Mr. Guice was what Delpit 2012 considers a warm demander; one  who would expect a great deal of their students, convince them of their  own brilliance, and help them to reach their potential in a disciplined and  structured environment p. 77. He demanded that we were always attentive, conscious, and astute; and held us accountable for information that  was provided to or by us. Mr. Guice and Mr. Brown were both staples in  our community; and well revered by many students, parents, teachers, and  community members. Drawing from Delpits concept of warm demanders, I reflect and share teachable moments through vignettes from one  of my only Black male educators, that have shaped my educator identity  and educational philosophy. Music was the common thread, as the torch  of excellence was passed from one Black male educator to the next. I demonstrate how Mr. Guices verbal and non-verbal communication styles and  passion for music in the classroom made a lasting impression on me. I reflect on how their work inspired me to become an educator who turned  up with music in the classroom. Finally, I provide recommendations for  educators, teachers, preservice teachers, and teacher educators, which  conceptualizes Black male educators as more than just male bodies in the  classroom Bryan  Williams, 2017. I became an educator like Mr. Guice. I was not afraid to turn up in my  classroom, because I understood the transformative power of music. I understood that it was my responsibility to continue his legacy and the legacy  of Mr. Brown by passing the torch to the next generation. Mr. Guice has  influenced my teacher identity, and my conceptions of the roles of Black  men in the classroom. Inspired by Oprah Winfreys 2014, What I know  for sure, I share proven practices I have learned from Mr. Guice through  experiences. These practices or approaches are proven, not only because  I have experienced them first hand in Mr. Guices class, or because I have  experienced them in my own class as a teacher, but because research has  demonstrated that it has yielded favorable results. This is particularly essential because practices that have historically been employed in U.S. classrooms have proven to be effective for most White American children, and  culturally irrelevant for children of color Ladson-Billings, 2006. Thus, my 

Turning Up With the Torch     9 voice, as a Black male educator, having been schooled in U.S. schools  Woodson, 1933 is essential; because the narratives, experiences, and ways  of knowing and being Black male educators and Black students have traditionally been omitted, marginalized, or silenced in dominant discourse  regarding pedagogy in U.S. schools. Thus, I will share what I know for  sure, after reflecting upon Mr. Guices practice. I use the term, warm demander in this chapter to describe Mr. Mack Guice, II because he cared  Gay, 2010 and proved that we could achieve and exceed all expectations,  when provided spaces and relationships where ethnically diverse students  feel recognized, respected, valued, seen, and heard Gay, 2010, p. 51. TEACHING WITH PASSION: PENTACOSTAL PEDAGOGY   IN MR. GUICES CLASS Warm demanders see themselves as advocates for the young people within a system that may not  be so caring. They adopt many of the attributes of parents. They consider the  whole child, not just his or her mind. They are concerned with the kind of  people they are helping to moldthey focus on promoting character, honesty, responsibility, respect, creativity, and kindness. Delpit, 2012, p. 85 I have also seen miracles performed by warm demanders, but none like  that of Mr. Mack Guice, IIan African American male, native of Birmingham, Alabama. He wore black shades, a black beret, and was always dressed  to impress. He wore a ring with the Mercedes Benz icon that matched his  car; and proudly threw up hooks both of his hands raised up to the sides  of his head turned outwards, holding his bald head high, to represent his  fraternity, Omega Psi Phi. He was and still is highly revered amongst our rural community. He walked with authority; bearing a bachelors and masters  degree. Although he was a renaissance man and a multitalented educator  who could do it all; teaching music was something he was passionate about. Learning in many of my classrooms as a student was primarily centered  around textbooks. Many students became passive learners Hammond,  2014, having been indoctrinated with content written through Eurocentric cultural lens Boutte, 2016; Hammond, 2014; Paris, 2012. I was a droid  in these textbook driven classrooms; harboring my inner potential, artistic  abilities, ideas, and creativity by listening and being quiet to navigate  the oftentimes Eurocentric culture of school Boutte, 2016; Dubois, 1903;  Hammond, 2014; Paris, 2012. I was young, gifted, and Black Perry, Steele,   Hilliard, 2003, but could have easily been labeled as dis-engaged.  This was because pedagogy in these classrooms were disengaging. However, pedagogy in Mr. Guices class was liberating, because he spoke to our 
A. BROUGHTON needs; and needs we did not know we possessed. His firm grip on content  knowledge, and charismatic and relevant approach to content delivery, oftentimes made me want to shout, preach! In fact, I would oftentimes say,  preach in class, when he made statements that resonated with me. Mr.  Guice integrated life skills into his lessons that spoke to our experiences.  Thus, I would describe the delivery style of Mr. Guices instruction as what  Emdin 2016 refers to as Pentecostal pedagogy. Mr. Guice often prompted  my peers and I to reflect about our performance through his consistent  questioning techniques. The very first concept Mr. Guice taught in each  class was the art of listening. He would inquire, Class, what is listening?  He expected us to respond in unison, Listening is being able to respond  to what has been said or heard. He believed that you would be unable to  appropriately respond if you were not listening; and rather than chastise us  when we did not follow directions, Mr. Guice would inquire, Class, what is  listening? We would have to pause and recite the definition that he taught  us to reinforce his expectations. This usage of call and response Smitherman, 1986 as an approach to  teaching and building a sense of community still resonates with me. When  he spoke certain phrases, he expected that we responded in unison. This  is the same approach that we used as drum majors to manage and communicate with our peers on the marching band. When we said, Band attention! the band members replied, CHS! The call and response was our  primary mode of communication; and primary method of getting everyones attention. We also used call and response to recite spirit chants, which  were done collectively. What I know for sure is that teachers should use call  and response for instruction and to build a sense of community. CULTURALLY RELEVANT APPROACHES I struggled the first two weeks learning to play a note on my trumpet, because I had not mastered the blowing technique. That changed when Mr.  Guice told me to spit the grits. I instantly blew my first note upon employing his strategy. His strategy was culturally relevant to me because I enjoyed  eating grits; and connected effortlessly with the concept. Mr. Guice also  used mnemonic devices to teach us how to read music. To date, I recall Mr.  Guice using elephants got big dirty feet, every good boy does fine, and  FACE as a strategy to read notes on the music staff. As a result, I learned  how to read music and rapidly traversed through the band ranks to drum  major. What I know for sure is that mnemonic devices that resonate with  students and culturally relevant strategies support learning. Mr. Guice also fostered culturally relevant learning through his approach  to musical literacies. He affirmed our interests by teaching us how to read, 

Turning Up With the Torch     11 write, and transpose some of our favorite rap, gospel, and RB songs. He  made learning and reading music meaningful and relevant, because he listened and learned about our interests and values. As a result, we developed  the skill to read and play music across multiple genres; while developing  cultural competence. Our music hip-hop was affirmed, and not seen  as the Black noise that Rose 1994 articulated. This contributed to the  positive rapport and sense of community that he fostered, because he demonstrated he cared by integrating our values in the curriculum. What I  know for sure is that teachers must listen and learn about students interests  and values, and integrate it in a meaningful fashion. A COMMUNITY-CENTERED EDUCATOR Mr. Guice was prominent in the community. Everyone knew him; and those  who did not know him personally, knew of him. It was common to encounter him in the grocery store, gas station, church, or at a community event,  even though he did not live in our community. The high school marching  band was highly revered in the community; with a rich legacy, under Mr.  Guices tutelage. From Day 1, Mr. Guice made it known that he knew who I  was, and everything about me hooks, 2004. Anthony Broughton! I know  exactly who you are, were the first words he said to me. I immediately felt  affirmed Gay, 2010. I discovered that Mr. Guice knew who I was, because  he also taught my mother and father when they were in school, as members  of the marching band. My mother was a majorette, and my father was a  drummer; so I knew that joining the band would be an approach to continue their legacy. I knew up front that Mr. Guice was serious business, because  of the longevity, and stability he provided our band program. Mr. Joseph  Brown, my first Black male teacher, who taught music had a very unique  connection to this storyline. He was also my mother and fathers classmate,  and a student of Mr. Mack Guice, II. This speaks to the level of interconnectivity that Mr. Guice had with not only his students, but the community.  He saw teaching as a way to give back to the community, so he spent a great  deal of time cultivating us by using various approaches to draw out our  potential. What I know for sure is that educators must get to know students  and their families. BEYOND THE CLASSROOM WALLS Mr. Guice was deliberate in what he exposed us to. He was passionate and  adamant about exposing us to the possibilities of higher education. Although we thought we were simply rehearsing solely to march in college 
A. BROUGHTON homecoming parades, looking back I realize that these experiences were  so significant to my interest in college. We did not realize that Mr. Guice  was intentionally exposing us to college. We toured the campuses and attended football games after the college homecoming parades. Although we  attended several college homecoming parades, the annual homecoming  experience at Benedict College left an everlasting impression on me. Thus,  by my senior year in high school, I was adamant that Benedict College was  the best choice for me. Unlike other seniors at the time, I did not have to  do a campus tour, or research information about the college because of  the co-curricular opportunities Mr. Guice afforded me through the marching band. Additionally, he supported us in going to band camp at Johnson C. Smith University for two summers, which transformed my life and  taught me discipline. As a result, my peers and I discovered leadership skills  we never knew we possessed; and we were able to employ those skills to  strengthen our band program when we returned from camp. What I know  for sure is that effective educators must foster meaningful learning and personal development opportunities beyond the walls of the classroom. SHARED RESPONSIBILITY I do not recall any major discipline issues in Mr. Guices class. We had great  reverence for him; and disrespecting him in any way was inconceivable.  There were a handful of my peers over the course of my 7 years under Mr.  Guices tutelage, that I witnessed a student test Mr. Guice. We knew he did  not tolerate disrespect, but there were always a few who would test the waters  to discover the consequences of disrespect that most of us were too apprehensive to consider. The first time I witnessed Mr. Guice discipline a student  was during a band class when I was in the eighth grade. It involved a male  student who refused to pull up his pants. At the time, the school had a strict  dress code policy in an attempt to prepare us for the professional world,  which was outlined in our student handbook. Our shirts had to be pulled up  and tucked at all times. However, during this particular day, there was one  student in our class who refused to comply with the dress code policy. We were all warming up our instruments, preparing for the lesson, and  we heard one of our male peers shout, I aint pullin up nothing! after  Mr. Guice asked him to adhere to the dress code. What did you just say?  inquired Mr.Guice, leaning in toward the student with his eyes squinted, as  if he misunderstood what he uttered. We were aghast. I said, I aint pullin  up nothing, reiterated the student. To our dismay, Mr. Guice calmly said  with assertiveness Brown, 2004, Step into my office. We did not hear  yelling, or screaming. Moments later, our classmate exited the office with  his pants pulled up, with a different attitude. He came back and sat down in 

Turning Up With the Torch     13 the seat and complied the remainder of the period. There was no evidence  that an incident had occurred. I always marveled at the transformative nature of Mr. Guices individualized student meetings. He never disciplined  students in the presence of their peers. He would always say, Step in my  office or Let me have a word with you. This approach did not embarrass  us; but rather fostered an opportunity for dialogue. Thus, we perceived this  approach as a demonstration of Mr. Guices respect for us as young adults.  Unlike the dehumanizing approaches commonly employed by most teachers, where students were chastised amid their peers, we were treated by Mr.  Guice as a key player in the decision making process. Mr. Guices approach  was effective because he understood as outlined by Brown 2004 that Power struggles between teachers and students often result in more hostility  and a complete lack of respect between the two. It is wise for teachers to avoid  power struggles initiated by students. Students have power, and as they enter  middle school and advance to high school their power base increases as they  attempt to impress peers and other classmates by initiating arguments with  teachers. p. 284 Mr. Guice protected students from embarrassment, because otherwise  our peers would have witnessed us lose the power struggle. Power struggles  did not exist with Mr. Guice because he had zero tolerance for disrespect;  especially since he always respected and went above and beyond for us. As  underscored by Delpit 1995, Black children expect an authority figure  to act with authority p. 35. Mr. Guice did not make requests, or provide  us with options that did not mirror our potential or our worth. He did not  allow us to disrespect him, ourselves, or our families. Rather than regarding  him as an authority figure for the sake of doing what he said to do, because  he said it; we regarded him as a father or school guardian who strived to  protect us. Lynn 2006 referred to this relationship as other fathering,  which is a mixture of tough love, discipline, and caring p. 2517. We  knew this because Mr. Guice saved us from school suspension, and the  pipeline to prison Perry, Steele,  Hilliard, 2003 that we may have otherwise become victims of. We knew he truly loved and cared for and about  us; because he demonstrated love through his actions. It felt good to see  a strong Black man love the way he did hooks, 2004. He immediately  Brown, 2004 resolved issues rather than passing it down to the administrators; because of his level of accountability for us. What we now know for  sure is that children dont care how much you know, until they know how  much you care. When children know that you care they will do anything to  demonstrate a high level of respect toward you. Mr. Guice cared by protecting usas much as he could, from the pipeline to prison Perry, Steele,  Hilliard, 2003; Wright  Counsell, 2018.  This act of caring spoke to his ability to foster meaningful personal and 
A. BROUGHTON interpersonal relationships with his students and members of the community Boutte, 2016; Gay, 2010; Hammond, 2014. He possessed what Hilliard  1991 referred to as the will to ensure we succeeded by implementing  collective responsibility, which others may refer to as classroom management. We were never oblivious of Mr. Guices expectations, because he was  clear and transparent with his expectations and intentions Ware, 2006 for  us on the first day of class. Not only was he explicit in his expectations, he  also discussed class norms, and modeled the behavior he expected Metropolitan Center for Urban Education, 2008. We felt like we belonged because we had a sense of ownership through the various leadership roles he  assigned us, such as trumpet section leader; so we managed our class.  What I know for sure is that students should have leadership opportunities  in the learning space to reinforce the concept of collective responsibility. LEARNING FROM LEGACIES There were photos of former band and choir members our parents, cousins, and community members that adorned the classroom walls. These  photos reminded us of the legacy we were charged to uphold and advance.  Mr. Guice oftentimes told us stories about previous band members, and  how things were back in the day. Oral histories were a key aspect of our  classroom learning King  Swartz, 2014; Long, Baines,  Tisdale, 2018.  It supported us in developing a sense of pride for our heritage. LadsonBillings 1995, 2009 referred to this as developing cultural competence.  What I know for sure is that students should see their cultural and historical  legacies depicted in the curriculum and classroom environment. Mr. Guice also showed us videos that modeled certain skills he wanted us  to develop. He had voluminous VHS tape recordings of what we referred to  as historical band drills. While the videos supported visual learners like  myself, this culturally sustaining approach Paris, 2012 also provided us an  opportunity to learn from the past. Mr. Guice created a group of student  leaders called band council, which comprised of all the instrument section  leaders. We met daily to discuss ideas, issues, and to plan instruction for  the entire band. Upon watching the VHS tapes he converted to DVD, we  learned Hew  Brush, 2007 the chocolate butter milk from a university  marching band that Mr. Guice filmed. Through a series of co-generative  dialogues Emdin, 2011, the band council integrated the chocolate butter milk into our half-time performance and developed a plan to teach  the moves to the band. Since Mr. Guice did not teach moves, we learned  how to teach various types of learners during this process Gardner, 2006;  Silver, 2005. Students who did not attend rehearsal, learn the music, or  had discipline or academic issues were required to stand on the sidelines 

Turning Up With the Torch     15 of the field during our half-time performance. Therefore, we all learned  discipline. Mr. Guices expectations were high; and the videos of past band  performances reminded us of why he set the bar so high. Mr. Guice wanted  us to be great; so he always showed us images and videos of greatness. This  strategy influenced our behavior, because we knew that Mr. Guice believed  in us. What I know for sure is that students should have the opportunity to  teach and learn from their peers. This requires that teachers allow students  to take ownership of learning, by relinquishing dominant control over  student learning Friere, 1970. BROTHER TO BROTHER As a current educator, I always speak to my students individually regarding  discipline concerns, because I remember how respected I felt to know that  Mr. Guice would never humiliate me in the presence of my peers. Although  Mr. Guice fostered meaningful rapports with students in the classroom, he  also taught us brotherhood through his mentoring group Lynn, Bacon,  Totten, Bridges,  Jennings, 2010. We did not believe that Mr. Guice ever  slept. Although Mr. Guice committed himself to teaching and being a band  and choir director, he was also a mentor. Mr. Guice, myself, and two other peers established the Omega Team fraternity, a high school mentoring  group and step team influenced by Mr. Guices fraternity, Omega Psi Phi.  This mentoring group and step team cultivated brotherhood and taught us  the value of collaboration, perseverance, and community service. Although  this group made a positive impact on my peers and I during high school, I  was inspired by Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Incorporated to take my intellectual acumen to new heights. Thus, I developed a mentoring group and  step team when I became an educator to stimulate the intellectual abilities  of the male students in my school. What I know for sure is that mentoring  groups and school step teams provide a positive outlet and a communal  space to foster personal and professional development. Mr. Guices approach to supporting our personal and professional development made him an ideal model for an educator, or elder King   Swartz, 2014, who cultivated his students holistically. He was truly what  Broughton 2019 referred to as a green thumb educator. Like plants, we  were all diverse, but Mr. Guice had the ability to identify our needs and  provide us with opportunities that helped us bloom. What I know for sure  is that the best teachers show you where to look, but dont tell you what to  see. Mr. Guice always told us where to look, but never what to see. We were  afforded the freedom to think for ourselves and to go against the grain so  that we would not become passive learners Hammond, 2014. He gave us  autonomy, but also preached shared responsibility King, 2014, 2018.
A. BROUGHTON RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRACTICE 	 Children do not care how much you know, until they know how  much you care. 	 Effective educators must foster meaningful learning and personal development opportunities beyond the classroom Boutte  Hill, 2006. 	 Students should see their cultural and historical legacies depicted in  the curriculum and classroom environment Gay, 2010. 	 Mentoring groups and school step teams provide a positive outlet  and a communal space to foster personal and professional development Lynn, Bacon, Totten, Bridges,  Jennings, 2010. 	 Educators must foster a sense of community and shared responsibility. 	 Educators must develop relationships with students to intentionally  integrate their interests and values into the curriculum. 	 Educators must get to know students and their families Boutte,  2016; Boutte  Hill, 2006. REFERENCES Broughton, A. 2019. Evidence-based approaches to becoming a culturally responsive educator: Emerging research and opportunities. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Boutte, G. S.,  Hill, E. L. 2006. African American communities: Implications for  education. New Educator, 2, 311329. Boutte, G. S. 2016. Educating African American students: And how are the children?  New York, NY: Routledge. Brown, D. F. 2004. Urban teachers professed classroom management strategies.  Urban Education, 393, 266289. Bryan, N.,  Milton Williams, T. 2017. We need more than just male bodies in  classrooms: Recruiting and retaining culturally relevant black male teachers in early childhood education. Journal of Early Childhood Teacher Education,  383, 209222. Delpit, L. 1995. Other peoples children: Cultural conflict in the classroom. New York,  NY: New Press. Delpit, L. 2012. Multiplication is for White people: Raising expectations for other peoples children. New York, NY: The New Press.  Du Bois, W. E. B. 1903. The souls of black folk: Essays and sketches. Chicago, IL: A.C.  McClurg. Emdin, C. 2011. Moving beyond the boat without a paddle: Reality pedagogy,  black youth, and urban science education. The Journal of Negro Education,  803, 284295. Emdin, C. 2016. For White folks who teach in the hood . . . and the rest of yall too: Reality  pedagogy and urban education. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.

Turning Up With the Torch     17 Foster, M. 1994. Effective black teachers: A literature review. In E. Hollins, J. King,   W. Hayman Eds, Teaching diverse populations: Formulating a knowledge base  pp. 225242. Albany: State University of New York Press. Freire, P. 1970. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. London, England: Penguin Gardner, H. 2006. The development and education of the mind. New York, NY:  Routledge. Gay, G. 2010. Culturally responsive teaching: Theory, research, and practice. New York,  NY: Teachers College Press. Hammond, Z. L. 2014. Culturally responsive teaching and the brain: Promoting authentic engagement and rigor among culturally and linguistically diverse students 1st  ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin. Hew, K. F.,  Brush, T. 2007. Integrating technology into K12 teaching and learning: Current knowledge gaps and recommendations for future research. Educational Technology Research  Development, 553, 223252. Hilliard, A. G., III. 1991. Do we have the will to educate all children? Educational  Leadership, 491, 3136. hooks, b. 2004. We real cool: Black men and masculinity. New York, NY: Routledge. King, J. E.,  Swartz, E. E. 2014. Re-membering history in student and teacher learning: An Afrocentric culturally informed praxis. New York, NY: Routledge. King, J. E.,  Swartz, E. E. 2018. Heritage knowledge in the curriculum: Retrieving an  African Episteme. New York, NY: Routledge. Ladson-Billings, G. 1995. Toward a theory of culturally relevant pedagogy. American Educational Research Journal, 323, 465491. https:doi.org10.2307  1163320 Ladson-Billings, G. 2006. From the achievement gap to the education debt: Understanding achievement in U.S. schools. Educational Researcher, 357. 312. Ladson-Billings, G. 2009. The dreamkeepers: Successful teachers of African American  children 2nd ed. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Long, S., Baines, J.,  Tisdale, C. 2018. Weve been doing it your way long enough:  Choosing the culturally relevant classroom. New York, NY: Teachers College Press. Lynn, M. 2006. Dancing between two worlds: Portrait of the life of a Black male  teacher in South Central L.A. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 192, 221242. Lynn, M., Bacon, J. N., Totten, T. L., Bridges, T. L., III.,  Jennings, M. 2010.  Examining teachers beliefs about African American male students in a lowperforming high school in an African American school district. Teachers College Record, 1121, 289330. Metropolitan Center for Urban Education. 2008. Culturally responsive classroom management strategies. Retrieved from http:steinhardt.nyu.eduscmsAdmin  uploads005121Culturally20Responsive20Classroom20Mgmt20 Strat2.pdf Milner, H. 2013. Chapter five: A talk to teachers about Black male students. Counterparts, 383, 6785. Paris, D. 2012. Culturally sustaining pedagogy: A needed change in stance, terminology, and practice. Educational Researcher, 413, 9397. Perry, T., Steele, C.,  Hilliard, A., III. 2003. Young, gifted, and Black: Promoting high  achievement among African American students. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
A. BROUGHTON Rose, T. 1994. Black Noise: Rap music and Black culture in contemporary America. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press. Silver, D. 2005. Drumming to the beat of different marchers: Finding the rhythm for differentiated learning. Nashville, TN: Incentive. Smitherman, G. 1986. Talkin and testifyin: The language of Black America. Detroit,  MI: Wayne State University Press. Ware, F. 2006. Warm demander pedagogy culturally responsive teaching that supports a culture of achievement for African American students. Urban Education, 414, 427456. https:doi.org10.11770042085906289710 Winfrey, O. 2014. What I know for sure. New York, NY: Flatiron Books. Woodson, C. G. 1933. The mis-education of the Negro. New York, NY: Wilder. Wright, B. L., Counsell, S. L. 2018. The brilliance of Black boys: Cultivating school success in the early grades. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 1928 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 19 CHAPTER 3 INSPIRATION   AND MOTIVATION How One Teacher Changed the Course   of My Educational Trajectory Kenneth D. Brown THE EARLY YEARS I was born and mostly raised in Jackson, Mississippi and I am a product of  Jackson Public Schools. I understand the racial implications that come with  growing up in the Deep South, but I wasnt truly able to conceptualize the  disparities until I was an adult residing in other parts of the country. When  compared to other states, Mississippi ranks last or close to last in almost  every identifiable measure imaginable poverty, infant mortality rate, STIs,  etc.; Michaela, 2018. Jackson, the capital and largest city in the state has  an African American population of 82 World Population Review, 2020.  The allocation of resources, or lack thereof, impacted most communities  and led to an increase in crime. In the 1980s, neighborhoods in Jackson  were still mostly segregated, and students were bussed to schools in different areas to integrate the populations.
K. D. BROWN I started attending Key Elementary School in first grade and would stay  through sixth grade. The student population was approximately 60 White  and 40 African American at the time. The teaching staff at Key was diverse. During my years of attendance, I had three White female teachers,  two African American female teachers, one White male teacher, and two  African American male teachers. I enjoyed attending school and was seen as  a smart student by teachers and classmates. I was frequently chosen to be the  classroom helper. I served on the safety patrol team and was responsible for  transporting students to and from the bus and making sure everyone stayed  in their seats while the bus was in motion. I even participated in a mock  election and out of three positions, I was the only African American elected.  I was chosen to write about the experience for our school newspaper and  spent time in our gifted and talented classroom. Although I recognized the  differences between my White peers and myself, I did not feel as though I  was treated differently by most of my teachers at the time because of my race.  I did feel that my African American male teachers expected me to act a certain way and they thought that intimidation was the best way to motivate me. While in elementary school, I also started learning how to play musical  instruments. In second grade, I began taking piano lessons. My instructor  was African American. He was very kind and always professional. After 2  years of lessons, my excitement wore off and I stopped. Around the same  time, I started playing the viola at school. I enjoyed learning how to play the  viola and participating in the recital, but the teacher was not memorable. I  only played the viola during my fourth-grade year and did not revisit musical instruments until I went to junior high school. I believe that my perceptions of my classmates home lives started shaping  the way I recognized the differences between the White and Black students.  I felt as if all my White classmates resided in the nice houses surrounding  the school, with both parents, and had very few issues. Media played a huge  part in my perception of my White classmates at the time. In contrast, I saw  myself, and classmates who looked like me, leave neighborhoods plagued  with decay, to attend our school. We lived in single family homes with our  mother and siblings. We were responsible for our younger siblings safety  to and from school as well as after school until our mothers came home  from work. Most received government assistance. Where we received free  or reduced lunch at school, I saw most of my White friends bringing their  lunch or paying full price. I am aware that this is an overgeneralization of  the experiences of my White and Black classmates but at the time I felt that  I had more in common outside of school with my Black classmates and had  more in common at school with my classmates perceived as smart regardless of their skin color. Overall, I enjoyed my elementary school experience and left believing  I was a highly intelligent boy who could accomplish anything. I developed 

Inspiration and Motivation     21 a strong academic foundation. In elementary school, I did not have a relationship with a teacher that pushed me to achieve more. I believe I was  motivated by the school-wide incentive program where key bucks were  given to students based on grades to buy big ticket items such as bikes and  stereos, but I was also motivated by a desire to achieve. As I grew older and  started to change physically, mentally, and emotionally; what motivated me  also changed. THE START OF JUNIOR HIGH I started seventh grade at Hardy Junior High, which had a predominately  African American population. In this environment, I was able to thrive in  a space with peers and teachers who looked like me. As I moved through  adolescence, I was becoming increasingly shy. I had a core group of friends  and support from teachers that made the transition to junior high seamless  though. Academically, I performed well. My classes were not advanced. At  the time, I didnt know that advanced level classes other than gifted and  talented existed. I earned mostly As and Bs in my classes with little effort  being exerted. In seventh grade, I also signed up for band as an elective. I  enjoyed the band experience even though I hated playing my instrument. I  only played the flute for 1 year, after which I asked my mother to exchange  it for the instrument I would grow to love, the saxophone. I began eighth grade in a junior high that was located in the suburbs.  Brandon Junior High was predominately White and reminded me of my  days at Key. Although I was only there for a short amount of time, I developed friendships and performed well academically. I do not feel as though  I stood out in any way as a student, academically or socially. As I reflect on  the time there, if teachers treated me differently or had different expectations for me, it wasnt apparent to me. That changed significantly once I  transitioned to my next school. DARKER DAYS In October of my eighth-grade year, my family moved back into the city and  I attended Siwell Junior High. Siwells student population was approximately 55 White and 45 African American. There appeared to be an even  mix of White teachers and teachers of color. During my eighth and ninth  grade years at Siwell, I had 12 teachers. Four of them were men. Three were  African American and one was Latinx. The transition to Siwell was especially difficult for me. Being shy, it was  difficult to become acclimated in the new environment especially starting 
K. D. BROWN well into the school year. I struggled to become comfortable to interact with  my classmates and felt isolated most of the time. I also felt unmotivated in  most of my classes. I earned Bs or Cs on most assignments and tests without  studying. Most times I wasnt paying attention in the class and still scored  well. The material was not challenging, and I did not find it the least bit  interesting. I was also having trouble dealing with challenges at home. My mother  remarried and I did not get along with my stepdad. He would discipline me  which added to the animosity I felt towards him. To add insult to injury, my  body was changing. I grew several inches my eighth-grade year and started  putting on size. I felt awkward about the new size and it showed in my disposition. I was extremely unhappy and severely depressed. I felt as if I did  not fit in at home or school. At this point, I realized how easy it was to skip school. I was the last to  leave home in the mornings and as long as I came home at the time the  bus normally dropped me off, no one would know I missed school. Initially,  I would miss days sporadically. It quickly became more frequent and even  multiple days in a row. I would stay home watching tv all day and when it  was time for my brother to come home, I would leave or hide until 3:30  p.m. One winter day, I even hid in my stepdads truck that was parked in the  driveway for an hour to avoid being caught. My mother, stepdad, aunt, and  uncle took turns taking me to school trying to improve my attendance, but  I did whatever I could to miss the bus and not go. I hated school. It served  no purpose. It did not seem to be preparing me for any type of future and  I felt like it was a complete waste of time. ENTER, MY FAVORITE TEACHER Things slowly began to change after I started developing a relationship with  my band director, Charles Bradley. He was the first to recognize my talent as  a musician and cultivated my gift. Through our interactions and conversations, I felt as if I was finally being seen. Mr. Bradley showed me that he not  only cared about my ability to master playing the saxophone, but also my  overall development as a scholar and a person. He took the time to learn  about my genuine interests and what I excelled in. I immediately noticed the difference between Mr. Bradleys class and the  previous classes I had taken. The energy was different. I came into the space  well after systems, routines, and relationships had already been established  but I felt welcomed as soon as I entered the room. He quickly assessed my  musical ability and tailored my instruction to meet my needs. He made  learning fun. Although we were learning basic music, he pushed our thinking and helped us to develop our craft. He introduced us to music that 

Inspiration and Motivation     23 students who had more musical experience typically played and challenged  us to perform it well. Mr. Bradley invested time in getting to know me. He asked questions  about my home life and kept up with how I was performing in other classes.  He also monitored my attendance. Mr. Bradley was the teacher who brought  to my mothers attention my attendance issues. He overheard other students  discussing my absences one week I was out Monday and Tuesday of that particular week and he contacted my mother immediately. Mr. Bradley took  the charge of helping me become more acclimated to the school environment to help motivate me to want to be there once I actually arrived. He  would take the time to check in to see how I was really doing. Slowly, school  started becoming more manageable. He fostered my self-confidence musically which impacted all aspects of my life. Mr. Bradley encouraged me to  try out for the all-city band my ninth grade year. Because of his teaching and  support, I made the list and was the only baritone saxophone player in the  junior high all-city ensemble that year. Although Mr. Bradley was very supportive, he was no pushover. He had  a muscular build with a huge presence. His voice was deep and echoed  through the band hall. He would praise us when we performed well and let  us know he was proud of us. There were times he would sit back in his seat,  smirking and nodding his head in approval of how we sound. But there  were other times where he would correct us when needed. Sometimes he  would yell and even throw a music stand, but, interestingly enough, I never  felt afraid of him. It is thought that the best way to discipline students of  color, particularly African American males, is by threatening and yelling  at them. While this may work for a lot, it wasnt the best approach for me.  I tend to shut down when yelled at which would affect my comfort within  that setting as well as my overall performance. My relationship with other  teachers who used this tactic would forever be impacted and I would avoid  all interactions with them moving forward whenever possible. But because  I knew Mr. Bradley genuinely cared about me and wanted me to do my  very best, I knew his moments of yelling came from a place of support and  was never used to demean me or my peers. He rarely singled students out  when scolding them especially when critiquing our performances. In ninth  grade, Mr. Bradley challenged me on the way I was behaving in his class. I  felt as though I performed better than another student on a solo assignment and voiced my disagreement with his grading. Initially, Mr. Bradley  explained his rationale for both grades, but I still didnt think the scores  were fair. He then said my performance wasnt as great as I thought it was  and that I needed to humble myself about my talents. It doesnt help to  put someone else down to make yourself seem better, and your performance wasnt all that, he exclaimed. I was upset by his feedback but after  some self-reflection, I realized he was right. Although I knew I played the 
K. D. BROWN saxophone well, there was always room for improvement and always someone who performed better. That little gem has guided me throughout my  educational path and career. Mr. Bradley built a relationship between home and school by communicating with my mother. He told her that I was talented enough to play  the saxophone professionally. He would give me rides home after practice,  along with other students, in the back of his Toyota 4Runner. I would ask  to ride home with him when my mother had already planned to pick me  up. My mother would come to parentteacher conferences and share pictures of me with Mr. Bradley while discussing ways they could support my  overall development. I knew based on this connection they were working  together to push me which worked as motivation to attend school more.  I also knew I had support from Mr. Bradley. He encouraged my mother  to help cultivate my musical skills which aided in improving my academic  growth. I learned that if I missed too many days of school or my grades were  too low, I wouldnt be able to perform. Not being able to participate in performances was not an option. So, I limited the amount of days missed which  helped improve my school experience. As we fostered a mentormentee relationship, Mr. Bradley showed me  he was someone I could look up to. He was married with children. He attended a Historically Black College and University HBCU. His presence  alone was one of the first introductions I had to African American fraternities. Mr. Bradley was a hardworking man. He encouraged me to develop  goals and want more for myself by setting the example. When I left ninth  grade, I knew I wanted to attend an HBCU and that my brilliance musically  as well as academically would create opportunities for me to do so even  during those times when other teachers didnt acknowledge it. For years  after I left Siwell I would randomly run into Mr. Bradley. Each time, he  would ask me if I still played my instrument. He was always proud to hear  that I did and was extremely disappointed when I told him I was no longer  in the band while in college. After all the students hes taught over so many  years, it always amazed me that he remembered details of my life. Mr. Bradley made me feel special in class and continued to do so for years to come  although our interactions were now short and rare. HIGH SCHOOL AND BEYOND Mr. Bradley taught me how to be self-motivating. When I went to Forest Hill  High School my sophomore year, I remember feeling the same lack of motivation from teachers. I wasnt pushed to think critically and with me now  having more height and size added at this point I was about 63 in height,  it appeared as though I wasnt expected to be more than a C level student. 

Inspiration and Motivation     25 But I channeled the life skills Mr. Bradley instilled in me to be my own inspiration. I found myself continuing to excel academically and musically. I  made the all-city high school band 2 years in a row and was first chair my  senior year. My grades were still mostly Bs and Cs. I decided to take advanced  level classes my senior year in preparation for college and started earning  As; not from the motivation of teachers or new band directors, but because I  wanted higher grades to make my college applications look more appealing. Mr. Bradley also showed me the type of relationship I needed with teachers moving forward to feel a part of their classrooms. As I attended Jackson State University, I recognized the importance of those relationships as  I struggled to acclimate to the college experience. Teachers perceptions of  me played a major part in that acclimation or lack thereof. Because of my  height and size, I began to realize that I was thought to be a student athlete  and the teachers stereotypical overgeneralization led them to believe the  work was too challenging for me. I also began to recognize those perceptions were based on race and gender as well. Teachers rarely pushed my  thinking, which attributed to less than desirable behaviors in class. I would  zone out completely or talk with classmates. Professors questioned my understanding of the content when I easily showed mastery. For example, my  college algebra professor, who was an African American woman, said, Can  you come to the board and complete this problem? I knew you couldnt.  I responded by saying, I can if you give me a chance. I solved the equation quickly and correctly. She quietly acknowledged my correct answer and  moved forward with the lesson. At the end of the class she asked, What time  do you play tonight? I looked at her, puzzled. She then asked, Youre on  the basketball team, right? I said, No, Im not and left. It was clear to me  she associated my lack of interest in her class or her perception of my lack of  mathematical skills to me being an athlete; tall, athletic, and Black. CONCLUSION As I reflect on my personal teaching experience, I realize I incorporated  several teaching and relationship building strategies I saw Mr. Bradley use.  He created an environment that was culturally responsive to the needs of  all students. Gay 2010 recognizes culturally responsive teaching as using  the cultural knowledge, prior experiences, frames of reference, and performance styles of ethnically diverse students to make learning encounters  more relevant to and effective for them Cole, David,  Jimenez, 2016.  Mr. Bradley fostered our relationship by recognizing and acknowledging  my individual strengths and built upon those. He also chose music from different genres to help promote cultural identity and understanding. I have  built relationships with my students by investing time into learning as much 
K. D. BROWN as possible about them and finding common interests. I have developed  lessons using scenarios and materials students can relate to promoting the  value of individual experiences and how it relates to the diversity found  within the classroom. I have also included reading materials from diverse  backgrounds and perspectives to promote cultural awareness. I understand the importance of Mr. Bradley being an African American  man. Although I had other African American male teachers who didnt impact me in similar ways, I know that the commonality between a racial and  ethnic identity can have a strong impact on student achievement. Reportedly 2 of all public school teachers are African American men Bristol,  2015; Duncan 2011. As an educator, I continue to ensure my presence  throughout my school is prominent so that the African American boys can  see someone who looks like them. It was also important for me to provide  instruction to them in an effort to adjust the narrative of the Black male  perceived in the media and most communities. Teaching is relationship  based and teachers of other races can easily impact the learning of African  American male students as well, sometimes in ways more impactful than  their African American counterparts. Either way, all teachers must build the  knowledge, skills, attitudes, dispositions, and orientations to be successful  Banks, 2015; Milner, 2016. TEACHER PRESERVICEINSERVICE Using a critical teaching pedagogy, I found the following are needed for  preserviceinservice support of teachers: 1.	 Self-reflection. Who teachers are, what they experience, and the stories they tell often find themselves in the fabric of their work with  students Milner, 2016. Teachers must honestly assess where they  are as it relates to appreciating the diversity of people in general,  but specifically the students in their classroom in order to provide  meaningful and purposeful instruction that meets the needs of  all learners Richards, Brown,  Ford, 2007. They must ascertain  what steps they have taken to foster relationships in the classroom and adjust as needed to build those individual connections  Richards et al., 2007. Space during professional development  workshops should be created to allow teachers to reflect on their  own commitment to diversity within their classrooms. Listen to the  students. Most times, students will show or tell the teacher exactly  whats needed. I have heard students share that in some classes the  work is too easy. Others have shared that the teacher doesnt genuinely care. As the teacher, it is our job to adjust our instruction and 

Inspiration and Motivation     27 actions to make sure the students feel as though they have been  heard by ensuring they are a part of the learning experience, their  voice is recognized, and lessons are designed to be engaging for all.  We can do so by validating students cultural identity in classroom  practices and instructional materials Richards et al., 2007. Create  spaces where students are able to share verbally or anonymously  their concerns and develop a plan to address them in a timely manner. Students should also be educated on the diversity of the world  around them while equity and mutual respect is promoted Richards et al., 2007. 2.	 Be willing to learn. Acquire knowledge about the intersectionss  of teacher racial and ethnic identity, curriculum, and the social  context of teaching and learning Milner, 2016. Learn about  personal and family histories and the history and experiences of  diverse groups to cultivate an appreciation of diversity Richards  et al., 2007. Create professional development opportunities at the  school, online, and offsite related to racial and ethnic identity and  diversity. Book studies would also be a great way to gain knowledge  on this subject. 3.	 Challenge students. Students must be motivated to become active  participants in their learning, encouraged to think critically, and  assessed validly Richards et al., 2007. During my educational  experience, I was not challenged academically or pushed to think  critically until college. Personal biases must be confronted head on  so that students are exposed to the type of instruction they require  and deserve. Administration should ensure content planning and  lesson development is differentiated based on student culture,  identity, and ability. 4.	 Foster an it takes a village mentality. Mr. Bradley was a part of my  community. He communicated with my mother and other teachers.  I saw him in spaces outside of school. His presence in areas that  reached farther than the band hall helped me feel as though he  was more than just my teacher, but a part of my life. It is important  that teachers foster positive interrelationships among students,  their families, the community, and school Richards et al., 2007.  This perspective aids teachers in developing lessons that encapsulates different areas of the students lives into learning while promoting interest in the content. Teachers are encouraged to develop  systems that promote regular communication with parents and  the community. As a teacher, I have used daily trackers to monitor  student interactions by purposefully planning for conversations  between select students. I would also suggest teachers participate 
K. D. BROWN in different school-wide initiatives that address diversifying student  experiences while promoting a sense of community. REFERENCES Banks, J. A. 2015. Cultural diversity and education: Foundations, curriculum and teaching 6th ed. Boston, MA: Pearson. Bristol, T. 2015, April 28. Black male teachers: There arent enough of them Web log  post. Retrieved from https:www.washingtonpost.comnewsanswer-sheet wp20150428black-male-teachers-there-arent-enough-of-them Cole, M. W., David, S. S.,  Jimnez, R.T. 2016. Collaborative translation: Negotiating student investment in culturally responsive pedagogy. Language Arts,  936, 430443. Duncan, A. 2011, December 10. Leading a life of consequence. Winter commencement speech presented at Fayetteville State University, Fayetteville, NC. Gay, G. 2010. Culturally responsive teaching: Theory, research, and practice. New York,  NY: Teachers College Press. Michaela, G. M. 2018, August 8. Analysis: Mississippi has most underprivileged  kids. TCA Regional News. Retrieved from https:www.djournal.comlifestyle healthanalysis-mississippi-has-most-underprivileged-kidsarticle107a225d  -0929-5a58-96ec-6321a951e688.html Milner, H. R. 2016. A black male teachers culturally responsive practices. The  Journal of Negro Education, 854, 417432. Richards, H. V., Brown, A. F.,  Forde, T. B. 2007. Addressing Diversity in Schools:  Culturally Responsive Pedagogy. TEACHING Exceptional Children, 393, 64 68. https:doi.org10.1177004005990703900310 World Population Review. 2020. Jackson, Mississippi population 2020. Retrieved from  http:worldpopulationreview.comus-citiesjackson-ms

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 2939 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 29 CHAPTER 4 DEFYING MEDIA  STEREOTYPES Resilience and Inspiration Fostered   by an African American Teacher Chaz T. Gipson The goal for this chapter is to highlight how an urban teacher positively  changed my life through her unique teaching strategies. She empowered  other educators to impact their students with a firm, but fair approach. I will  highlight her impact on my life as a current educator and educational leader, despite the negative stereotypes of African American males, portrayed  in mass media. Effective teaching strategies highlighted in this chapter will  serve as a toolkit from which all preservice and in-service teacher practitioners can utilize to create a dynamic learning atmosphere. In this chapter, I  will share how her strong approach to teaching created a space for highly  effective learning. Moreover, this chapter is grounded in culturally relevant  pedagogy, drawing on connections between my teachers pedagogical practices and the work of a prominent scholar Ladson-Billings, 1994. Todays mass media, comprised of television, social media, radio, newspapers, magazines, and similar sources of news and information, influence 
C. T. GIPSON how people perceive the varied cultures of the world. Media sources perpetuate or contribute to negative stereotypes of specific populations or groups,  particularly African American males Gipson, 2018. According to Rapport,  Bolden, Kolfer, and Savier 2009, African American males must handle  unavoidable challenges such as, but not limited to, street violence, educational inequality, burdens that are perpetuated by social, economic, and  cultural orientation, and mass media stereotypes. Researchers have posited  that the media strongly misrepresents African American males as incarcerated, poor, unemployed, and intellectually challenged, without educational  achievement Adkins-Coleman, 2010; Coakley, 2013. Furthermore, academic success is influenced by socioeconomic environment, poor housing,  overcrowding, a shortage of material resources, and the physical placement  and conditions of schools Coakley, 2013. I come from a social background often represented in such negative portrayals. Having personally experienced an array of challenges and finding my  own resilience in community dynamics that served to empower my resistance  to them, this urban African American teacher taught me how to overcome  challenges with negative media representations to defy media stereotypes.  Additionally, I learned how to tenaciously confront personal, social, and academic barriers to achieve academic success. As an educator and educational  leader, I have dedicated my life to leading by example and cultivating culturally based resilience through my teachings, research and leadership, and  overcoming negative media portrayals of African American males. In this chapter, first, I introduce readers to the early stages of my life and  share some of the challenges that I encountered in a low-income urban environment, particularly the disconnections I had with teachers. Then, I describe my high school years and my introduction to Ms. Hixson. I share in a  rich and detailed manner the high expectations that Ms. Hixson demanded  and how adhering to her standards helped me get to the place where I am  today. As we journey further, I share how we built a relationship through  watching an episode of Oprah that focused on Morehouse College. I share  how Ms. Hixson helped me believe that I can become a Morehouse Man. In  my final section, I offer recommendations and strategies that can be helpful  for preservice and in-service teachers to positively impact the lives of their  students. I hope the narrative shared and the recommendations made will  encourage current and future teachers to have the magic of Ms. Hixson. PRELUDE TO THE OPRAH CONNECTION Ms. Hixson, I need help! I am failing, and I cant get an F! I will be kept  back, and I will not be able to graduate or go to college. Please help me!

Defying Media Stereotypes    31 Ummm, its 4 oclock, Im off the clock, and its time for me to watch The  Oprah Winfrey Show. You should have done what you were supposed to do before now. You need to make an appointment. Oprah is on now. Bye! As tears rolled down my face, I was beyond shocked. I had been denied  help. My teacher had told me that she would rather watch Oprah than help  me. Still in shock, I told the teacher that my mom and I watched Oprah all  the time. I asked to watch with her! Hesitantly, she agreed. This was the start  of a relationship that changed my life forever. The Oprah episode that we watched together was about being a Morehouse Man. That episode showed me that I could be more than what the  media often portray: A Black male from a low-class urban environment,  who accomplishes very little. However, because of Ms. Hixson and watching  that episode of Oprah, my life, as an educator, has been enriched by the lessons I learned. I also learned that I did not have to conform to the negative  portrayals of African American males, as depicted in mass media, and I had  what it took to be resilient and defy media stereotypes. EARLY CHALLENGES I grew up in a single-parent home in Carver HomesWest End, South Atlanta. The area was generally referred to as the hood. The neighborhood  was filled with crime. Many went to jail. No one was expected to make it.  While I had few positive role models, I knew that this was not the life that  I wanted Gipson, 2019. I faced the usual challenges that young African  Americans from lower-income backgrounds encounter. I was the product of  a single mother and had no father figure. My community was often plagued  with school dropouts, low standardized test scores, high suspension and  expulsion rates, and high incarceration rates were the norm. In school, I  was picked on, teased, and bullied by the cool kids. I did not fit in with the  regular kids. I was a church boy, a mamas boy, and a nerd Gipson, 2019. Not only was I challenged to make connections with my peers, I was  often challenged to make connections with my teachers. I directed much  of my energy toward being the stereotypical Black male as a problem child,  class clown, a wannabe thug, and a prodigal son. I was different, and  I felt ignored by my teachers. For example, I recalled standing outside a  classroom witnessing a teacher fussing at one of her problem children.  She opened the door so aggressively that she unintentionally hit me in the  head. Her reaction was, Oh, I am so sorry, youll be all right. She immediately turned her attention back to the problem child. The fact that I  was bleeding appeared not to be a concern. Moreover, the teachers casual  reaction to having injured me with, Youll be all right, caused me both  physical and emotional pain. The cut to my forehead was temporary, but 
C. T. GIPSON the cut to my self-esteem was long term. I was impacted and lost the ability  to dream, and the magic of possibilities. HIGH SCHOOL AND MS. HIXSON A typical day in this school included suspensions at least 15 per week,  students smoking weed in the bathroom, students being expelled for bringing a weapon on campus, teachers being fired for having sexual relations  with other teachers or students, teachers being overwhelmed and leaving in  the middle of the semester, or administration hiring unqualified persons as  long-term substitutes in critical subject matter courses. Teaching for these  individuals consisted of simply babysitting and watching movies like Set It  Off andor The Nutty Professor. Then there was Ms. Camela Hixon, my American literature teacher in  the 11th grade. She was different. Her no-nonsense approach was unlike  other teachers, especially younger teachers, who made overt attempts to be  friends with students by trying to be hip or cool but did not necessarily have  high or any expectations for students. However, as we entered Ms. Hixsons  classroom on the first day, she told us: I do not know you or what you are used to. However, welcome to my world.  This is a real class and you will do real work. You will earn everything, and  nothing will be given to any of you. I do not care who you are, who your momma is, who your daddy is, how cute you think you are. I am the law in here. If  I were you, I would dot my Is and cross my Ts. Good Luck! I knew at that point that I was in for a whirlwind. I had never experienced  anyone who was that strict and direct. I did not expect to make it through  the first week. Dealing with Ms. Hixsons dominating personality was challenging. Not  only was she difficult, she was meticulous about everything. As an English  teacher, she had lots of explicit over-the-top expectations for students  work. She often used a special phrase: Hint Hint Clue Clue. It was literally  a hint and a clue that whatever she was about to say was important. In fact,  she said it so often that you were led to believe that everything was important. She gave very specific instructions: Make sure you take notes, no matter what; make sure you always have a blue  or black ink pen only in my class. Take notes from the time you awake to the  time you leave my class as if your life depends on it, because I am only saying  stuff once; if you miss it, you just miss it. Even if it is movie day, take detailed  notes. Do not ever forget your textbook, even when you think you dont need  it for the day. Make sure your heading is on the left. Always read the side of 

Defying Media Stereotypes    33 the board when you walk in. There is always a Do Now assignment waiting  on you. Show up every day, and if you ever even think about skipping class,  you will hate life. Do all homework assignments, as they are worth as much  as the exams. Take time to organize your notebook for this class and do not  throw any papers away. Be prepared for absolutely anything and everything,  including a pop quiz, notebook check, textbook check, knowledge check,  definition check, homework comprehension check. Not only did she say these things, she implemented these concepts and  penalized us when we forgot. I had a hard time adjusting to this level of  perfection. I had never met a teacher who was this hands on or who gave  us this much work. She piled on writing assignments, homework, reading,  quizzes, and exams to the point that we thought we had post-traumatic  stress disorder. Ms. Hixson also had a sense of strict humor and quick wit. She had no  problem in reminding students, Yes, I need a job, but I dont need this job.  So, try me if you want, and you will lift up your eyes. We did not know what  that meant. Was she going to pray for us? Was she going to hug us? Was she  going to pick us up and throw us out the window? Research suggests that students in urban schools are more motivated to  perform classroom tasks when two particular elements co-exist: a teachers who set high expectations for student learning and ensure that students  meet those expectations, and b teachers who build community based on  trust and care Adkins-Coleman, 2010. While I did not always agree with  some of Ms. Hixsons strategies, eventually they became the norm, and we  quickly adjusted and adapted to meet or exceed her expectations. She met  us where we were, made us rise to her standards, and moved us beyond  where we believed we could go. She instilled discipline, respect, and tenacity. She exposed us to things that we could not imagine. In addition to teaching the standard English literature curriculum, Ms.  Hixson made it a priority to expose us to college. In our low-income urban  environment, college was not in the plans for most students. Most of the  students parents had no experience in or even knowledge of higher education. Ms. Hixson taught us how to construct a rsum, stressing that it  was often the first impression for a potential employer. Furthermore, she  provided many college preparation assignments by embedding them in the  11th-grade English language arts curriculum. She exposed us to content in  both the SAT and the ACT. She worked with the counselors office to provide vouchers for students to take the examinations for free. We discussed  the college admission process and identified focus strategies for our application. We made lists of target schools that fit within our reality. Ms. Hixson reviewed our lists to see whether we met the standards of the selected  schools. She would often say, Dont think you are applying to Harvard with 
C. T. GIPSON a 1.9 GPA. Let us get realistic. You should have thought about that while  you were playing. We had to explain why we selected each school, how we thought it was a  personal fit, what scholarships they offered that pertained to our interests  and financing options. We wrote responses to sample college entry essay  questions, which I hated because they required me to think outside of my  comfort zone and disclose personal information. Not only did we have to write on these deep topics, we also were required to dress up and present our responses not reading verbatim. Ms.  Hixson talked about the importance of effective communication, presentation skills, and looking professional. She told us, No one will leave my  classroom not knowing how to give an effective presentation. So, practice  and remember that prior preparation prevents piss-poor performance. In  addition to the rsum, we practiced effective interviewing skills for college  and the workforce. Ms. Hixson encouraged us to attend college fairs, where  we met and engaged with college representatives. She reminded us that admission officers initially learn about us from documents such as transcripts,  ACT or SAT test scores, applications, essays, and recommendations. However, the interview would be our chance to talk positively about our interests,  personalities, and other characteristics to boost our chance of admission. Some of the questions that we had to answer were: Describe in detail  five important things about yourself; Tell me about your interests; Why  do you want to attend our college?; What can you contribute?; What  courses have you enjoyed most?; If you could change one thing about  your high school, what would it be?; What is the most difficult situation  you have faced?; What is your strongestweakest point?; What have  you done to prepare for college?; What has been your best experience  in high school?; What are your biggest challenges?; Are your grades  an accurate reflection of your potential?; Which of your activities is most  rewarding and why?; What has been your biggest achievement?; What  is your opinion on the presidential election process?; How did you spend  last summer?; What do you want to do after you graduate from college?;  What is your favorite book or author and why?; and What are you the  proudest of? We were overwhelmed. However, we came to realize that her expectations and practices were preparing us for our future. She reminded us that  although we were focusing on preparation and interviewing skills for college, the learning was transferrable to other situations in life. Ms. Hixson  was breaking us down to build us up. She said, Although many of you will  be failing my class, please understand that youre more than just test scores  or a grade. Despite all this encouragement, many of my classmates did not  take academics seriously. Many of the other teachers did not demonstrate  this level of commitment nor demand our attention. But I was grateful for 

Defying Media Stereotypes    35 these tips. No one had ever taken the time to explain how I should conduct  myself in an interview for college or a job, or other situations in life. While Ms. Hixson often talked about the interview process and reminded us that these skills are transferable, she also realized that college was not  for everyone and everyone was not for college. In fact, it was quite clear that  many students had no interest in attending college. Nevertheless, Ms. Hixson wanted to ensure that we were exposed to the possibilities that many  of us had not even imagined. Also, she recognized that students needed  preparation for their futures. She administered personality tests such as the  Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, which is a psychological examination to determine how people perceive the world and make decisions. She helped us  to identify potential career paths and occupations and to investigate each  to determine the potential job growth, the starting salary, and what kind of  work was involved. We had to explain the career trajectory for each position. As with the college interview process, she gave us tips on the job application process. Gloria Ladson-Billings 1994 coined the term culturally  relevant pedagogy to describe a pedagogy that empowers students intellectually, social, emotionally, and politically by using cultural referents to impart  knowledge, skills, and attitudes p. 17. Similarly, Ms. Hixson consistently  provided teaching strategies and pedagogy practices that were impactful to  our future. THE OPRAH CONNECTION In my junior year, I was in a stage of transition. I had spent many years being bullied as a nerd, church boy, and mamas boy. I was searching for my  identity. I was also in the process of shifting my personal appearance to fit  in. I started trying to find swag, so I could be in the in crowd. I worked to  maintain at least a B average, so I could keep peace with my hard-working  mom. I became more actively engaged and comfortable in making connections with peers in the inner circle. I was super busy on the JROTC Drill  Team and percussion section leader of the marching band, playing the 30inch Scotch bass drum. I was a part of the school chorus, the church choir,  captain of the church step team, and president of the drama club. I did not  prioritize thinking about college. But from the day that I stayed to watch Oprah with Ms. Hixson, I began  to make a connection with her. The episode that day told about how Oprah  Winfrey had donated money to create an endowment of scholarships for  Morehouse College. Ms. Hixson looked at me and said: You could be going to Morehouse, too, if you would start focusing on what  you need to do and take this stuff serious. You are a rising senior and it is 
C. T. GIPSON time to cut the bull crap. I need you to focus so you can be one of the young  men that Oprah gives money to. You can be an Oprah Scholar. You can be a  Morehouse Man! Ms. Hixson cited the motto of the new president of Morehouse College,  Dr. Robert Michael Franklin. She knew him personally as she was a member  of his church. She told me about his formula for building the best Morehouse Man, whom he also called the Renaissance Man. She said that Dr.  Franklins concept was five wells: well read, well dressed, well spoken, well  written, and well traveled. She described that being well read means to read  books and develop versatile reading habits because books can enhance  your knowledge and provide exposure. She described being well spoken  as: Good communication decreases the necessity of relying on profanity  or empty vocal interrupters. Ms. Hixson noted that being well traveled allows people to see how various cultures strive and survive. She discussed the  importance of being well dressed, which consisted of wearing appropriate  attire in professional or social settings to demonstrate pride in appearance.  Ms. Hixson reminded me that I had what it takes and that, if I focused, I  could not only attend Morehouse, but I could thrive. After the Oprah show ended, Ms. Hixson called Mr. Marshall Troup, a  friend who worked in the counselors office and oversaw a program called  TRIO at Morehouse College. TRIO is a combination of outreach and student services programs designed to identify and provide services for individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds. Its mission was to assist low-income,  first-generation college students and students with disabilities to progress  through the academic pipeline from middle school to post-baccalaureate  programs. After she made the introduction, I became a part of the TRIO  Talent Search and Upward Bound programs. It changed my life and led to  my decision to go to college. I went on multiple college tours and geared up  for college. I completed the academic year and earned a B in Ms. Hixsons  class. As I entered my senior year, I was placed in Ms. Hixsons British literature course. She delivered the same approach, but I was now much more  focused on preparation for college. After multiple college tours with the  TRIO program, I decided that I wanted to attend Florida Agriculture and  Mechanical University FAMU, to major in teacher education. I also wanted to be part of the Marching 100. However, because I was now connected  with Mr. Troup, who worked at Morehouse, he and Ms. Hixson highly recommended that I apply to Morehouse. During the spring semester, I received a letter of denial from the college  of my dreams, FAMU. I felt that I had wasted my time preparing to play in  FAMUs band and would not become a Rattler and achieve the dream of 

Defying Media Stereotypes    37 being a college drum major. I became very depressed. However, 2 weeks  later, I received a package of acceptance to Morehouse College. While I did not understand how I had gained admittance to Morehouse  College and not FAMU, I was grateful for Ms. Hixson. She had realized  my potential, even when I did not realize my own potential and self-worth.  She helped me to believe in myself, even when I did not. She did not judge  me for my nerdiness, nor did she prejudge me because of the community  where I came from. She provided tough love, high expectations, and a level  of exposure outside of her students comfort zones to help us to imagine  the unimaginable. Ladson-Billings 1994 posited the life-changing agenda of culturally  relevant pedagogy is two-fold: It challenges traditional views of teaching  and learning; and it develops a social consciousness among students in order to confront various forms of societal oppression. Likewise, Ms. Hixson  taught us what it would be like to enter the real world. She reminded us  that no one would feel sorry for us and that no one was required to give  us anything. We would get where we wanted to go through tenacity, commitment, and hard work. She used her magic as an educator to leave me  with what I often believe to be the Oprah Effect. Like Oprah, Ms. Hixson  taught me the power of influence, the beauty of passion, the importance of  being consistent, the importance of focus, the strength of being personal, a  respect for uniqueness, the magic of inspiration, and the role of analytical  thinking. I would learn later that both Ms. Hixson and Oprah had dreamed  of becoming teachers. Perhaps new and future teachers could develop their  own Oprah Effect to impact the lives of children like Ms. Hixson did for me. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRESERVICE   AND IN-SERVICE TEACHERS The influences of Ms. Hixson on my current practice as an educator are  many. However, I believe the following recommendations might be useful  to current and future teachers: 1.	 Educators should set the bar high for their students and provide rigorous  and rewarding real-life experiences. Every teacher should enter the  classroom daily with teacher effectiveness and high expectations in mind.  Their personal mission should be nothing less than to leave a direct  imprint on the lives of their students, especially in an environment  where excellence is not the norm. Students from these environments  are often the victims of low expectations and poorly skilled teachers.  Many never get exposed to teachers who hold them accountable  and expose them to an education that strengthens them in multiple 
C. T. GIPSON domains. Teacher effectiveness and high expectations are important. Teachers must demonstrate professionalism and consistency,  firmness, fairness, and friendliness, while setting high standards  for achievement. Ms. Hixson was not always friendly, but her stern  comments and quick wit, which were embedded in humor, allowed  students to know that while she was human, she also had expectations that we would achieve to the best of our abilities. 2.	 There should be a focus on intertwining the required academic content  with real-life application. This content should be taught in conjunction with developing students professional skills. Students are  more than academics and they will need skills to survive after high  school. For example, teaching academic content in the context of  communicating effectively across disciplines and domains helps a  student learn an important skill that can be used for life. 3.	 Use innovative strategies in teaching to promote learning. Many students  who come from under-resourced communities often do not know  how to approach the learning environment. Ms. Hixson used multiple and unique methods and strategies to reach her students. For  example, she used a speed dating setting to help us to be comfortable in talking about ourselves in a professional way. Teachers who  fail to choose diverse ways of reaching students fail to understand  the neurodiversity of the brain and may never assist students in  learning how to contribute effectively to the classroom dynamic or  integrate effectively in the larger society. 4.	 Take time to build and create relationships with students. The adage of  students dont care how much you know until they know how much  you care is still relevant for current and new teachers. The effective  teacher takes time to connect with students individually and collectively. When I watched Oprah with Ms. Hixson, we connected. We  communicated. We laughed. When she assigned the class written  assignments, she allowed us to reveal important things about ourselvesour likes and dislikes, our successes and failures, our challenges. Ms. Hixson also understood how African American males  are portrayed in the mass media and ensured that I knew that I was  better than the media depictions, by teaching me that I could be  resilient and defy the negative stereotypes portrayed in mass media. CONCLUSION The work of a teacher is challenging. However, the lesson learned from Ms.  Hixson from her initial response, Its 4 oclock. I am off the clock, and it is  time for me to watch Oprah. You should have done what you were supposed 

Defying Media Stereotypes    39 to do before now. You need to make an appointment. Oprah is on now.  Bye! has taught me the importance of setting standards and developing  skills that students will need for life, whether that involves attending college or not. It was her demeanor, her actions, and her consistent commitment to me and my future that taught me how to push through and find  the resilience that was within me to become the best human being I could  be. Additionally, it was because of her touch and teachings that I learned I  was not the African American male that the media often describe through  a negative lens; however, I was the quite opposite and I had been equipped  with the tools to defy mass media stereotypes. Teachers who choose to work  with students in under-resourced communities should consider the magic  of Ms. Hixson and create their own Oprah Effect to inspire students to rise  above what they think they can achieve, and teach them that they too can  find their resilience and defy negative mass media stereotypes. REFERENCES Adkins-Coleman, T. A. 2010. Im not afraid to come into your world: Case studies of teachers facilitating engagement in urban high school English classrooms. Journal of Negro Education, 791, 4153. Coakley, T. M. 2013. The influence of father involvement on child welfare permanency outcomes: A secondary data analysis. Children and Youth Services Review,  351, 174 182. Gipson, C. 2019. Delayed but NOT denied: How a Black male educational leader  mastered resilience. In R. T. Palmer, M. O. Cadet, K. LeNiles,  J. L. Hughes  Eds., Personal narratives of Black educational leaders: Pathways to academic success pp. 111121. New York, NY: Routledge. Ladson-Billings, G. 1994. The dreamkeepers: Successful teachers of African American  students. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Rapport, M. D., Bolden, J., Kofler, M. J., Sarver, D. E., Raiker, J. S.,  Alderson, R.  M. 2009. Hyperactivity in boys with attention-deficithyperactivity disorder  ADHD: A ubiquitous core symptom or manifestation of working memory  deficits? Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 374, 521534.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 4153 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 41 CHAPTER 5 ERNEST SMITH Transforming Students Lives for 50 Years Cleveland Hayes You cant hoot with the owls at night and soar with the eagles the next morning. Ernest Smith Distinguishing themselves professionally Foster, 1995; Hayes  Jurez,  2012; Johnson, 2000, Black teachers have made significant contributions  to the field of education in general and to the teaching of Black children  in particular. Black teachers as a group and over time have consistently succeeded where others continue to fail at effectively teaching Black and other  students often deemed hard to teach if not unteachable Ladson-Billings,  1994, 1995; Lynn  Jennings, 2009. Taken together, the successful approaches of Black teachers demonstrate  that the persistent racial gaps in school discipline, educational opportunities, and attainment levels that continue to characterize U.S. public schooling are in no way natural or inevitable Johnson, Boyden,  Pittz, 2001;  these gaps persist because we as a nation allow them to do so. Black teachers shared approaches to effective teaching for students historically underserved in classrooms provide a rich, albeit still mostly untapped, resource 
C. HAYES for teacher educators and others vested in pushing against these persistent  race-based educational disparities Hayes  Juarez, 2012. In education, there have always been Black menMalcolm X, Carter G.  Woodson, George Washington Carver, and W. E. B. Du Bois, to name just  a fewwho have refused to be defined and contained by an imperialist  system of White supremacy, making use of every tool and means at their  disposal to challenge and change that system and empower those targeted  by it hooks, 1992. Importantly, the meager research that does exist on Black male teachers has examined the views of these educators about teaching in a variety  of contexts and their reasons for entering the profession. In many cases,  Black men have seen teaching as an opportunity to correct social, political,  and even economic barriers to success for African Americans; they often  have practiced a kind of critical race praxis that is aimed at ending racial  inequality and challenging White supremacy Hayes, 2006; Lynn, 2004,  2006a, 2006b; Lynn  Jennings, 2009. Because their daily lives, and therefore the stories they tell about their  work, reflect the influence of and their engagement with the imperialist  system of White racial domination. The viewpoints of Black men provide a  significant yet still largely untapped resource. As an education community  we can use these strategies coupled with a viable research base to better  support and nurture academic success among African American and other  students of color. I ask, following Richard Wright 1957, Is it not clear to  you that the American Negro is the only group in our nation that consistently and passionately raises the question of freedom? This is a service to  America and the world p. 101. The purpose of this chapter is to explore the philosophies of one Black  male teacher who impacted the lives of students in one community for 50  years, Mr. Ernest Smith, in hopes of providing a valuable source of knowledge on effective schooling. I hope that we can glean from this what it  means to be a successful educator not only for Black students but for all  students within a societal context constantly changing King, 1993; Lynn   Jennings, 2009; Ware, 2002. LEARNING FROM THE NARRATIVE OF MR. SMITH:   MY PURPOSE OF INQUIRY In this chapter, I introduce Mr. Ernest Smith, respectfully known for his  effectiveness in teaching Black and other students typically deemed unteachable, from the American South. He attended and taught in public  schools during and immediately following the integration of classrooms  albeit nearly two decades after the passage of the landmark 1954 Supreme 

Transforming Student Lives    43 Court ruling of the Brown v. Board of Education decision declaring the separate but equal dictum unconstitutional and having no place in public  schooling. This chapter draws on critical race theory CRT and its emphasis on the value and usefulness of subjugated peoples lived experiences  and knowledge in exposing processes of racial domination to highlight and  examine the silence in the literature on Black male teachers, in particular,  and the successful teaching of African American students in general by examining the perspectives and theorizing of these three African American  men regarding their work and lives as an educator. Pointedly, students of color are the coming comingand in some places, already establisheddiverse new majority in U.S. public schools Hayes,  2014. Students of color, Black and Latino students, in particular, are also  more likely to go to prison than to college Noguera, 2003, 2008; Wacquant, 2001. At the same time, as Joyce King 2005 has observed, The  abysmal state of Black education in the United States and globally is an inhumane situation that calls into question the values and pronouncements  of Western civilization p. 3. For the promise of Brown to be realized and  this pernicious school-to-prison pipeline to be interrupted, then, all of us teachers, teacher educators, and others vested in democratic principles and  outcomes in educationmust learn what these and other Black educators  have long knownthat is to say, how to teach all students effectively. As  Lynn Lynn, Johnson,  Hassan, 1999 has observed, Very few studies  have explored how African American men who teach in emancipator ways  view their teaching p. 43. Drawing from the viewpoints and pedagogies  of Black male educators who are successful teachers of African American  students and other students of color, this chapter both extends the literature on the lives and work of Black teachers and attempts to help push forward and move beyond existing understandings of culturally relevant forms  of teaching and learning by linking the practice of teaching and everyday  life to the political, while using knowledge developed through struggle  within and against the historical context of White supremacy. HOW TO READ THIS CHAPTER Like the teachers in Fosters 1995 study, the educator presented in this  chapter was identified and chosen through direct contact with the African  American community. Mr. Smith, also similar to the teachers in Fosters  study, is considered and known within his school, neighborhood, and personal and professional communities as a highly successful teacher in terms  of his effectiveness in teaching and working with predominantly Black student populations.
C. HAYES Pointedly, and this is very significant, I must caution against reading the  narrative presented in this chapter as a recipe cookbook, a how-to-guide or  any other kind of resource of magic-bullet formulas on how to successfully teach Black and other racial minoritized students and thus fix our  schools. There will be no recipes provided herein through the narrative or  otherwise. As I define them, teaching and learning are cultural  work, ways  of thinking and thus approaching life and its many domains, including education. It is not a technocratic, rational, objective, and mechanistic process  or procedure. Moreover, in education, we already have a plethora of narrowly defined curricula, that is to say, scripted pedagogies and standardized  assessments that are proven failures despite the good intentions from which  they were developed Hayes, 2014; Quijada Cercer, Alvarez,  Rios, 2010. I take the stance that teaching is not a what to do endeavor, but rather  a how to think one because, following Ladson-Billings 2006 and this  narrative, while the educator in this study believed that students deserve a  demanding curriculum, he was also not necessarily attached to any specific  teaching strategy or curricular program. Mr. Smith viewed his mission and  role in education in a particular way that is based on using his teaching to  ensure the survival and well-being of all Black children. Because this teacher thinks about his students in ways that are not dependent on assumptions  of Black cultural and moral deficiencies and assumptions of White moral  and cultural superiority, the teaching approaches he used likewise was not  aimed as compensating for the supposed cultural and moral deficiencies  of Black children and guiding Black students toward acceptance of and assimilation into the existing system of White supremacy.  In this chapter, I am concerned with a particular Black male teacher  who taught during and immediately after the Jim Crow era of racial apartheid in the American South. I aim to highlight the pedagogical practices  and philosophies of Mr. Smith as a way to show how he drew on his lived  cultural and gendered knowledge and experiences to successfully teach African Americans. What we will see as a theme in Mr. Smiths narrative are  the struggles of this teacher as he attempted to use his teaching as a means  to end racial inequality by challenging the historically embedded notion  of Black inferiority OConnor, 2006a set of beliefs widely held among  Whites suggesting that, for example, African Americans tend to be unmotivated, less intelligent, and more aggressive and violent than Whites, that  African Americans prefer welfare over working for a living and have poor  parenting skills, and that African Americans have an overall less sophisticated and well-developed culture and morality than Whites Feagin, Vera,   Batur, 2001; Picca  Feagin, 2007. By default, importantly, assumptions of  Black cultural and moral inferiority necessarily imply assumptions of White  cultural and moral superiority.

Transforming Student Lives    45 I hope readers will recognize how Mr. Smith saw his teaching as a moral  obligation to help his students learn to challenge and work toward eliminating social inequalities and institutional oppression in pursuit of a more  robust democracy. With many pressing issues in education, I hope readers  will learn from the narrative presented in this chapter by taking the experience and perspective shared by Mr. Smith and use it as a call to act against  inequities in education and society and thus, like him, become agents of  change and school culture shifters Hayes, 2014; Dixson  Rousseau, 2005;  Freire, 1973; Lynn, 2006a; Quijada Cercer et al., 2010; Yosso, 2005. YOU CANT PARTAKE OF THE FIFTH ON THE FOURTH AND  EXPECT TO COME FOURTH ON THE FIFTH  Mr. Ernest Smith Before there was STEM science, technology, engineering, and math for  girls, there was Mr. Smith, Henderson shared. He encouraged many and  influenced a lot of us to be who we are today Brown, 2015. He was the kind of person who would help anyone, Edwards shared.  His classes collected canned food items during the holidays for LOVEs  Kitchen and never wanted the prize given to the class that collected the  most Brown, 2015. Youre gonna f-f-fail by getting a f-f-freddy frog, for an F grade and Stop  drinkin that wiinne, and you might be on tiiime! to anyone late to his class,  but managed to make it through the door before he locked it Brown, 2015. As an educator for more than 50 years, Smith retired from MPSD in August 2009. A native of Starkville, he attended Oktibbeha County Training  School and finished number one in his senior class. Two days after graduating from high school, Smith was inducted into the U.S. Army. After 6 years,  Smith enrolled at Jackson State College, where he received a Bachelor of  Science degree. He also earned a masters degree in physical science. After Mr. Smith passed, the Meridian Star, the local newspaper, ran a special  feature article about the legacy of Mr. Smith as a teacher in the Meridian  Public Schools. The quotations in italics are what his former students said  about him as a teacher and the impact he had on the community for some  50 years. Mr. Smith was one of a kind, and there is a void where he once  occupied time and space. When Mr. Smith began his public school education career, first as a  student and then as a teacher, this need for learning which prepares African American youth for freedom, respectability, and self-reliance had not  changed. As a student, Mr. Smith was taught by his teachers that he must be  prepared for freedom, respectability, and self-reliance. Then as a teacher, 
C. HAYES in turn, Mr. Smith taught his students that they too must be prepared for  freedom, respectability, and self-reliance. In the following paragraphs, I present the narrative of Mr. Smith and  how he approached his work as a teacher serving a predominantly Black  community. His narrative is based upon the main ideas that emerged from  his description of his approaches to teaching and learning. I begin Mr.  Smiths story by explaining how he understands the role and significance of  education and, then, how he implements his views on education and their  importance in his teaching practices. MR. SMITH: I TEACH NOT ONLY THE COURSE,   BUT I ALSO TEACH LIFE I teach because I know Im helping many kids. Plus, I like what I do. And anytime youre on a job, and you like what you do, you do a better job. My kids  are learning and Ive seen the results of the kids going out and doing well. I have taken the experiences from my own teachers to create this environment in my class that is respected by the students, the parents, and the  community. We need to know where we came from, and we never need to  forget where we came from. We need to know and have the ability to guide  all of the kids that we teach, regardless of race, in the right direction. I have one philosophy. I try and explain my expectations to my students: If  you plan to pass this course, you must study every day, as if you were having  a test the next day. This is not a course that you can stay up all night and cram  and get ready to pass the test. It wont happen, but if you do a little studying  every day with all of your courses, with spending more time with the most  difficult, the less time with the less difficult, then youll do well in school. I believe that all kids can learn. I believe that I have to do something to  make them learn, or to help them learnwhether it is patting them on the  back, or kicking them in the butt, begging them, or demanding. I have to figure out every student and do the best I can to get the best I can from them. I  instill in them the importance of an education if one wishes to be successful.  I instill in them that they should be better than their parentsthey should  surpass their parents. I instill in them that they must be honest and do the  very best they can all of the time. I instill in them to be kind and to respect  each other. They have to speak to each other and speak to me with respect.  I try my best to not only teach the course that I teach, but I also teach life  experiences that they need to know about. And I do this from Day 1. There are a couple of things that I think frame my way of thinking about  education that can be passed on to the next generation of teachers. First, in  my community the most important man, or the most important person, after  the home, was the preacher. The next most important and respected person  was the teacher. They were very much so respected. All of the men were called professors, even though they might not have

Transforming Student Lives    47 had a BS degree and most of them didnt. They were called professors. And  now some of the older teachers, the older Black teachers that worked with  me, we called each other professor, or just fessor, after a matter of respect  for our heritage. Its not that we are professors because we dont teach at  a college, and we dont have a professorship, and we dont get paid what  professors get paid, but its a matter of carrying over our heritage and respect  for our people before us. Second, I enjoy it. I enjoy taking students where they are and bringing  them to where they should have been and carrying them to where I want  them to be. I enjoy seeing them come out successful. We, as teachers, regardless of race, I think that you are going to prepare  yourself to overcome the many obstacles that you will encounter. I think that  you should not only be a person who is a leader but a person whom other  people will follow, as well. Other people, meaning not only your students  but also your peers, in your profession and your community. I think that you  should never give up on any student. I think you have to do your best all the  time for your students. Mr. Smiths love of teaching and students, importantly, emerges forcefully  from his narrativehe teaches because he loves working with students. That  love of students and teaching is communicated to his students and their  families and then reciprocated. This love of students and teaching is not the  interpersonal, individual, psychological feeling that Dr. Martin Luther King,  Jr. termed emotional bosh typically associated with this word Cone, 2004,  p. 130. It is instead a reference to respect in its robust form of putting a  positive value on the students and the communities and families they come  from and the cultural experiences and knowledge they bring with them. We  experienced this mutual respect in all of our interactions with Mr. Smith and  when we crossed those boundaries we experienced his warm demanding.  Mr. Smith positively valued his students and the communities they represent  by likewise emphasizing through and in his teaching the importance of and  need to know where we came from. Mr. Smiths emphasis on the importance  of education in the Black community historically as well as his explanation  of how he and other Black teachers referred to each other as fessor are  useful illustrations of how the connection and respect for the cultural heritage and background of the students are incorporated into his approach to  teaching and daily practices. Mr. Smith expected his students to understand  that this valuing of education was part of their cultural heritage and thus  belonged in his teaching and in the classroom as part of the curriculum. There was a historical aspect to Mr. Smiths teaching. By understanding  and bringing into his teaching the historical experiences and accomplishments of the Black community, Mr. Smith used and applied discernment in 
C. HAYES his teaching. This positive valuing of the Black community in his teaching  practices and approach is notable because it is most often the case that African Americans and their cultural backgrounds are typically represented often as pathological aberrations of dominant White societys cultural forms  and therefore of no use or value in the classroom Foster, 1997. Pointedly, students were in the center of Mr. Smiths talk about his teaching approach and practices. Mr. Smith, departing from conventional notions and pedagogies of teaching and learning, did not expect students  to conform to him; and find ways to connect with him, rather, he works  to conform to them and find a way to connect with them using a range of  strategiesfrom patting them on the back to demanding their cooperation. Put simply, Mr. Smith, as their teacher, took on the responsibility of  his students learning. Unlike traditional forms of teaching and learning,  which put the locus of responsibility on the child, Mr. Smith saw it as his  purpose as a teacher to reach his students and make connections with them  as the first step in helping them to be successful in school. If students are  not learning, Mr. Smith saw this as a reflection of himself as a teacher, not a  failure on the part of the students. Mr. Smith did not draw on or default to deficiency notions of Black students and their cultural background to explain the challenges they face in  the classroom. His willingness to take ownership and responsibility for their  learning suggests that he saw himself as invested in his students learning  and did not draw on understandings of Black inferiority to avoid taking  responsibility for his students learning. As Mr. Smith put it, You has to  do your best all the time for your students. This need to do your best all the  time for your students locates the locus of responsibility in the teacher as the  professional educator in charge of the classroom and students learning. By taking responsibility for students learning on himself as a professional educator and then making connections to students, Mr. Smith set  the stage in his classroom to foster his students successful learning. At the  same time, Mr. Smith saw the curriculum as more than academic content  in his class. More specifically, students were not merely learning academic  content for the sake of learning academic content. For Mr. Smith, success  in school required academic learning as a stepping stone or basis for being  successful in living and life in general. As Mr. Smith explained, I try my  best to not only teach the course that I teach, but I also teach life experiences that they need to know about. For Mr. Smith, curricular content was thus tied to life and being successful in life. He views teaching as more than simply conveying academic facts  and bits of knowledge. This expanded view of teaching as more than transmitting knowledge is critical because it underscores the contextual and historical aspects of Mr. Smiths teaching approach and practices. Mr. Smith  also sought to use his teaching as a means to advocate for Black children. 

Transforming Student Lives    49 He focused his work as a teacher on making connections with students and  helping them to view themselves and their efforts in school as part of a  much bigger and historical endeavor to improve the social conditions of  the Black community and Black children in particular. CLOSING OUT: THEORIZING THE THEORY In todays educational parlance, we are always talking about these hard  to teach kids as if that task is so very impossible. Yet, there have always  been those in the Black community who have made a way out of no way. As  Ladson-Billings 1994 has repeatedly argued, the contemporary education  community needs to look to those who have accomplished this feat for the  wisdom, knowledge, and strategies about how we too might do what previously seemed an impossible task. I hope that the narrative of Mr. Smith  shared in this study will assist educators, policymakers, and vested others in  better understanding the social justice-oriented teaching approaches that  African American teachers have historically employed to foster the academic success of Black students and to offer a vision of a more socially just  society. Until we take it upon ourselves to follow teachers like Mr. Smith in  viewing the world through a lens that is grounded in an anti-racist struggle  and which does not affirm assumptions of Black inferiority and White superiority, our recipe-like practices and what-to-do approaches will continue  in the already deeply entrenched and well-trodden path of White supremacy predictably proving futile in our public schools. At the same time, the  dream of equal education for all students remains yet elusive. At the heart of CRT is an appreciation for storytelling. Following hooks  1992, the narrated story of Mr. Smith presented in this chapter is essential  because his existence functions to counter the institutionalized ignorance of  Black history and culture as well as Blacks existence not only in education  but in the broader national and global historical context. The field of education needs successful counter-stories and testimonies of Black educators  who worked within education in the past to help us to understand how we in  the present might successfully prepare African American students in todays  racially charged society. It is the stories of oppression and resistance of the  past that we can use as a framework for better understanding and navigating  the present within the historical context of White supremacy Lynn, 2004. The application of CRT in this chapter allowed me to focus on the voice  of teachers like Mr. Smith to learn more about how to think about and use  teaching as a form of cultural work to successfully teach African American students and realize a transformative education for all. By successfully  teaching African American students, Mr. Smith worked to challenge the  dominance of White superiority. The use of CRT makes it possible for me 
C. HAYES to tap into the knowledge and understandings that he used to effectively  teach African American students and hope to accomplish half of what Mr.  Smith did across several decades. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRACTICE:   WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM MR. SMITH If there is one take-away from this section, according to Ware 2006, culturally and politically responsive teachers teach with authority, a form of  teaching that includes teaching to the whole child as a member of a particular social group situated within a particular context and history. However,  being a warm demander is more than coming into the classroom and demanding a checklist of certain behaviors from students. Effective teaching  of African American students is not about implementing a particular stepby-step remedy plan. Black and Latino kids, for example, see White teachers arrive in their communities stand up before them, attempting to teach  them a curriculum that is already pre-determined and defined in terms  of what they need to know. Consequently, the students can in turn answer  questions on a standardized test that are likely to have little to no bearing  on their actual lived experiences and realities. The teachers, in turn, do  not have any connection to their students and neither does the curriculum  they are attempting to teach Juarez  Hayes, 2012; Hayes  Juarez, 2012. Teachers cannot be warm demanders by doing drive-by teaching. Teachers must be invested in, deeply familiar with, and able to find and draw on  the richness and beauty of the communities in which they teach. Teachers must not go into communities with the mentality to save the students  from themselves, their parents, their culture, or their history and thus miss  the resiliency, richness, and beauty of the ways groups and individuals have  learned to cope and thrive within a historical context of near-constant racebased hostility and forms of nonaggressions, sabotage, and assault perpetrated by the dominant society. The paradox of teacher preparation, however, is that most teachers,  teacher educators, and future teachers are White. Teacher education in the  United States is a White world Hayes  Juarez, 2009. Most White people  have developed very little familiarity with or investments in African American or any other racial minority community in the United States. What can a predominantly White field of educators learn from Mr.  Smith? Mr. Smith as an African American male, logically, is more than likely  to have the familiarity with and investments in the African American community required for the effectively teaching of African American learners. Do teachers thus have to be Black to learn from Mr. Smiths lessons?  Since White people and others from outside of the African American 

Transforming Student Lives    51 community tend not to have these same connections and familiarity, are  they necessarily excluded from the pool of potentially effective teachers of  African American learners? I posit that the answer is a resounding No! First, race is a social construction. People must therefore learn their  racial identities. While the realities of race and racism are very real and  historically embedded, they are not biologically determined. Accordingly,  there is no inherent biological or other natural barrier to keep White and  other non-Black people from learning from Mr. Smith Juarez  Hayes,  2012; Hayes  Juarez, 2012. Second, and accordingly, Mr. Smiths lessons constitute an approach to  teaching and learning, not a step-by-step formula or recipe. He viewed his  work as teacher from a particular perspective that includes an awareness  of and an activism against White racism. His lessons explicitly are aware of,  know about, and work against assumptions of Black inferiority and White  superiority. Hence, Mr. Smiths lessons are perspectives and ways of thinking about and making sense of the world that can be learned and adopted by anyone regardless of background Juarez  Hayes, 2012; Hayes   Juarez, 2012. Moreover, because Mr. Smiths lessons are not technical step-by-step formulas, they cannot be mechanically implemented as a type of technocratic,  objective, rational process. To learn from Big Mamas recipes requires us to  understand and interpret them within the context from which they were  derived and developed. In particular, Mr. Smiths lessons require us to develop an awareness of the historical and group context, not the individual  as an entity outside of group membership and history. The focus of Smithss lessons is not simply on the cognitive and psychological well-being of students, but incorporates an awareness of and challenge to the ways White racism negatively influences the individuals psychological, social, and other forms of well-being. In other words, Mr. Smith  affirmed the contributions and validity of Black culture, experiences, and  history. He did not view his Black students or the surrounding community  as a deficient and corrupt version of European American culture. Without an awareness of history and context infused into teaching approaches and practices, Mr. Smiths lessons are likely to become just another  set of prescriptive recipes that fall by the wayside in schools. To learn from  Mr. Smith, we must learn to identify and work against the consequences of  White racism that influence students of color and privilege students who  benefit from the systemic privileging of Whiteness presently and historically  within U.S. society. We too must familiarize ourselves with the gifts of Black  folks and develop a vested interest in communities of color an investment  not based on the patronizing and ultimately harmful effects of presuming  Whiteness as the normative standard.
C. HAYES REFERENCES Brown, I. 2015. Smith remembered by former students. Retrieved from http:m.meridian  star.comnewssmith-remembered-by-former-studentsarticlef805d3ce  -a47e-11e5-ba1b-6fd8f0ca23c2.html?modejqm Cone, J. H. 2004. Martin and Malcolm and America: A dream or a nightmare. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books. Dixson, A. D.,  Rousseau, C. K. 2005. And we are still not saved: Critical race  theory in education ten years later. Race, Ethnicity, and Education, 81, 727. Feagin, J., Vera, H.,  Batur, P. 2001. White racism: The basics 2nd ed. New York,  NY: Routledge. Freire, P. 1973. Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York, NY: Continuum. Foster, M. 1995. African American teachers and culturally relevant pedagogy. In  J. Banks  C. M. Banks Eds., Handbook of research on multicultural education  pp. 570581. New York, NY: Macmillan. Foster, M. 1997. Black teachers on teaching. New York, NY: The New Press. Hayes, C. 2006. Why we teach: Storytelling the lives of Black family of Mississippi educators. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Utah, Salt Lake City. Hayes, C. 2014. We teach too: What are the lived experiences and pedagogical  practices of gay men or color teachers? Masculinities and Social Change, 32,  148172. Hayes, C.,  Juarez, B. G. 2012. There is no culturally responsive teaching spoken  here: A critical race perspective. Democracy and Education, 201, article 1. hooks, b. 1992. Black looks: Race and representation. Boston, MA: South End Press. Jurez, B. G.,  Hayes, C. 2012. An embarked learning and transformative education for freedom dreams: The education our children deserve. Journal of  Education Controversy, 61. Johnson, K. A. 2000. Uplifting the women and the race: The lives and educational philosophies and social activism of Anna Julia Cooper and Nannie Helen Burroughs.  New York, NY: Routledge. Johnson, T., Boyden, J. E.,  Pittz, W. Eds. 2001. Racial profiling and punishment  in U.S. public schools: How zero tolerance policies and high stakes testing subvert  academic excellence and racial equity. Oakland, CA: Applied Research Center. King, J. 2005. Black education: A transformative research and action agenda for the new  century. New York, NY: Routledge. King, S. H. 1993. The limited presence of African American teachers. Review of  Educational Research, 632, 115149. Ladson-Billings, G. 1994. The dreamkeepers: Successful teachers of African American  children. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Ladson-Billings, G. 1995. Toward a theory of culturally relevant pedagogy. American Educational Research Journal, 323, 465491. Ladson-Billings, G. 2006. Yes, but how do we do it? In J. Landsman  C. W. Lewis  Eds., White teachers, diverse classrooms pp. 2942. Sterling, VA: Stylus. Lynn, M. 2004. Inserting the race into critical pedagogy: An analysis of racebased epistemologies. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 362, 153165.

Transforming Student Lives    53 Lynn, M. 2006a. Dancing between two worlds: A portrait of the life of a Black  male teacher in South Central LA. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in  Education, 192, 221242. Lynn, M. 2006b. Education for the community: Exploring the culturally relevant  practices of Black male teachers. Teachers College Record, 10812, 24972522. Lynn, M.,  Jennings, M. E. 2009. Power, politics, and critical race theory: A critical race analysis of Black male teachers pedagogy. Race Ethnicity and Education, 122, 173196. Noguera, P. A. 2003. Schools, prisons, and social implications of punishment: Rethinking disciplinary practices. Theory into Practice, 424, 341350. Noguera, P. A. 2008. The trouble with Black boys and other reflections on race, equity, and  the future of public education. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. OConnor, C. 2006. The premise of Black inferiority: An enduring obstacle fifty  years post-Brown. In A. Ball Ed., With more deliberate speed: Achieving equity and  excellence in educationRealizing the full potential of Brown v. Board of Education  pp. 316336. New York, NY: Teachers College Press. Picca, L. H.,  Feagin, J. R. 2007. Two-faced racism: Whites in the backstage and frontstage. New York, NY: Routledge. Quijada Cerecer, P. D., Gutirrez Alvarez, L.,  Rios, F. 2010. Critical multiculturalism: Transformative educational principles and practices. In T. K. Chapman   N. Hobbel Eds., Social justice pedagogy across the curriculum: The practice of  freedom pp. 144163. New York, NY: Routledge. Wacquant, L. 2001. Deadly symbiosis: When ghetto and prison meet and mesh.  Punishment and Society, 31, 95133. Ware, F. 2002. Black teachers perceptions of their professional roles and practices. In J. J. Irvine Ed., In search of wholeness: African American teachers and  their culturally specific classroom practices pp. 3346. New York, NY: Palgrave. Ware, F. 2006. Warm demander pedagogy: Culturally responsive teaching that  supports a culture of achievement for African American students. Urban Education, 414, 427456. Wright, R. 1957. White man, listen! Berkeley, CA: HarperPerennial. Yosso, T. 2005. Whose culture has capital? A critical race theory discussion on  community cultural wealth. Race Ethnicity and Education, 81, 6961.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 5564 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 55 CHAPTER 6 I AM BECAUSE YOU ARE The Importance of Being Given Roots   to Grow and Wings to Fly Tiffany Hollis There are only two lasting bequests we can hope to give our children. One of these is  roots, the other wings. Good parents give their children roots and wings: roots to know  where home is, and wings to fly off and practice what has been taught to them. Jonas Salk I had heard the above saying before, but I recently heard this while in conversation with a fellow colleague: Wings show you what you can become,  while roots remind you of where you are from. There were many people  and situations that helped me to soar and rise above the risks and adverse  situations that I faced. There were times when my wings were clipped and  needed to be mended; however, once they were mended, my flight towards  my destiny continued. I am reminded daily of where I am from, especially  by those who might not have made it or who may not be happy with their  current situations. Growing up in Gaffney, South Carolina did not allow  for much exposure to positive examples of women of color who were successful. I am what some might call the exception. I do not know of many 
T. HOLLIS young women who grew up in similar situations like me to have attained a  doctorate degree. Although my story is still being written, it is my hope that  this account of my journey proves that despite challenges and complexities, ones fate is not sealed and he or she can overcome adversity and live  a productive life. I am currently a tenure-track assistant professor at a Predominantly  White Liberal Arts Institution in South Carolina. I have my PhD in curriculum and instruction urban education from UNC Charlotte. I received my  BA in history and a minor in secondary education from Davidson College  in Davidson, NC before attaining a Masters in education from Columbia  College in Columbia, SC and a graduate certificate in teaching in special  education from UNC Charlotte. According to my family history, my neighborhood, and the circumstances in which I grew up, I am not supposed to  have made it this far. I am a living witness that starting life with disadvantages does not mean that ones destiny is defined. Many never leave Gaffney  or venture out of their comfort zone. I, on the other hand, saw what staying  in Gaffney could do to a persons psyche and I decided I wanted to break  the cycle and move out of the area. I was determined to prove those who  had doubted my ability to be successful wrong, while making a better life  for me beyond the life and circumstances that I was forced to grow up in. As a young African American girl, I grew up in adverse childhood situations, experienced chronic poverty, lived in a single-parent household with  my mother. I was faced with numerous obstacles, but managed to defy stereotypes held of children who grow up in poverty similar to me. How was I  able to remain strong and resilient? Who helped me to rise above harsh and  unyielding obstacles? What factors within the context of my journey, positive and negative, helped me to succeed in spite of adverse circumstances?  I began to develop a mindset to expect greater. I had some help from my  mentor whom I will speak about later in the chapter. WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO EXPECT GREATER? Expecting greater means to be able to develop resilience and survive and  even thrive in the face of difficulty. Expecting greater is the ability of a  person to adapt, so that he or she can triumph over obstacles. As we face  difficulties, our resilience alters to meet and overcome new challenges, and  consequently, we expect greater. Oftentimes having a mentor and a strong  relationship with a caring and supportive adult in the classroom or in the  education setting helps one to expect greater of oneself.

I Am Because You Are    57 CHALLENGES MAKE YOU STRONGER The saying How you start is not how you end up emphasizes that despite  challenges and complexities that may be faced, ones fate is not sealed and  he or she can overcome adversity and live a productive life. Consequently,  youth who have been labeled as at-risk in terms of societal definitions  can use the protective factors in their lives to transform into at-opportunity and become productive citizens who contribute to society Hollis   Goings, 2017, p. 888. According to the history of my family, I am not  supposed to have attained the level of education that I have attained thus  far. Starting life with disadvantages does not mean that ones destiny is  defined. I was born into a family where my mother dropped out of high  school and by the age of 21, she already had two children out of wedlock by  two fathers. My mother worked hard to provide for her children and even  lived with her mother so that she could try to get on her feet as a young  single mother who had limited education. We eventually moved to South  Carolina to live with my great-grandmother, who we affectionately called  Big Mama. My mother made a decision to move out of the house with my  great-grandmother and show and prove that she could make it without  support from her mother and my great grandmother. Although my mother worked hard, we still were faced with times where  the hot water was turned off, food was uncertain, and it was a constant  struggle to provide even the most basic of needs. Like others born into  generational poverty, I eventually realized that my educational journey was  born out of necessitya necessity to move out of povertyand education  seemed to be my vehicle. I also knew that I had obstacles in my path such  as memories of violence from the sporadic, yet rampant incidents of domestic violence that my mother experienced, emotional un-attachment of  my mother not because she did not love me, but because she was dealing with some of her own issues at times, not knowing my father, and  just sheer fear of not knowing what was going to happen next in a place  that was supposed to be home and provide a nurturing and caring environment. School became a safe space for me, but it also became a place  where I felt invisible. Not many people paid attention to the young African American girl with an attitude and a smart mouth, who would fight  anyone including teachers if they even looked at her the wrong way or  made an ignorant comment. In fact, many teachers just wanted me out of  their classrooms, so the referrals and the suspensions added up. I would  get suspended from school only to engage in some risky behaviors in the  neighborhood in which I lived. My mother worked several jobs and oftentimes she was unaware of the things that I was doing.
T. HOLLIS No one at the schools talked to me to find out why my behavior had  abruptly changed and why I was starting to get into so much trouble. From  that point forward, I got into fights daily that eventually became physical.  I talked back to the teachers and even made threats towards my teachers.  Little did they know that I was crying out for help as the situation at home  was getting worse and I began to lose focus and get into more and more  arguments and fights, which led to more suspensions. I would miss school  and come back and ace the tests and even be prepared for the next lesson  because I had read ahead in my spare time. The fights, defiance, and disrespect continued well into middle school.  It was as if my reputation preceded me because I had teachers who would  write me off before I could even open my mouth in their classrooms. I had  been labeled as the bad girl who was a class clown and who had a mouth  on her. I had a few teachers who tried to challenge me and then I had  some who actually cared about me. There was no such thing as gifted and  talented in the middle school. Instead, you were placed on a track to be in  the college prep track or the regular track. Even though my behavior was  atrocious, I made straight A honor roll, which confused so many of the  teachers with whom I interacted. It soon became evident that I was smart,  but I was a combination of being book smart and street smart. This was a  combination that many adults had no clue how to handle. As a result of  being that smart Black girl, I became the only minority student in many of  my classes over the years. In order to be successful, I had to conform to the  dominant standards and start to embrace this new identity to which I was  slowly adapting. For me, there was opposition each school year as the inner  conflict continued as I struggled with being the honor student I had become  and the stereotypical student on welfare growing up without a father that  others expected me to be when I returned to my neighborhood each day. The next few years, I struggled with trying to find out where I fit in as  I juggled my workload at school, the issues at home, helping my mother  with adult responsibilities at home, and even trying to still be that hard  girl who did not take any mess. I was looking for a support system and crying out for help and it seemed as if no one heard me. I felt as if my wings  had been clipped and I was left to venture on this journey without much  support. Where were my roots and my wings during this difficult transition in my life? Research shows that the presence of just one caring adult in the life of  a child can make a difference between success and failure in school Gay,  2000. It was in middle school that I met my mentor, who was also my guidance counselor. Dr. Dorse Cleveland, as I affectionately called her, pulled  me out to talk with me one day. She said that she had noticed that I was  getting into a lot of trouble, so she asked me if I wanted to talk to her. I told  her that I did not know her like that and she should mind her business. She 

I Am Because You Are    59 called me to her office the next day and offered to share a positive quote  with me. She gave me several quotes and she would ask me if I tried journaling and getting things out that way. I went to her office a few times a week  to write, read, eat, and just listen to her talk. I did not say much at first and  then I told her to just give up. She told me that I was used to everyone giving up on me and that she was not going to give up on me or go anywhere  because she saw potential in me. She told me that I was destined for greatness. She reminded me that as long as I embraced who I was and whose I  was that I could achieve anything despite my shortcomings. At first, it was  hard for her to break down the barrier that I had put up. Understanding  protective factors that foster resilience and increase school connectedness  is crucial to helping children who have experienced violence in their urban  neighborhoods and are chronically exposed to violence Hollis, 2019. I  refer to her being able to reach me and to foster a sense of connection with  me by using a model that I have coined as the CARE model of teaching.  However; in this case, I am attributing it to the role of guidance counselors  as teachers Hollis  Goings, 2017. Consequently, the CARE model explores the role that C culturally relevant pedagogy, A attachment to school, R regulating emotions mental health, and E expectations of teachers play in narrowing or closing  the gaps Hollis  Goings, 2017. This multifaceted approach is essential  to meet the needs of youth who are frequently underserved, and often profoundly left behind, by the educational system. Although she was a guidance counselor, I learned so much from Dr. Dorse Cleveland in terms of  being educated and not just schooled. She would talk to me about so many  things and just speak positivity into my life even though I continued to  pretend as if I was not listening. Thus, I use this model to speak to how although she was not an educator in the classroom, she educated me beyond  the confinement of a classroom and played a vital role in why I am who I am  and why I am where I am today. She placed me in numerous activities after school and would take me  home so that I could not give her the excuse that I did not have a ride.  She placed me in several events, activities, and even summer programs that  would help me nurture that potential that she said she had noticed in me.  She even began to teach me how to talk to adults in a more respectful manner, how to turn my anger into something positive, and how to honor and  respect my mother and the decisions that she made because she was still my  mother, despite the issues and decisions that she made. I felt as if my wings  had been mended and I felt invincible. She took the time and energy to  make me feel as if I mattered, as if my life mattered despite my past circumstances. Over the years, my trajectory started to change and I began to move  in the right direction in life. She stayed right by my side the entire time  and fostered a sense of resilience. According to Masten 1999, resilience 
T. HOLLIS usually refers to positive results in spite of threats. Before continuing my  narrative, I need to place the term resilience in a social context. According to Benard 2004, resilience denotes the process, the ability to bounce  back from stressors, challenges, and trials. For the purposes of this chapter,  resilience will be viewed as the developmental process that improves people  as they adapt to adversity in order to triumph Hollis, 2016. Her actions  were similar to those that were modeled by the teachers who Ladson-Billings 2009 called Dreamkeepers who, as noted in her book, were like  coaches, believing students were capable of excellence. My mentor was integral in my life after our initial meeting in middle  school as I started to slowly transform and become a better person. She  gave me information about college preparatory programs, nominated me  for awards, and often would register me for various contests and opportunities. She took a vested interest in me and certainly helped me to channel  my anger into something positive. I remember when she strategically had  me placed at an internship with her through a program called YOU Youth  Opportunities Unlimited at Limestone College in Gaffney, where I had a  job over the summer and was given a stipend. Being at the school with her  and the principal, Dr. Carol McFadden, who was also an African American  female allowed me to see firsthand how schools operated. Consequently, it  also gave her a chance to keep me under her supervision and away from  my boyfriend who was 18 at the time and a drug dealer. She knew I had  been sneaking around to see him and spending more time with him than I  should have been at my age. She did not judge or condescend my decisions.  Instead, she continued to affirm that I was destined for greatness and that I  had a purpose in the world and was born to make a difference. This was another turning point in my life, but this time things were beginning to look up and my trajectory was being altered. This woman who  was strategically and divinely placed in my life was helping me transform  into the person that she knew I had the potential to be. It was during this  time that I saw the roots being positioned to provide me with the foundational supports I needed to become grounded so that I would not drift  away from future goals and aspirations. Dr. Dorse Cleveland was a clear  example of a caring adult who invested time, energy, and hope in me because she believed in me and had high expectations for me. Teachers who  hold high expectations for their students create positive atmospheres for  their students Ladson-Billings, 2009. Consequently, students internalize  these feelings and feel they are capable and act accordingly. Teachers need  to recognize that their views of students can negatively or positively impact  their students academic success and to constantly engage in self-reflection  to ensure they are always holding high expectations for their students Hollis  Goings, 2017.

I Am Because You Are    61 Dr. Dorse Cleveland worked with me throughout high school, placing  me in activities, checking in and checking up on me, helping me process  through tough situations, encouraging me to attend church, signing me up  for plays, attending my awards ceremonies or events; and she even would  take me places with her family. I now understand the importance of exposure and being able to experience different things other than my usual surroundings. As a student from a marginalized population, having my mentor  expose me to numerous experience helped to increase my expectations to  want to pursue a career and higher education at the postsecondary level  Hollis, 2016. It was as if I was finally getting the positive attention from a  caring adult that I had longed for and cried out for. She and I developed  a strong bond over the years. I slowly began to change and I was no longer  getting into fights or getting suspended; I was even getting comments such  as a pleasure to teach on my reports. Even though some aspects of my life at home had improved, it was hard  putting on a faade and pretending that everything was all right at home,  the one place that was supposed to be full of love, safety, security, and support. So, I was still facing the trouble at home, while encountering negativity at school as well. Let us not forget that I was also trying to maintain  academically so that I could go away to college. Thus, having Dr. Dorse  Cleveland in my life as a supportive factor was integral in helping me develop the roots that I needed so that I would not drift away from my destiny  when the time came for me to use my wings to fly. She continued to place  me into programs, help me with scholarship and college applications, and  just ensure that I was staying on top of my studies. I ended up getting a full  ride to Davidson College in Davidson, NC. I did not want to attend that college at first because I did not want to leave my siblings behind. During my time in college, I continued to follow the sage advice of my  mentor and she and I had the best of relationships. It was during interactions with students, faculty, and community members, as well as in times of  isolation and intrapersonal reflection, when I was able to initially articulate  and make meaning of my identity. I had to define and examine for myself  how I wanted to describe my identity as an African American woman. It was  challenging as I found myself often having more questions than answers. It  was as if hearing my mentors voice reminding me of her wisdom helped  me recognize the importance of having roots that would help me excel and  succeed, despite the doubt and obstacles I encountered. I kept hearing my  mentors voice: Trust in the Lord and lean not unto your own understanding, she would remind me. I tried so many times to show strength so others  would not think I was weak. I found myself in daily battles with racism and  prejudice. I was angry, indecisive, and, most of all, tired. I was angry because  I found myself in isolation. In my new life as a college student, I often found  myself struggling with the feeling that I was the only one here having to 
T. HOLLIS prove my worth and value as a woman of color in academia. Consequently,  I had to find a refuge among other people who understood my journey.  This became important as I experienced many emotions and even became  depressed to the point of wanting to give up. I began to question who I was  and if I was truly where I needed to be. I was torn between being too Black, too hood, or too ghetto for  the students of color, but not being White enough for the Whites. It was a  draining processliving in two worlds and not fitting in either. I was tired  of explaining myself to my family, peers, professors, and so on; tired of  being perceived as the angry Black woman; tired of being the only one to  speak up in class and show up and mobilize others when there was racism  on campus. But most of all, I was tired of other people not understanding  my experience, including members of my immediate family. My mentor,  who consistently provided me with the support that I needed to overcome  my bouts with depression and doubt, always reminded me to remember  who I am and whose I am. I was tired of trying to figure out how to show up  and who to show up as on which day. Just as I would encounter success or  happiness in my journey through college life, I would quickly be reminded  by instances of racism on campus that I was still in fact an African American  woman, regardless of the positions or titles that I held. I came into college believing the environment was supposed to be a place where my mind  would be challenged, where I would be nourished, my identity and purpose  nurtured, and where my interactions with others would lead to growth and  development. I was longing for the home away from home and the nurturing environment that I so desperately needed to experience. Many people often seemed surprised to hear that I was pursuing a masters degree in spite of all of the things that I had gone through in my  lifetime. It was rare to hear about young African American females who  grow up in adverse circumstances and without a father figure to accomplish  the goals that I had accomplished so far. My educational journey became  more complex as I matriculated through several educational settings, including my graduate school experience. My educational journey became  more complex as I matriculated through several educational settings, including my graduate school experience and attaining my doctorate. During  this time, conversations with my mentor who understood the journey kept  me focused and made it easy to stay motivated. Although the darkness of  discrimination and racism always followed, the stories and conversations  provided a safe haven from the negativity and a connection to my support  system, which gave me the strength that I needed to face my obstacles. I currently have my PhD and am a tenure-track professor as a result of the wings  and roots that were placed in my path. As I revisit my educational journey, it  becomes clear that I have not made it to the mountaintop yet, even though  I have had to move several mountains along the way.

I Am Because You Are    63 As I embark upon this new obstacle in my lifebeing an early career scholar and woman of color in the academyI am reminded that life teaches us  many lessons; however, it is what we learn from those lessons that matter.  Would I be where I am without my wings or my roots? Probably not, but I am  so glad that there were people who took a vested interest in me and that I  encountered some of the experiences positive and negative that I did because they truly helped shape and mold me into the first-generation female  professor of color I currently am. I will never forget where I came from. A  large part of my motivation for attaining a doctorate and becoming a professor was so that I could have something and some way to give back. I really  see my role as being twofold: I am striving to improve my situation, while at  the same time working to improve the situation of the next generation. I am  grateful that my mentor and many other adults have supported me and given  me roots and wings so that I could be successful on my educational journey.  These roots and wings have been integral in the growth that I have made over  the years and the decisions that I made to pursue an advanced degree and to  become a professor at the college level. I hope that my auto-ethnographic account conveys the strength, resourcefulness, and resilience of an African American first-generation female student, who despite obstacles and barriers, continues to overcome.  I want educators to understand the social and cultural context of mentoring and what it truly means to have someone who looks like you but is no  relation and has a vested interest in you enough to mentor you. I hope  that through my journey others will be inspired to overcome obstacles and  become successful. I hope my words will remind mentors and educators  that they are critical to a childs trajectory. My relationship with my mentor  showed that having a caring adult in your life can help to turn the trajectory  around for a child whom society considers at-risk. However, with the supports of a mentor and a caring adult in place, that same child can go from  at-risk to at-opportunity in a matter of years. Although educators are unable  to control many of the risk factors students face, they can gain an understanding of the protective factors that help students to succeed. Teachers  can foster resilience in their students by developing a caring and personal  relationship with their students by having positive and high expectations,  while providing the necessary supports for students to reach those expectations; and by providing meaningful opportunities to students. In this way,  educators like my mentor can provide the roots to ground students while  empowering them with the wings to soar above their obstacles.
T. HOLLIS REFERENCES Bernard, B. 2004. Resiliency: What we have learned. San Francisco, CA: West Ed. Gay, G. 2000. Culturally responsive teaching: Theory, research, and practice. New York,  NY: Teachers College Press. Hollis, T. 2016. Wings and roots: Perspectives on resilience and academic success  in education. In G. Wiggan Ed., Dreaming of a place called home: Local and  international perspectives on teacher education and school diversity pp. 101119.  Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense. Hollis, T. 2019. Building bridges and fostering hope: Helping traumatized children learn through trauma-sensitive practices at the middle school level.  North Carolina Middle Level Education Journal, 321. Retrieved from: https: ncmlejournal.orgfall-2019-v321724d21a9-ddde-4c85-ac88 8bbed15621a8 Hollis, T.,  Goings, R. B. 2017. Keeping the dream through the CARE model:  Examining strategies to bridge the gaps in education among urban youth. In  W. T. Pink  G. W. Noblit Eds., Second international handbook of urban education pp. 887905. New York, NY: Springer International. Masten, A. S. 1999. Resilience comes of age: Reflections on the past and outlook  for the next generation of research. In M. D. Glantz, J. Johnson,  L. Huffman Eds., Resilience and development: Positive life adaptations pp. 289296.  New York, NY: Plenum.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 6576 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 65 CHAPTER 7 TRYING A DIFFERENT  APPROACH The Influential Power of Mrs. Taylor   and Mr. Johnson in Seeing an Ugly Duck  Turn Into a Swan James T. Jackson A child born into an unhealthy home environment and a socio-political system of racial segregation, known as Jim Crow, in Hodges, South Carolina in  1952, had little chance of becoming anything but a common laborer, even  though he dreamed of something better and would often spend nights  standing in the backyard of the sharecropper framed house, that his mother and nine siblings occupied. He would often look upon the lights that  shined from afar and wondered where they came from. While he dreamed  and wondered, the reality of his life always returned to the environment of  struggle, poverty, violence, and mistreatment because of his Blackness  and his being a bastard child. This was my life. The reality of my early  experience often left me feeling like an ugly duckling. It is difficult to navigate spaces and places when you are viewed from the lens of being poor, a 
J. T. JACKSON bastard child, and dark skinned. Back in 1952, when I was born, people  with dark skin were often relegated to a position simply because of their  color. Jim Crow laws made it difficult for all Black people, but being dark  skinned was another form of segregation within the Black community. This chapter recounts the influential ways in which two of my teachers,  Ms. Taylor, my sixth-grade teacher, and Mr. Johnson, one of my high school  choral teachers saw beyond the ugliness of the duck to help give life to a  swan. It ends with some recommendations for educators to consider as they  work to influence the lives of children. A CONTEXT FOR THE UGLINESS OF THE DUCK Having been born into the segregated south and a dysfunctional home, not  much was expected of me or members of my family. By the time I started  school in 1958, none of my older siblings had graduated high school, nor  was my mother a high school graduate. However, there was some hope for  me and two of my younger siblings; but it would not be sustained. By the  time we got to high school, the younger brother, by 2 years, had dropped  out; and an older sister, who got pregnant during the summer after her  junior year, left school, after the first semester of her senior year. This was  rather devastating to me because she had shown such promise academically  and socially, and I had used her as an example of what I could become.  Nonetheless, I persisted; even though I did not know anything about what  I wanted to do. The standard for my family was that children would attend  school long enough to read at a basic level and then go to work. Education  was not seen as a valuable commodity. However, I knew I did not want to  be like my sisters and brothers. I wanted to at least finish high school, for it  was here that I flourished and became a little more focused on doing well,  despite the odds, but that was not the beginning. Research on the impact  of a negative environment on a childs self-esteem and behavior regularly  indicates that a myriad of problems can result. The consequences of growing up in a household with few resources and the socio-political construct  of the Jim Crow south did not give me much hope. The fact that I was poor,  dark skinned, and without a father figure had me thinking negatively of  myself early. The internal struggle of not being worthy of love, coupled with  being treated differently because of segregation and skin color, created a  mental schema that left me feeling like I was an ugly duckling. Having been born to a widowed mother, who lost her first husband in a  tragic auto accident because of his addiction to alcohol, made me wonder  why I was conceived. Nonetheless, I grew up without much direction and  poor examples for the future. You see, in addition to my mother being  a widow, she was also a sharecropper someone who farmed the land by 

Trying a Different Approach    67 planting, growing, chopping, and picking cotton in exchange for a place  to stay and money to buy food and other essentials to live. I realize now  that this arrangement was one step away from slavery, but at the time, and  as a young boy, I was not aware of its impact; even though, I did notice the  difference in treatment of Black people as a result of the Jim Crow laws. For  example, while I never experienced a lynching, which was prevalent in the  south during the 1950s, I do remember the numerous visits from what we  called night riders. I later learned that they were the Ku Klux Klan. These  individuals primary goal was to frighten Black people into submission in order to maintain the status quo of White superiority. There were many times  that crosses were burned, and Black men and teenage boys were beaten.  While I never witnessed any of my brothers suffering this atrocity, they did  spend significant time in the local jail for fighting and drunkenness, and  sometimes were assigned to the Chain Gang for their misdeeds. My mothers  response to all of this, particularly the visits by the Ku Klux Klan, was to direct her children to put the oil lamps out, our source of light, for there was  no electricity or indoor plumbing, to sit quietly in the dark until the terrorizers left. Her response to the seemingly weekly jailing of one of her older  boys, was to have the man who owned the land that she sharecropped bail  them out on any given Sunday morning, which further provided a sense of  enslavement because this additional burden of being indebted obligated us  to plant, grow, chop, and pick more cotton. The fact that my mother sought  support to have the landowner rescue one of her three older sons from jail  almost weekly was really a sore eye for the family and continued until the  second oldest son got into a fight with my mothers youngest brother, Uncle  Alonzo. According to accounts, Elbert, the second oldest son of my mother  was drunk, got into an argument with my uncle at a local juke joint, cut  a major artery, and my uncle bled to death. This tragedy created a feeling  of loss for me because my uncle was my supporter, and even though he was  often drunk from alcohol consumption, he was always nice to me and tried  to serve as a positive role model. He talked, let me talk, and he listened. I  often wonder if he had lived, what impact would he have had on my life  and I on his. My life as a young child growing up in the south during the 1950s was  fraught with many hardships. One of these hardships was living in a wooden  framed house without insulation. I previously mentioned that there was no  electricity and indoor plumbing. There was also no central heating or air I  suppose that is why I dont need much heat in the winter or air conditioning in the summer today. During the winter months, my mother would  instruct the younger children to use whatever materials we could find to  plug opened holes in the house to keep the cold air out. As there was no  central heating source, one room was often used by the family to stay warm,  which was done by a fireplace, later a cast iron heater, that was filled with 
J. T. JACKSON wood or coal. The other rooms had no heat, so before bed, bricks would be  heated, wrapped in a towel or other pieces of cloth and placed in the bed  to provide heat. We would dress in pajamas, stand in front of the fireplace  or heater to get warm, and then run and get in bed. Because there were so  many of us living under one roof, sleeping two or three to a bed helped to  promote warmth. In the summer, every door and window were opened to  allow cool breezes to blow through the house. Moreover, food was often  scarce. To help with the food supply, my brothers would often go hunting  and fishing. This produced some interesting meals and food choices. For  example, there was a time that my mother served a roasted opossum that  was surrounded by sweet potato slices and sat in the middle of the dining  table, which was in the kitchen, across from the wood burning stove. The  meal may have been okay, but when I discovered that the big rat, had  been cooked with its head attached, I couldnt and wouldnt eat! It were  these incidents that taught me early how to subsist on minimal food and be  selective about what I consume today. Another hardship of being born poor and Black in the segregated south  was the lack of opportunity. Since my family was poor and had little formal  education, it meant that its financial well-being was dependent upon how  much cotton could be grown and picked. Regardless of how productive the  family was, there was never enough money to free us from the clutches of  what seemed like slavery. Nonetheless, after some years, my mother decided  to leave the cotton field to become a domestic worker, whose exploits have  been documented so well in both the movie and book titled, The Help. I was  about 12 years old when my mother made the decision to leave. However,  before this occurred, I had my first experience in public school. It was 3  years after the Brown v. Board of Education, Topeka, Kansas decision. While  I was unaware of how this court case would impact the education of Black  children, I was only six, I knew something was not right. On the first day of  school, rather than jump on the bus in front of the wooden framed house,  me, my younger brother, and my youngest sister, had to walk six miles or  more in order to catch the bus. This would happen regardless of weather  conditions. There were many days that we did not attend school. Perhaps  this was one of the reasons I only attended school about 80 days of the 180  required by the district. I am also certain that this is the reason I had to  repeat first grade. When I arrived at North Hodges Elementary School in 1958, I was taken  aback by a comment that was made by one of the teachers, as the students  gathered to enter the building. The teacher said, There is one of those  Jackson boys. I did not understand the context then, but I knew that I  did not like what I heard. I would later learn that my older brothers had  presented tremendous behavior problem for some of the teachers and this  teacher thought I would be just as bad. As a result of this knowledge, I 

Trying a Different Approach    69 decided that I would not be a problem. Rather, I remained quiet in Mrs.  Thomas first grade classroom. I was so afraid to speak up and participate  that I never asked to use the bathroom and would often wet my pants. During recess, I would stand on the sidelines and watch other children play. I  had no concept of what it meant to be a happy and free-spirited child. The  preoccupation with my life at home, the lack of resources, having to wear  the same clothes 5 days a week, having no textbooks parents had to pay for  rental of textbooks back then and some other misfortunes really left me  feeling anxious and uncertain. I now know that I was a child who operated  from the internal dimension of behavior and could have benefitted from  special support, but back in 1958, no one thought that a young Black boy  needed special attention. Being a young Black boy, who thought he was not  wanted by his father, created an internal struggle so severe that belief in  myself was non-existent. I only lived because I did not know what else to do.  I would often have bad dreams at night, wet the bed, and developed fears  and phobias about many things. I was particularly afraid to cross bridges as I  thought they would collapse. I still have some queasiness about crossing major bridges today. However, not being able to discuss my feelings with a significant adult, as most children born in Black rural southern communities,  in the 1950s, and earlier were not encouraged to talk about how they felt.  They were to be seen and not heard. Therefore, I started to use my creative  energy as an outlet to soothe a broken soul. The result was an exploration  of creating objects out of the red clay we called it mud that permeated the  landscape of my community. While my first year in school was difficult, I also questioned why I had  to pass a school, designated for White children, close to my house, to attend one for Black children that was farther away. This socio-political dynamic further impacted my fragile self-esteem, made me feel unimportant, unequal, and uncared for. Having negative images of myself because  of environmental and socio-political mores that did not promote a sense of  acceptance and justice, left me wondering about my trajectory. Nonetheless, I propelled myself to the second grade, after having spent 2 years in  first grade. I managed to sustain myself, although much had not changed.  I did have access to textbooks and the school bus was now stopping at the  wooden framed house and taking us to school. We no longer had to walk six  miles in any weather conditions. I performed well enough academically and  had become a little more socially involved, that I was able to advance to the  third grade, where I met Ms. Pearl Miller. She provided a comfortable and  structured classroom and promoted a sense of discipline. I was in a good  space. However, when I got to fourth grade, the pressure of having lost my  Uncle Alonzo and knowing that one of my brothers had killed him made  me spiral out of control. I no longer internalized my feelings and thoughts,  but operated from the externalized dimension of behavior to the point that 
J. T. JACKSON I assaulted other classmates and the teacher. I became angry both because  of my uncles death and how my meager existence did not match the lives  of my classmates; some of them with fathers, who had good jobs, cars, and  could afford things for their children. I resented this, so I stole, but would  often return the items when my conscience got the best of me. As I entered fifth grade, I carried the angry thoughts and negative behaviors with me, but I had stopped stealing. However, because I was being  bullied and eventually sexually assaulted by an older boy, the negative behaviors increased. Feeling horrified and not knowing what to do or who to talk  with, I kept that secret until I was 28 years of age, when I shared it with some  Navy buddies aboard a ship in Norfolk, Virginia. I chose not to tell family  members, because I was afraid that my mother would hold me responsible  and punish me. I also thought that I would be further ostracized by brothers and sisters, because I was regularly called disparaging names because of  my bastard status and the complexion of my skin. I became so tired of being  misunderstood and mistreated, that I would often run away from home and  spend hours in the woods to find some relief. I believed that my mother really  hated me because of the absence of my father. However, before I reached a  total meltdown and acted on thoughts of suicide, I was advanced to the sixth  grade, where I met Mrs. Taylor. This tall, light-complexion lady with glasses,  had a classroom structure that promoted a sense of community, classroom  engagement, student responsibility, and so many other qualities that were  helpful for a troubled child. She also saw the value that theater and dramatic  performance could play in developing the lives of children. Mr. Johnson, my  high school choral teacher for 4 years, did a similar thing with singing. He  too saw what singing and being part of a focused group could do to a young  man who had endured so much. Both these individuals help give life to the  ugly duck so that he could blossom into a swan. THE INFLUENCES OF MRS. TAYLOR AND MR. JOHNSON   IN HELPING THE UGLY DUCK BECOME A SWAN Hans Christian Andersens 1843 classic, The Ugly Duckling, recounts the  puzzlement of a mother duck who wonders why one of her ducklings  looked so differently and larger than her other off springs, as she professed  her love for all her ducklings, despite their differences. The ugly duckling,  who was a swan, was berated, which resulted in him feeling ashamed. The  mother duck, embarrassed because of the differences in her children, demanded that the ugly duckling confine himself to a specific area of the  pond so that he would not be seen by others. The treatment by the mother  duck and the taunts of the other birds forced the ugly duckling to wander away as he thought no one wanted him. However, one day the ugly 

Trying a Different Approach    71 duckling happened upon a group of birds, other swans, that look liked him.  It was with this group that he found his place and acceptance. Mrs. Taylors  classroom was like the ugly duckling finding other swans. She created a  classroom environment that spoke to acceptance, cooperation, community, responsibility, discipline, and structure. She was a strong disciplinarian,  whose objectives were clear. She communicated a sense of fairness, but also  demanded personal accountability. She capitalized on the uniqueness of  her students and celebrated that in the way she spoke, shared her knowledge and expectations. She also provided outlets to help students realize  their uniqueness. She was the first person to allow me to see how valuable  theater and the art of performance could be used to alter ones trajectory,  regardless of the negative baggage that was acquired along the way. She did  this by casting me in my first ever play, because she discovered that I could  sing. While I never got to perform in front of the audience of community  members, because I didnt have transportation to get me to the night performance. I was devastated and disappointed, yet I understood that because  my family had limited resources, I didnt question the lack of support, but I  cried and questioned why my life was so cruel and why no responsible adult  felt the need to support me. I thought that I had failed Mrs. Taylor and  disappointed my class and school. Nonetheless, when I returned to school  the next day, Mrs. Taylor never asked why I did not attend the performance.  Rather, she embraced me and conducted her classroom instruction as she  normally did. Perhaps she knew more about my home environment and the  struggles that I was experiencing than I realized. She continued to encourage and place me in activities that allowed me to use my ability to sing and  develop more positive skills and behavior. Because of the commitment of  Mrs. Taylor, I used these opportunities to reshape and reframe my life. I created a new character for myself. The creation of this new character helped  to present a less angry young man and motivated him to find ways to relate  with other students and form positive rather than destructive connections.  The recognition that I received from being featured in school talent shows  propelled me to change my negative ways. This recognition would later  move into the community, where I often sang at churches. I became active  in the local 4-H Club, which gave me an opportunity to develop my leadership skills and become a regional song leader. This newfound life even  led to other teachers, at North Hodges Elementary School, to become involve in assisting me. Mrs. Miller, my third-grade teacher, who had become  principal of the school, when I was in sixth grade, started to provide me  with more assistance and encouraged me to participate in 4-H competitions  and would provide me with transportation and resources to help become  a ribbon winner. I was a new person and I took those things with me as I  transitioned to Brewer High School, the high school for Black students in  Greenwood, South Carolina, in the Fall of 1964.
J. T. JACKSON When I arrived at Brewer, I was still a bit timid about my existence. Here  I was, a boy from the country and not having a strong sense of confidence,  expected to interact with young people from many socio-economic backgrounds. I was a little embarrassed and afraid. It did not help that the name  James Jackson was also a part of my persona. As the new junior high students gathered in the auditorium, to be assigned to a homeroom class, students in upper grades were there to assist us in getting us to the classrooms  to which we were assigned. When my name was called, I heard much snickering. I became self-conscious and wondered why that was. I would later  learn that the snickering occurred because my name was the same as an  older student who lived his life openly gay. While I did not understand and  resented the snickering, I tried to remain positive, but the taunting of teenagers sometimes hurt and led to negative encounters. After having been  ridiculed because of my name too many times, I reverted to fighting and  trying to get revenge. The consequences of this led to a few days of suspension from school. I was again devastated but learned from the experience.  When I returned to school, I vowed that I would not fight again and made  efforts to do a different thing. With the encouragement of my eighth grade  English teacher, I entered an oratorical and declamation contest. I used my  anger about being ridiculed for my name to connect to a deep emotional  pain to breathe life into the performance on the night of the contest. I was  declared one of the winners! My female cousin, from my fathers side of  the family, was the other winner. After that win, I gathered the courage to  do other things in the area of performance; the result was my participating  in a talent show that had been spearheaded by one of the physical education teachers at the school. When she asked me if I wanted to participate,  she told me that one of her friends, who represented a recording company  would be in the audience and that he possibly would be looking for new  talent. I agreed to do it, but had some trepidation, because this was a much  larger adventure than previous ones. I performed my song, and while I did  not win the talent show, the recording representative did ask me if I was  interested in recording. My response to him, mostly out of ignorance and  knowing that my family would not be supportive, was No. I regret that decision now, but when a young man comes from an environment like mine  and there is no one to provide guidance, mistakes are often made. Nonetheless, one day as I stood alone in the schoolyard of Brewer, I overheard  the choir, under the direction of Mr. Johnson, practicing. I listened to this  sound several days, until I finally mustered up the courage and went to his  office, in the basement of the school auditorium and told him I wanted  to audition for the choir. Afterall, singing had become my drug of choice.  There were many evenings that I would stroll the streets of Hodges, by this  time my mother had moved to the city part of the town, entertaining myself  as there was little else to do. Mr. Johnson auditioned me and accepted my 

Trying a Different Approach    73 voice as one of the singers in the bass section of the choir. It was a marvelous  undertaking and brought another dimension to help me become something more than I thought I could. Being a member of Mr. Johnsons choir provided many things. First,  it gave me an opportunity to be among students who had a similar focus  in that we all loved to sing. Prior to joining the choir, I wasnt very active  at Brewer. Living outside the city of Greenwood, which is where the high  school was, and not having transportation to travel the more than eight  miles, I was reluctant to become involved. Being a part of the choir allowed  me socialization and an opportunity to be involved during school hours. Another benefit of being in the choir was the chance to view Mr. Johnson  as a father figure. As someone who operated with a precision for excellence, discipline, commitment, preparation, and a sense of caring and love  for his students, I saw in him someone whose behaviors I could mimic. I  had never had the experience of connecting with a Black man who was a  professional and demonstrated the kind of characteristics that I would realize in my own life. I think if I had not been a part of Mr. Johnsons choir, I  would not have ever developed the kind of commitment to the work that I  currently do as a university professor. Mr. Johnson provided me exposure outside of the small town that I was  accustomed to seeing. It was through his connection to Benedict College  he graduated from there that I was able to take my first major trip outside  of Hodges and subsequently experience what it was like to be on a college  campus, something that I thought I would never do. While at Benedict, we  not only performed a wonderful concert, but for some of us, it was our first  time seeing Columbia, the capital city of South Carolina, which is where  Benedict is located. This trip, although short, gave me my second thoughts  about what life might be like away from Hodges. The discipline that Mr. Johnson exhibited in working with the choir was  exceptional! He demanded of his singers to always be prepared, know their  parts, sing them well, and have a presence that indicated confidence. During rehearsals, he would often walk among the risers and listen to individuals sing to make sure that parts were correct. If singers did not produce the  sound that he expected, he would ask them to leave the risers and sit in the  audience and listen to other singers so that they could get it right. This activity was especially harsh when the choir was preparing for a concert. The  passion that he displayed was sometimes frightening, but he always managed to comfort those singers who might have felt embarrassed for being  pulled from the risers. Nonetheless, we all knew he loved us and wanted us  to do our best. I believe he knew the importance of Black Excellence and  he wanted that for us. It just didnt seem like that at the time.
J. T. JACKSON THE SWANS LESSONS FROM MRS. TAYLOR AND MR.  JOHNSON TO EDUCATORS Children who are born into circumstances that they cannot control, often  make choices about how to live their lives. They may choose to focus on the  negative influences of these experiences and spiral out of control, like most  of my siblings; or they may decide to endure the challenges and think about  how to use them as motivators to become something better. Someone who  steps in to provide guidance can ensure the latter more than the former. Mrs. Taylor and Mr. Johnson served that role for me and I believe that  there are lessons for other educators to learn. Therefore, the following  thoughts are recommended for both new and seasoned educators, in hopes  that they will make it possible for many swans to flourish, regardless of their  beginning. The power of a significant and authentic teacher can be the  difference between success and failure for a troubled and misdirected student. The lessons are: 1.	 Accept students, regardless of their differences. Students come to  the learning environment from a variety of backgrounds, have different needs, issues, and so on. Many teachers often see themselves  as authority figures, who will hold students accountable, apply affirmations when there is accountability, and eventually move into the  realm of acceptance. Bianco 2002 has suggested that this order  should be reversed:

Acceptance: I accept you unconditionally. Your background, parents, lifestyle, skills, and habits are all real, but do not infringe  on my total commitment to you.

Accountable: As your teacher, I am accountable for this years  academic, social, and emotional growth.

Affirmation: I see you as a work in progress and I will make a  considerable contribution to your future success.

Authority: I will use my authority to be your advocate and be  viewed as a valuable person in your life p. 13. Children need to know that they are more important than their  problemsbehaviors. Unconditional acceptance coupled with  structure and humane consequences, provide students with an opportunity to experience restorative justice and find healthy ways to  contribute to the classroom community. Richards 2018 believes  individuals who have a chance to rebuild relationships after a misstep and to foster empathy, attunement, and accountability helps  the whole community to feel safe and more connected p. 3. 2.	 Focus on students strengths. Every student has something to offer, but if educators concentrate more on the deficits and not the 

Trying a Different Approach    75 strengths, they may miss an opportunity to see gifts and talents  that may be useful to help build a sense of classroom community.  Boykin and Noguera 2011 have referred to these talents and gifts  as assets that children bring to the classroom environment. Moreover, the New York University Steinhardt School of Culture, Education and Human Development 2018 has suggested that assetbased teaching seeks to unbridle students potential and focus on  their talents by highlighting strengths more than the deficits. The  teacher who focuses on the strengths of children more than the  deficits, can potentially create self-empowered individuals, who can  do good and find ways, with guidance, to engage in more appropriate behaviors. 3.	 Find alternative and unusual teaching methods to engage and  access students knowledge. Students are more than their cognitive abilities and because many of them possess social-emotional  problems that hinder this ability, other approaches might need to  be employed by teachers to meet children where they are. If a child  has a passion for the arts, perhaps that might be the method that  the teacher utilizes to motivate growth in other areas. Both Mrs.  Taylor and Mr. Johnson used art forms to change my trajectory.  Perhaps they realized the truism that Renzulli 1973 spoke of so  many years ago when he suggested that creative ability is one component to his three-ring concept of giftedness and that children  from culturally different backgrounds often display a higher level  of creative ability. Moreover, the National Endowment for the Arts  2015 has reported that the use of arts in educating children has  multiple benefits, to include pro-social skills, cooperation, independence, emotional regulation, and reduction in both externalizing  and internalizing behaviors. 4.	 Expose students to the unfamiliar. Many students from under  resourced homes and communities dont have the luxury of  experiencing the world beyond these places. Good teachers, like  Mrs. Taylor and Mr. Johnson, expose children to worlds unknown  so that they might gain a new perspective. When I taught public  school, it amazed me that students who lived near major metropolitan areas had never experienced them. Mrs. Taylor and Mr. Johnson both saw the need to introduce students to worlds beyond their  home communities. Prior to meeting these two amazing teachers, I  had never traveled to a major city. However, because of them I was  able to visit my first college campus, fly on a plane to Washington,  DC, and experience so many other things. Who would have ever  thought that a young boy, born to a sharecropper mother, as a  bastard child, would one day sing at Carnegie Hall. I did not, but 
J. T. JACKSON because of the early influences of Mrs. Taylor and Mr. Johnson, I  did and have done so much more than I thought I could. Good and effective teachers possess many qualities. The ones mentioned  above are the most important that I learned from Mrs. Taylor and Mr. Johnson. Perhaps there are other lessons to be learned from my story, but teachers who practice unconditional acceptance, focus on students strengths,  use alternative ways to educate and engage students, and make a commitment to expose students to the unfamiliar, could be the catalyst to motivate  them to look at and experience their lives differently. Maybe you can be the  next teacher who will. REFERENCES Andersen, H. C. 1843. The ugly duckling. Copenhagen, Denmark: C.A. Reitzel. Bianco, A. 2002. One-minute discipline: Classroom management strategies that work. San  Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Boykin, A. W.,  Noguera, P. 2011. Creating the opportunity to learn: Moving from  research to practice to close the achievement gap. Alexandria, VA: Association for  Supervision and Curriculum Development. National Endowments for the Arts. 2015. The arts in early childhood: Social emotional  benefits of arts participation. Washington, DC: Author. New York Universitys Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development. 2018. An asset-based approach to education: What it is and why it matters.  New York, NY: Author. Retrieved from https:teachereducation.steinhardt  .nyu.eduan-asset-based-approach-to-education-what-it-is-and-why-it-matters Renzulli, J. S. 1973. Talent potential in minority group students. Exceptional Children, 396, 437444. Richards, J. 2018, September 4. How restorative justice helps students learn. Edutopia. Retrieved from https:www.edutopia.orgarticlehow-restorative-justice  -helps-students-learn

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 7783 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 77 CHAPTER 8 HIGH EXPECTATIONS The Key Ingredient   to Academic Success Jubria Lewis Teaching has always been considered a noble profession in the African  American community. Teachers were revered by young people because of  their position and status in the community, intellectual acumen, and ability  to serve as role models. Teachers of African descent, when teaching students of African descent often find that the hidden curriculum requires  them to focus on education as a means of liberation because they see  themselves in the students that they are educating. These teachers often  use culturally relevant pedagogies and curriculum to empower their students. These beliefs and approaches are the underpinnings to the high  expectations that permeates the culture of the teachers classroom and is  the glue to the relationship that he or she establishes with each individual  student. Culturally relevant pedagogies and curriculum address issues of  access, inclusion, and racism in schools by empowering students  socially,  emotionally, and politically by using cultural referents to impart knowledge,  skills, and attitudes Ladson Billings, 1992, p. 382. Similarly, they cultivate
J. LEWIS a strong academic base, and foster students positive self-worth and racial  and cultural identities Asante, 1991; Ladson Billings, 1992; Mudhabuti   Mudhabuti, 1991. PURPOSE OF THE CHAPTER The purpose of this chapter is to highlight Mr. Rener, a highly effective  African-American male teacher and how he personified the principles of  culturally relevant teaching through his high expectations for all students.  The storytelling methodology of this chapter is structured in a manner that  preservice teachers understand the need to develop deep relationships  with their students, articulating high expectations to them and being deliberate on delivering on it in instruction, culture, and community. Finally,  practitioners will be provided with key recommendations that support one  in creating a positive climate for all students, particularly, Black and Brown  students to thrive academically and socially. A REFLECTION ON MY EARLY SCHOOLING YEARS The start of each school year is often filled with such anticipation for many  people. On one hand, parents are often overjoyed when their children return to school. On the other hand, teachers and school leaders are thrilled  at another chance to empower an awaiting group of scholars with knowledge and skills, while fostering their love to become life-long learners.  Moreover, students are mixed with emotions for endless reasons such as  excitement to connect with friends in hope that they are in the same class  or classes, nervous about attending a new school, or hopeful that they have  the best teachers based on the rumor mill from older friends and family  members. August of 1991 was no different for me as I looked forward to the sixth  grade at St. Charles Elementary School in Jeanerette, a small, working class  city in the Acadiana region of Louisiana. My excitement and anticipation  existed because it was a 33 chance that I would have Mr. Rener as my  teacher, one of the two African-American male teachers in my elementary  school and one of three teachers in the sixth grade. The school orientation day was the launch of every academic year where all students and parents were invited to the school where you looked for your name on either  apples, books, or some type of novelty on the teachers doors to indicate  where you will spend the next 180 days of your life. This school cultural  event was the central focus of every students phone conversation, park and 

High Expectations    79 playground chatter, or Sunday School whisper. Our conversations typically  went like this, I sure hope that I am in Mr. Reners class. I hear that he is a  fun teacher and you will do a lot of projects in his class. My friend chimed  in with, Me too, and our last names are close so we will sit by each other  because they will put us in alphabetical order! But I hear that he does not  play either. He expects a lot! The walk down the hallway seemed to take forever, as the sixth grade was  the terminal grade at St. Charles Elementary School, and housed the oldest  students in their own little enclave within the school. While walking down,  the responses of students were evident of either their anticipation or disappointment in who their instruction will be led by for the academic school  year. My heart began to palpitate at the speed of light as I got closer to the  sixth-grade corridor. Walking with my mom, she delayed the reveal as she  spoke to all of my previous teachers because she built great relationships  with them as a parent and as a fellow colleague at the local high school in  our community. I realized as I walked with my mom and greeted all of my  former teachers that all of them from second through fifth grade looked  like me. This not only worked in my favor because we shared the same hue  and cultural experiences, but it had an impact on my overall educational  attainment. Gershenson, Hart, Hyman, Lindsay, and Papageorge 2018  found that Black students who had one Black teacher by third grade were  13 more likely to enroll in college, while those who had two Black teachers were 32 more likely. The moment of truth as I reached the doors of  the three sixth grade teachers. I went straight to Mr. Reners door to look  for my name and before I could even begin searching, I could hear his deep  voice say to me, Yep, Jubria, you are in the right place. My reaction was  a clear indication that I got my wish as I screamed, Yes, and my gestures  motioned like I just scored a touchdown in the Super Bowls fourth quarter.  Though I have had African American teachers from second through fifth  grade, this was really special because I nailed an African American male  teacher; a rare breed in both rural Louisiana and the nation. The most underrepresented demographic of teachers in America are  African American males at a startling 1, equating to approximately 35,000  teachers in our public schools, with most being at the middle and high  school levels Aud et al., 2013; Lewis, 2006; Lewis  Toldson, 2013. Having  no knowledge of this scarcity as an 11-year-old boy, I was thrilled to start the  new school year. The school year was off to a great start and I recall every  morning being excited about another day of learning. Mr. Rener just did  an amazing job of creating a culture of care, respect, appreciation, joy, and  risk-taking. During that time, I could not necessarily articulate my feelings  of these elements that are quite evident in our classroom environment,  but I knew that our experiences were different than in some of the other 
J. LEWIS classes. Friends would share stories of their classroom cultures on the playground, but it seems as if we were able to walk with an increased level of  pride due to the energy and vibe that Mr. Rener cultivated in the classroom  amongst teacher to student and student to student. Our teachers expectations were delivered through modeling his culture of care both verbal and  nonverbal. Though classrooms are depicted as neutral sites where social  and academic learning occurs, the social context of a classroom affects the  learning that happens in that classroom Young  Smith, 1997. One social  factor is the relationship between teacher and student; however, if this relationship is caring, then students academically and socially benefit Birch   Ladd, 1997. Though I knew I had a special relationship with Mr. Rener,  it became evident quickly that he had developed a special relationship with  each student and then collectively as a class community. He truly made a  concerted effort to exemplify what the National Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education, also referred to as NCATE National Council  for Accreditation of Teacher Education, 2008, requires in its teacher disposition of caring for their students not only materially, but also socially,  emotionally, relationally, and academically. Mr. Reners spirit of caring was anchored in his commitment to high  expectations of us, and we felt the symbiotic relationship with the two. His  caring allowed us to deepen the bonds of trust in our classroom. This was  pivotal in being able to understand and feel the high expectations that  our teacher had for us. His high expectations became the heartbeat of our  classroom, particularly in his approaches to teaching and learning and our  disposition to learning. I can vividly remember receiving a B in reading  and I was crushed because I just unequivocally knew that I deserved an A.  Before going out for recess one day, Mr. Rener called me back because he  sensed that I was not as participatory in class and did not show up well in  class. He inquired about what was bothering me and I blurted out with a  mixture of frustration, anger, hurt, and disappointment, You gave me a B  in reading and I am the best reader in this class! His response was also a  combination of a teacher and a father with, You are indeed an outstanding  student Jubria, but I have told you a number of times that you are rushing  through your work to finish first to have others believe that you are smart  and that is not smart to do. You earned that B; however, I am expecting you  to work to your greatest potential and earn that A you desire. His words  at that time did not resolve the A that I wanted in the moment, however, I  worked hard from that point on because his words were worth and value  given the relationship we had established and his unwavering expectations  around student achievement. Mr. Reners degree of cultural competence assisted in his effectiveness  in advancing student achievement in his classroom. Ladson-Billings 1995 

High Expectations    81 refers to cultural competence as the ability to function effectively in ones  own culture of origin. For African American students, which we were the  majority in Mr. Reners classroom, it meant understanding those aspects  of our culture and possess the ability to communicate and relate to other  members of the cultural group Gay  Baber, 1987. Our classroom conversations were never short of discussing college life on Historically Black Colleges  Universities HBCU, as one was an alma mater of Mr. Rener. He  used this connection to encourage us to set our aim on college education,  while relating it to those schools that resonated at beacons of excellence in  our communities, such as Grambling State University, Southern University,  Xavier University of Louisiana, and Dillard University. He would further  share his stories of being in a Black Greek-lettered fraternity, Omega Psi Phi  and how they supported each other academically and built a bond of brotherhood. These anecdotal lessons were not part of the taught curriculum,  but it allowed African American children to see themselves in college, particularly those that have educated our ancestors, parents, and other members of our village. His expectations were that I want you to see yourself in  me and pushed us to work hard to maintain high scholastic achievement,  because we were college bound. PRACTICAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR TEACHERS As Mr. Rener was my first African American male teacher in my K12 career,  it has left an indelible mark on my life and what I established as a benchmark for my career. It is without a doubt the reason that I became an educator and started my career as a fifth-grade teacher; I too, became the first  African American male teacher for many students. Furthermore, I was able  to share my experiences in college both at a PWI and an HBCU, pledging  Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity with my 100 African American students. My  high expectations for my students were similar to those that Mr. Rener had  for us and also those that I developed in my own personal professional journey. As a preservice teacher, it is necessary to understand that having high  expectations is the key ingredient to academic achievement. The following  strategies should be the underpinning to your pedagogical approaches as  well as your classroom culture: 1.	 Develop a strong belief in the learning capacity of all students and  adopt a growth mindset around teaching and learning. Grounding  your north star in that All means All. 2.	 Recognize that each parent has sent you their best and it is incumbent upon the educational community to articulate the high 
J. LEWIS expectations that you have for students in your approaches, words,  actions, systems, and policies. 3.	 Deliver an instructional program that is rigorous, while providing  the supports and scaffolds for students who will struggle at various  points during the learning process. 4.	 Establish a college-going culture for the entire community of  students where they can envision their success in post-secondary  educational pursuits 5.	 Provide quality on-going, explicit feedback to students throughout  the academic year on their glows, grows, and goals. Though this may not be an exhaustive list of strategies that should be adopted as a preservice teacher, it will be a launchpad for success and will  strengthen your practice and provision of services. REFERENCES Asante, M. 1991. The Afrocentric idea in education. Journal of Negro Education,  602, 170180. Aud, S., Hussar, W., Johnson, F., Kena, G., Roth, E., Manning, E., Wang, X., . . . Zhang,  J. 2013. The condition of education 2013 NCES 2012-045. Washington, DC:  U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. Birch, S. H.,  Ladd, G. W. 1997. The teacherchild relationship and childrens  early school adjustment. Journal of School Psychology, 351, 6179. https:doi  .org10.1016s0022-44059600029-5 Gay, G.,  Baber, W. 1987. Expressively Black: The cultural basis of ethnic identity. New  York, NY: Praeger. Gershenson, S., Hart, C. M., Hyman, J., Lindsay, C.,  Papageorge, N. 2018. The  long-run impacts of same-race teachers. Retrieved from https:www.nber.org systemfilesworkingpapersw25254w25254.pdf Ladson-Billings, G. 1992. Liberatory consequences of literacy: A case of culturally  relevant instruction for African American students. Journal of Negro Education,  613, 378391. Ladson-Billings, G. 1995. Toward a theory of culturally relevant pedagogy. American Educational Research Journal, 323, 465491. Lewis, C. W. 2006. African American male teachers in public schools: An examination of three urban school districts. Teachers College Record, 1082, 224245. Lewis, C. W.,  Toldson, I. A. Eds. 2013. Black male teachers: Diversifying the United States teacher workforce. Bingley, England: Emerald Group. Mudhabuti, S.,  Mudhabuti, H. 1991. African-centered education: Its value, importance, and necessity in the development of Black children. Chicago, IL: Third World  Press. National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education. 2008. Professional standards for accreditation of teacher preparation institutions. Washington, DC: Author.

High Expectations    83 Young, B. A.,  Smith, T. M. 1997. The social context of education NCES 97-981.  Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 8591 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 85 CHAPTER 9 IN HONOR OF SELMA WHITE Marvin Lynn Ive written extensively about the work and lives of Black teachers. More  specifically, Ive spent my entire adult life either working as a Black male  teacher or studying them. Ive had the privilege of publishing my work on  the work and lives of Black males in a number of prestigious academic journals. While I always acknowledge and publicly thank my own teachers who  were so instrumental in my own development, I dont believe Ive actually  written about any of them in great detail. When the editors asked me to  participate in this project, I was pleased that I would finally get the opportunity to blend the personal with the scholarly in a way that I had not  done so before. While its true that all scholarship is personal, its also true  that I have managed to maintain a degree of psychological and emotional  distance from those whose work and lives I have studied. For example, Ive  never even desired to conduct research in my hometown of Chicago where  I attended school from kindergarten through college. My research was set  in New York, Los Angeles, Prince Georges County, and Baltimoreboth in  Maryland. I had no personal ties to any of these places except that I either  was obtaining a degree in an institution in one of those places or was employed as a professor there. Even when I took an academic job in Chicago, I  did not endeavor to do research there. It was too close. I got too emotional 
M. LYNN even at the thought of trying to understand, from a scholarly standpoint,  the challenges facing Black educators in this deeply racist and heartless city  of mine. I invested some energy into understanding more of the scholarship on Black education in Chicago when I taught a class on Black Education at UIC. I still didnt write about it. Today, I am writing about a teacher who was like a family member someone who invested so much of herself in me that I had no choice but to  adore her back. The late Mrs. Selma White still holds a special place in my  heart. Even as I write this, I worry about speaking so affectionately about  a teacher. I dont want to give the wrong impression. But I also want to be  honest about my genuine love for this selfless educator. Mrs. White had a number of distinguishing features. Mrs. White was a  southern Black woman with a bold face. She had long straight hair and did  not usually wear makeup. She was also older than most teachers we encountered. No one knew Mrs. Whites age. As high school students, we worked  hard to try to figure it out. Sometimes fellow students in our class would ask  and shed reply, Oh, Im 150 years old. And then shed quip, Boy, dont  you know you should never ask a lady her age? And then shed roar with  laughter and walk away. When I met her in 1987, she was already at the end  of a nearly 30-year teaching career. She was in her late 60s and was heading  toward retirement. She had taught for many years at another high school  on the southside of Chicago. She had not been teaching long at this new  school. In fact, she was hired to replace a much-beloved music teacher who  had become a school counselor. She was likely one of the oldest teachers on  staff at Senn High School. This was a matter of interest for many students.  It also gave her the license, as she put it, to say whatever she wanted to say.  She felt no restrictions. She reminded me of the womanist teachers Annette  Henry 1998 writes about in her study on Canadian women teachers. Alice Walker refers to a womanist as a Black feminist . . . Usually referring to  outrageous, audacious, courageous, or willful behavior . . . committed to the  survival and the wholeness of an entire people Walker, 1983, as cited in  Cannon, 1996. Walker describes the way the term emanates from the term  womanisha term used to describe a young Black girl who was acting  too grown for her age. I suspect that Mrs. White, with her bold and sometimes outrageous personality, was likely accused of being womanish as a  child. One cannot be certain. But I am certain about her commitment to  me and all the students, who were mostly poor and working-class students  of color, at Senn High School. Like Annette Henrys teachers, Mrs. White worked towards the cultural, political, educational, and spiritual survival of Black children Henry,  1998, p. 3. She not only helped us learn music, but she wanted to save our  souls, to heal us, to liberate us, and render us completely free from the  chains that bound so many of our ilk. Noted womanist theologian, Katie 

In Honor of Selma White    87 Cannon 1996, talks about the suffering that Black women experience. It  was clear to me that Mrs. White, as a Black womanist educator, suffered because of the state of education for Black children. It appeared, at times, that  she was determined to single-handedly transform our education and therefore transform our lives. She challenged us, she pushed us, and propelled  us forward. She was an educator, a womanist, an activist, and a true fighter  for the liberation of Black students in the Chicago Public Schools. In addition to being a teacher, she was also a mentor, a cheerleader, a protector,  and sometimes a disciplinarian. She was also a bold, often loud, frank, and  painfully honest African American woman from Texas. Mrs. White was never well-behaved and was sometimes considered outrageous, audacious  and willful by others. She spoke her mind about the conditions of  Black people. Even more important, she fought to improve the conditions  of Black students in our school. She spokeeven when she was asked not  to do soon our behalf. She demanded the best from her students while  continually reminding us how important it was for us to honor our history  as Black people and endeavor to be excellent at all times. She continually  challenged the White male principal of our school because it was her belief  that he didnt give a damn about bright Black students like me because  we were Black. She pushed him to do more. It was always clear to me that  she was absolutely committed to the health and wholeness of her Black  students even if it meant that she might suffer as a result. As one of her  students, I always got the impression that she cared deeply for usthough  I cannot recall that she ever said it, instead she lived it and she illustrated  it so clearly that it was simply a truth made evident by her actions. Her outspoken activism scared her well-behaved colleagues and even led some  of them to refer to her as crazy. She had little concern for what others  thought about her. She simply did not care. In fact, she relished in the idea  that some were frightened by her brashness. I met Mrs. White when I joined the beginning choir at Senn High  Schoolthen referred to as Senn Metropolitan Academy. Senn was a  45-minute train ride from my house. I ended up there because it was a better option than my local high school: Wells. Wells was riddled with gangs,  drugs, and all the other problems associated with large Chicago schools with  a history of academic failure. Senn High School was not a high achieving  school. But it wasnt a failing school either. It was known for having strong  emphases in the arts, science, and technology. Even more important, gangs  did not run the place. It was Mrs. Williamsmy 5th-grade teacher, also African American, who told my mother she should enroll me there. At Senn,  Mrs. Powell, also an African American educator, who was a good friend of  Mrs. Williamslooked after meeven though we didnt have much contact. Id see Mrs. Powell in the hallway and shed give me the, Im watching  you, boy stare. I was never intimidated by her because I could see the look 
M. LYNN of concern and care in her eyes. I didnt know it at the time, but Im sure  Mrs. Powell shared regular reports on my progress with Mrs. Williams. At Senn High School, I excelled. I was in the Top 20 during my freshman year. I was in mostly honors classes and joined the National Honor  Society and the student council. I was delighted at the opportunities I had  to participate in extra-curricular activities including chorus. My elementary  schoolwhich was a K8 schooloffered very limited opportunities for  extracurricular activities. I had been singing all of my life in the church. I  had even performed with The Soul Children of Chicagoa professional gospel group. We produced an album that was being played on radio and TV  stations all over the world. I had the privilege of traveling all over the region  performing. I maintained a fairly grueling scheduling on the weekends performing with this group during my first year of high school. That continued  until I met Mrs. White. During my sophomore year, I joined the high school chorus at Senn. It  would be the first time I had ever been taught music in school. Almost immediately, Mrs. White, who was our chorus teacher, took me under her wing.  She noted that I had solo ability and began working with me so that I could  sing in different languages. The first classical song I learned was Caro Mio  Ben which means my dear beloved. It is a late 16th-century Italian love  song. It was a simple and fairly repetitive piece from the standard art song  repertoire. It was also a good piece for a beginner. We would rehearse during the lunch hour or during breaks. She recommended that I engage in  formal vocal study. I had no such experience. She arranged for me to take  lessons with a well-respected voice teacher at the Merit Music Programa  grant-funded music preparatory program for city youth. I was able to take  lessons and participate in a choral group at no cost. Mr. Halfvorson taught  the choral group and Mrs. Halfvorson was my voice teacher. They were parents to Eric Halfvorsona famous operatic bass-baritonewho was singing  all over the world. I also began singing in the All-City High School Chorus.  Young people who participated in the city chorus were considered the best  singers from their high school. I was proud to represent Senn and to sing  in this group with other top singers from around the city. I also competed  in vocal competitions on a regular basis. In addition, Mrs. White took the  chorus to various places around the city to perform. I had plenty of solo  opportunities. I also sang solos at school for special occasions. When Mayor  Harold Washington died, I was asked to sing a solo for the school assembly.  Mrs. White had selected me to do so. Suffice it to say, I was famous at Senn.  While I was no longer ranked in the Top 20 of class at Senn, I continued to  perform well academically. In 1987, Mrs. White nominated me to participate in the Golden Apple  Foundations newly minted scholarship program. This new initiative funded by local White venture capitalistswas a spin-off of a program they 

In Honor of Selma White    89 developed to honor top educators across the city of Chicago called the  Golden Apple Teachers program. The program was highly regarded. They  decided to launch their first group of Golden Apple scholars in 1989. The  scholars had to be young people who had chosen teaching as their professional path. In addition to completing an application, one had to also participate in an interview. Dozens of young people applied for the prestigious  award. I was selected along with 14 other high school juniors from across the  city. We would receive financial support, along with mentoring, and a summer job working in various settings working with children. I was interviewed  by the New York Times and CNN. I went to DePaul University in Chicago on a  music scholarship. I later changed my major to elementary education. The Golden Apple Scholars program made it possible for me to get valuable experience in classrooms while earning needed income in the summers while I was in college. By the time I graduated from college, I was  well-prepared for the classroom. I also got academic enrichment in the  summers with Golden Apple. One of my summer instructors who taught  in the Golden Apple Scholars program was Bill Ayers. At the time, I was  not aware that Bill was an internationally recognized education scholar  who had written several books on teaching. As I neared the end of my college experience, he recommended that I go to graduate school. I had been  mentored by another African woman educatorDr. Vera Rhimes mother  of Shonda Rhimes who was trying to steer me toward Dartmouth College  in New Hampshire. As a child of the city, I was not certain that I would not  enjoy living in New Hampshire. To Dr. Rhimes dismay, I never applied to  Dartmouth. Instead, I applied to Columbia Universitys Teachers College  at the direction of Bill Ayers. At the time, I did not realize that Columbia  University was an Ivy League institution and that the degree would open up  opportunities for me that I never imagined possible. At some point, Bill did  tell me that. But I didnt understand it until I experienced it. All of this happened because of Mrs. White who recommended me for the Golden Apple  Scholars program where I met Bill Ayers. Mrs. Whites insistence that I reached beyond my own dreams for myself,  helped to propel my career as an education scholar and leader. I also had  a strong personal connection to her. I recall that when I graduated from  college and later with my doctorate, she was there. She would always say,  Ive got to go and see about my Marvin, honey! When I moved back to  Chicago with my growing family to teach at the University of Illinois at Chicago, Mrs. White was there for all of us. She invited us over for dinner and  helped acclimate me to the Black middle class on the southside of Chicago.  I grew up poor in Chicago. So, I had little association with that community.  As I discovered, because Black-middle-classness is not just about how much  money you make or how many degrees you have, its very much about your  lineagewho your people are. My people, at least on my mothers side, are 
M. LYNN mostly poor folk. As a tenured professor working at a major university in the  city with a doctorate from a world-class university, I was expected to be part  of the worldI think. But I felt like an outsider, an interloper, someone  who didnt deserve to behold the titles and the prestige that came with being a tenured university professor at a major research university. Mrs. White  disrupted those feelings for me. She helped me focus my energy on a key  community transformation initiative. Mrs. White and I soon collaborated  on an effort to bring opera to the south side of Chicago and we developed  South Shore Opera Company of Chicago in collaboration with the Chicago  Park District. The South Shore Cultural Center became the home of this  fledgling but important community-based artistic effort. She worked tirelessly to help make the company a success. We celebrated, to great fanfare,  our immensely successful opening in the Winter of 2009. A year later, my  dear Mrs. White was gone. She discovered she had a brain tumor and left  this earth no less than 6 months later. I was not prepared for this. She was  close to 90 years old at the time. It didnt matter. I grieved hard. In fact, I  still do. Perhaps it is an expression of my deep gratitude to her for having  the courage, the tenacity, the passion, and the commitment to care enough  to invest in my development. She exemplified the qualities of the womanist  educators in Henrys book who were angry about how schools treated the  children they referred to as their own. Like Mrs. White, they took action  to correct the problems they knew their students encountered. Even more  important, she gave of herself, her time and even her resources to support  us even into adulthood. Mrs. White will forever be emblazoned in my heart. IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICY AND PRACTICE My success as an educator, a scholar, and leader is due, for the most part,  to my teachers. My lifes mission has been to tell stories about teachers who  were like my own and then work to help teacher education programs produce more teachers like the ones I had. Mission impossible? At times. But  I persist. Over the last 2 decades, Ive learned a few things about what must  happen at the state, university, and collegeschool level in order for this to  occur on a large scale. First, states must have explicit policy that prioritizes  the recruitment, retention, and advancement of teachers of color. In order  to do this, the state legislature must fund scholarships and other forms of  support for candidates of color. In addition, they can incentivize school districts to partner with communities of color and institutions of higher education to advance grow your own programs Gist, Bianco,  Lynn, 2018.  Universities too must place particular emphasis on workforce diversity as a  key goal. It is not sufficient for a school or college to take up this issue without the support and backing of the institution. Presidents, provosts, and 

In Honor of Selma White    91 deans must be in alignment on this matter. In addition, workforce diversity  efforts must be buttressed and lifted up by broader institutional goals that  value equity, diversity, and inclusion and see workforce diversity efforts as a  key manifestation of these larger goals. Teacher education programs must have an explicit commitment to advancing teacher diversity while also ensuring that teacher candidates become proficient in culturally sustaining practices that recognize historic  inequalities and attend to their students intellectual, socio-emotional, linguistic, and cultural needs. In order to do this, they must be in partnership with school districts and with communities. We must break down traditional barriers between institutions of higher education particularly elite,  research-focused ones and the communities in which they sit. Institutions  of higher education must have explicit engagement agendas that include  a commitment to advancing workforce diversity across all of their schools  and colleges. Deans, department chairs, and faculty must be willing to roll  up their sleeves and work alongside troubled school districts to be part of  the solution. Many of us have the ability to write grants that bring much  needed resources to support these agendas. We must include our school  district partners in these efforts. Finally, institutions of higher education  must work to diversify the full-time facultyboth tenure and non-tenure  track. Faculty of color are far more likely to lead and invest deeply in efforts  to recruit, retain, and successfully produce teachers of color who will have a  strong commitment to teaching in urban schools with diverse populations. REFERENCES Cannon, K. G. 1996. Katies cannon: Womanism and the soul of the Black community.  New York, NY: Continuum. Gist, C. D., Bianco, M.,  Lynn, M. 2019. Examining grow your own programs  across the teacher development continuum: Mining research on teachers  of color and nontraditional educator pipelines. Journal of Teacher Education,  701, 1325. Henry, A. 1998. Taking back control: African Canadian women teachers lives and practice. Albany: State University of New York Press.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 93104 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 93 CHAPTER 10 MUSIC EDUCATION AS  A VEHICLE TO DREAM,  EMPOWER, EXPLORE,   AND INSPIRE The Life and Legacy   of Mrs. Arcelia Simmons Brian L. McGowan Heritage high to thee we sing, a joyous song of praise  Love and respect integrity, we will remember thee always  Ring those bells on Heritage campus, sing those songs like never before  Maroon and silver thy colors be, you will always remain a part of me  Truth and knowledge is thy soul, a place where everyone excels were told  Thy fame will forever be sealed by faith and loyalty  Heritage high our pride and joy, we honor thee forever more Heritage High School Alma Mater Once you enter Heritage High School HHS through the main doors, take  a few steps, make the first left, walk through the doors, go down the hall  until you see the vending machines, and make a quick right. Mrs. Simmons 
B. L. McGOWAN office is the first office next to the vending machines on the music wing.  Depending on the time of day, odds are that one of the following three  things were happening: a you heard choral tones with a great balance,  rich tone quality, and good blend; b you heard Mrs. Simmons teaching  students how to read music; or c you heard Mrs. Simmons giving students  a meaningful lesson about life. Once inside, you noticed three rooms in the  back of the classroom, a piano approximately two feet from the chalkboard,  and a group of chairs in an oval shape in front of the piano. This was what  I now call my magic space. One that provided you room to dream beyond  your circumstances, one that empowered you to develop your leadership  skills, one that allowed you to explore your passions, and one that inspired  your confidence and gave you a sense of hope. Mrs. Simmons created a  transformative educational space that fostered excellence. She embodies  characteristics that align with the aims of this text and I am honored to  write a story about how she impacted both my teaching practice and life. I begin this chapter by providing insight into four salient influences in  Mrs. Simmons educational and life trajectory. Next, I draw on culturally responsive teaching and pedagogy literature as a lens to situate this story. Then,  I reflect on critical moments I recall while at HHS regarding her pedagogical  techniques and behaviors. I then describe how she impacted my teaching  practice. I end this chapter with recommendations for teacher education. MRS. SIMMONS AND FOUR SALIENT INFLUENCES   ON HER EDUCATIONAL AND LIFE TRAJECTORY Mrs. Arcelia Simmons, a native of Palmer Park, Maryland was the inaugural  chorus teacher at the new magnet school located in downtown Newport  News, Virginia in 1996. A graduate of Norfolk State University, she has devoted her career to empowering young educators to pursue their dreams  despite their life circumstances. She exudes confidence and drive and seeks  to instill these qualities into her students. She often found herself being the  first in many contexts, including the first Black person ever to be in her high  schools top musical ensemble. To truly know Mrs. Simmons is to understand  the four important influences that shape her educational and life trajectory.  These include her family, faith, HBCU experiences, and a Black woman music  educator in Greenbelt, Maryland. I describe each of these influences below. Family Mrs. Simmons parents were working-class. They instilled in her a strong  work ethic and to not use excuses as a reason to not get things done. She 

Arcelia Simmons Legacy and Music Education    95 was aware of the racism that her parents endured but they persevered and  remained resilient. For Mrs. Simmons parents, success was not about how  much money you made; but more about how you managed what you had.  These were lessons that Mrs. Simmons embraced, and instilled into her students. She embraced a family first mindset. She is a wife with a supportive  husband, three daughters, and a son. She often discussed the importance  of family and shared stories about her children in class. Faith A long-term member, choir director, and musician of New Life Church  in Hampton, Virginia, Mrs. Simmons often discussed her faith and the ways  it shaped her life. She is a giver. During a discouraging time early in her  teaching career, she heard a word from God that has carried her over the  years. God told her, As you pour into somebodys child, I will pour into  yours. She draws on the Matthew 10:8 bible verse, Freely you have received, freely you give. She has poured into and cared for thousands of  students and believes her own children are successful due to her enactment  of this message. All of her children have completed bachelors degrees in  music with some having masters degrees. Historically Black Colleges and Universities Experiences Attending Historically Black Colleges and Universities HBCUs impacted  her outlook on life and racial identity. Mrs. Simmons initially attended South  Carolina State University SCSU but transferred and graduated from Norfolk State University NSU. Prior to attending SCSU, she possessed some  anti-Black attitudes based on negative examples that she observed in her  hometown and viewing her Black peers classroom misbehavior as a barrier  to her own learning as the teacher was oftentimes unable to teach. After being denied admission to the University of Maryland College Park where they  told her that she was not a good enough musician, she attended SCSU. Her  experience at SCSU instilled in her a sense of Black pride. She witnessed her  Black peers having a strong desire to learn. This attitude for learning resonated with her and she felt comfortable in this new setting. She often talked  about the relationships she built at NSU as being life changing as well. Dr. Barbara Baker Mrs. Simmons knew by the third grade that she would be a music teacher.  Having experienced both good teaching and observing others who could 
B. L. McGOWAN not maintain control of their classrooms motivated her to be a caring and  committed teacher. Dr. Barbara Baker was the chorus teacher at the rival  nearby new tech magnet school Eleanor Roosevelt High. She did not get  a chance to talk to Dr. Baker at the time but seeing her conduct a choir  changed her life. For Mrs. Simmons, witnessing a Black woman on the podium was new to her and this representation mattered. Mrs. Simmons aspired to be like Dr. Baker and had a full circle moment when she met her  27 years later where she conveyed to Dr. Baker that her poise, confidence,  and presence changed her life. In the ensuing section, I theorize about race and culturally responsive  approaches that Mrs. Simmons drew on in her teaching practice. Although  Mrs. Simmons may not have had these specific theories in mind, I appreciate how her behaviors and commitments aligned with culturally responsive  teaching and pedagogical approaches. CULTURALLY RESPONSIVE TEACHING AND PEDAGOGY Culturally responsive pedagogy CRP has been linked to positive outcomes for ethnically diverse students in schools across multiple educational  phases including high school environments. CRP is defined as using the  cultural characteristics, experiences, and perspectives of ethnically diverse  students as conduits for teaching them more effectively Gay, 2018. CRP  assumes that when academic knowledge and skills are situated within the  lived experiences and frames of reference of students, they are more personally meaningful, have higher interest appeal, and are learned more  easily and thoroughly Gay, 2002. According to Gay 2018 culturally responsive pedagogy encompasses four teacher pillars of practice and eight  student outcomes. These pillars of practice caring teacher attitudesexpectations, culturally diverse content in the curriculum, cultural communication in the classroom, and culturally congruent instructional strategies  describe the critical aspects of a culturally responsive teacher. The eight  student outcomes validating, comprehensive, multidimensional, empowering, emancipatory, transformative, humanistic, and normative and ethical characterize teaching approaches that work best to support ethnically  diverse students. 	 Caring teacher attitudes. Culturally responsive caring teachers care  for and actively work to ensure the personal well-being and academic success of ethnically diverse students in their classrooms Gay,  2018. Caring teachers recognize the children in their classrooms  as both students and as people. Consequently, this type of caring 

Arcelia Simmons Legacy and Music Education    97 results in teachers treating their students in humane ways, holding them in high regard, having high expectations, and employing  strategies that support students in achieving these expectations  Gay, 2018. 	 Culturally diverse content in the curriculum. Curriculum content is a  tool that supports students in emphasizing their capabilities, attitudes, and experiences Gay, 2018. Teachers that make knowledge  accessible and connected to the lives and experiences outside of  school empower ethnically diverse students. 	 Cultural communication in the classroom. Communication, culture,  teaching, and learning are codependent. Culture strongly influences communication styles among students from different ethnic  groups. Teachers that understand how to effectively communicate  with ethnically diverse students can impact their academic success. This chapter, highlights Mrs. Simmons, a culturally responsive teacher, and  her ethic of care, communication skills, and integration of Black content in  the curriculum. My interactions with her are recounted below. RECOLLECTIONS OF ACADEMIC SUCCESS   DURING MY HIGH SCHOOL YEARS Mrs. Simmons classroom was my magic space. It was an incubator to create  dreams. I felt safe in her classroom and oftentimes did not want to leave. I  knew that I could talk to her about anything and she helped me through  many personal situations primarily around issues of poverty in my hometown. I was taught at an early age that despite facing adverse circumstances,  education was the ticket to a fulfilling life. She encouraged me to focus on  the things that I could control. We had fun learning music. Mrs. Simmons  made us laugh just by being herself. I remember the occasional hitting of  the wrong note on the piano or not being able to sing certain notes when  teaching the soprano or bass sections followed by the words, You know  what I mean. She even gave students rides home after concerts or late rehearsals if they did not have transportation. I signed up for an extra choir  class a few semesters just to have more time in my magic space. Her ability  to get the most out of her students is what made her stand out from other  teachers. Mrs. Simmons provided exposure to Black composers, access to  opportunities in music, and showed tough love while teaching confidence.  These were traits that I vividly remember from my high school years and I  briefly describe them below.
B. L. McGOWAN Exposure to Black Composers and Appreciating   Black Voices In The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African American Children, Ladson-Billings 2009 stated that culturally relevant teaching allows Black students to be academically excellent while still being able to identify with  Black culture. Mrs. Simmons actions encouraged this type of excellence  among her students. She connected music content to real world events and  our home communities. Further, given how choral music education is often approached from a Eurocentric perspective, she deliberately exposed  us to music arranged by Black people in addition to teaching some of the  commonly taught Eurocentric pieces. I remember singing songs arranged  by Black people such as Every Time I Feel the Spirit William Dawson, and  Joyful, Joyful Mervyn Warren. I also remember other songs arranged by  those who were not Black. These included jazz numbers A Nightingale Sang  in Berkeley Square Gene Puerling and Pennies from Heaven Kirby Shaw  and classical pieces Cantique de Jean Racine Gabriel Faur and Regina coeli  Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. In addition to exposing us to a wide array of music genres, she taught us  to embrace the uniqueness of our voices as Black singers. Our choirs were  predominantly Black, and she spent time shaping our tone and blend. I  remember this vividly when practicing for my district and state choir auditions. She told us that we had to be twice as good and would often say, Do it  again, to make sure we learned our voice parts and represented ourselves  in the best possible manner. I made the all-district choir 4 consecutive years  and finished first runner up for all-state my junior year. You could only audition for all-state your junior and senior years. I recall auditioning for a solo  in Swahili at the district level and ended up getting the part. While learning  this song, she employed a critical lens and encouraged me to explore what  the song was about. She wanted me to learn the meaning behind the song. Exposing Students to New Experiences and Access   to Opportunities Mrs. Simmons was adamant about exposing her students to life opportunities beyond my hometown and saw music education as a way to do so. She  believed that completing high school and getting the first generation of  Black children into college would inspire and increase the chances for others to follow. If students did not desire to attend college, she encouraged  them to be a productive member of our society. She made us feel like we  had worth past high school and that we could accomplish anything.

Arcelia Simmons Legacy and Music Education    99 My family was proud that Mrs. Simmons created opportunities for us  to expand our horizons. First, I went to Florida my freshman year and  performed at a highly selective music festival that featured choirs from  across the country. We also auditioned and were selected to perform at the  White House during their winter holiday series. Some of the guys in the  top choirs at my high school and I formed a music group and performed  songs throughout the Hampton Roads area. These experiences allowed  me to grow as an artist and taught me how to dream beyond my immediate circumstances. Mrs. Simmons also created an environment where her  current and future students felt like they belonged. Lastly, I recall Black  alumni from the first two HHS graduating classes coming back to visit and  discuss their experiences being music majors at Old Dominion University  ODU. We even had an ODU student complete their student teaching at  HHS. These experiences shaped my college selection process. I knew that  I wanted to follow in their footsteps and chose to attend ODU to major in  music education. Talk about a full circle moment, while at ODU, I visited  the HHS choirs and completed one of my required internships under Mrs.  Simmons supervision. Showing Tough Love and Teaching Confidence Mrs. Simmons employed a tough love approach and did not accept excuses. She pushed us even harder if she felt like we were making excuses. As  one of the first freshman ever selected to the top choir at HHS, I was often  nervous when singing in front of my upperclassmen peers. Mrs. Simmons  taught me to not make excuses even at times when I messed up. For me, her  tough love approach was familiar and reminiscent of a Black grandmother  giving you the stern but loving look. As a Black woman teaching Black students, many of Mrs. Simmons actions were familiar and positively resonated  with me and my peers. When students misbehaved, Mrs. Simmons would  give you a look and you knew what it meant. The look was sometimes accompanied with an eraser or piece of chalk in her hand. I was well-behaved  in high school but do recall getting the look once. This look was also given  when she felt like one of her students was not living up to their potential,  which could have been a result of them lacking confidence. I recall a conversation with Mrs. Simmons about teaching confidence.  For Mrs. Simmons, teaching confidence was key to tapping into a students  potential. She was cognizant of the challenges posed when her students did  not possess confidence. For instance, she mentioned that children from  backgrounds similar to mine sometimes internalize not being good enough  when all they need is for someone to believe in them and understand their  talent. I also remember the manner in which she selected soloists and it 
B. L. McGOWAN was not always based on who had the best voice. She picked the person  who wanted to learn. She picked the person who she wanted to build confidence. I also recall the day she found out that I had perfect pitch. She  pushed keys on the piano and would test if I could name the key. I became  our choirs pitch pipe whenever we needed to find our starting note. I was  nervous but she instilled confidence in me even on the rare occasion where  I was sharp or flat. Mrs. Simmons instilled in me several lessons while I was at HHS. Exposing us to a wide array of music arrangers, particularly Black ones, helped  me to appreciate different genres of music and validated my singing voice.  Exposing us to opportunities to leave our hometown was inspirational and  it taught me how to dream. Her tough love approach and desire to teach  confidence has carried over into my own teaching philosophy. In the next  section, I discuss the ways in which Mrs. Simmons impacted my approach to  the classroom and teaching practice. MRS. SIMMONS IMPACT ON MY TEACHING PRACTICE After completing a Bachelor of Music in music education from ODU, I  switched professions and pursued a career in higher education. For the  past 15 years, I have been an administrator in university housing and residence life, a researcher in a higher education center focused on student  engagement, and a full-time faculty member in higher education and student affairs programs. In addition to drawing on the lessons that I observed  from Mrs. Simmons during my HHS years, I reflect on three ways that she  has influenced my teaching practice. I learned about the importance and  responsibility of being a Black teacher, the need to employ a challenge and  support approach, and the creation of a fun and supportive learning environment. I briefly discuss each of these below. The Importance and Responsibility of Being   a Black Teacher All of my professional experiences have been at traditionally White universities where Black professors are sorely underrepresented. Given this unfortunate reality, I understand the importance of being a Black professor as  students are not accustomed to seeing us on these campuses. I deliberately  promote critical thinking and often pose how and why questions for  students to understand the origins of and rationale for their perspectives.  This is similar to when Mrs. Simmons made me understand what I was singing about when learning music. Mrs. Simmons was a storyteller who told 

Arcelia Simmons Legacy and Music Education    101 stories about her HBCU experiences and choir memories. She instilled in  me and my peers a sense of pride about being Black and introduced us to  some of the sociocultural realities that Black people face. Similarly, I convey  stories that connect students to course content, make broader connections  to societal systemic issues, and deliberately incorporate Black authors and  guest speakers in my courses. Challenging Students and Offering Support in the  Learning Process In graduate school, I remember learning about Nevitt Sanfords 1968  theory of challenge and support. Sanford indicated that for student development to occur, the environment must balance the challenge and support  offered to students. The optimal goal is to give students an appropriate  amount of challenge and provide adequate support. I learned this concept  from Mrs. Simmons tough love approach way before I learned Sanfords  theory. She had high expectations but gave us the tools to meet them. I operate from the same paradigm. My teaching philosophy is reflective of my  commitment to social justice and change that can transpire through education and co-constructed learning environments. I strive to establish a learning environment that is supportive and promotes risk-taking by students. I  do not accept mediocrity. I set high expectations while providing students  tools to meet them in the learning process. Creating a Fun and Positive Learning Environment Mrs. Simmons created a learning environment that was fun and positive,  and I recount her showing aspects of her personality that were engaging  and funny. We laughed often. Whether hitting wrong notes or telling stories that prompted laughter, I remember getting so much out of her classes.  I knew that she cared about me as a person beyond my ability to sing or  read music. I strive to do the same with my students and bring aspects of  myself into the classroom setting to foster a co-constructed fun learning  environment. We share and celebrate accomplishments with one another  to create a supportive environment. I rely on popular culture and use music  to emphasize course content. Further, I design activities where students can  be creative and bring their culture and positionalities into the assignments.  Lastly, you will often find me being in tune with what my students are feeling while in class because it is difficult to teach when they are not mentally present. Mrs. Simmons checked in on me and I regularly do check-ins  with my students before or after class. Inspired by the life and legacy of 
B. L. McGOWAN Mrs. Simmons, a culturally responsive music teacher, recommendations for  teacher educators are presented below. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRACTICE Magic Space: Integrating the Contributions   of Black People Into the Curriculum Mrs. Simmons transformed her classroom into a magical space where  students saw individuals Black composers who resembled them in the curriculum. The integration of the contributions of Blacks in the P16 curriculum has been a topic of interest across all content areas. Extant literature  has documented how the inclusion of Blacks into the curriculum positively  impacts the preparation of pre-service teachers to teach and support ethnically diverse students Atwater, Freeman, Butler,  Draper-Morris, 2010;  Butler, 2014. Research has also suggested that the exclusion of the experiences of minoritized populations in the curriculum render their experiences as not valued, promotes White inferiority, and fosters prejudice in  classrooms Souto-Manning, Llerena, Martell, Maguire,  Arce-Boardman,  2018. Mrs. Simmons supplemented her music curriculum by including  Black composers in her lessons. Teachers need to first be cognizant that  curriculum may be culturally irrelevant before actively finding ways to  transform their curriculum so that students from majority and minoritized populations have an accurate understanding of the contributions of  all populations in their disciplines. Teacher educators should supplement  their curriculum with perspectives of individuals who have been omitted  from the mainstream literature. Furthermore, professional development  for in-service teachers ISTs must include workshops that can support ISTs  in helping students make better cultural connections between their positionalities and the curriculum. Fostering Excellence: Holding High Expectations  Creates Educational Opportunities Mrs. Simmons had both high expectations and a high regard for her students. Her high expectations created a space that was void of excuses and  fostered excellence. She challenged students and offered adequate support  to help them accomplish their goals. Her high expectations also encompassed exposing students to experiences and providing them opportunities  i.e., White House performance, which allowed them to be academically  successful. Exposing students from marginalized populations to multiple 

Arcelia Simmons Legacy and Music Education    103 in-school and out of school experiences has been linked to increasing  students pursuit of career aspirations and matriculation in post-secondary  environments Russell  Atwater, 2005; Watkins, 2016. Teachers that hold  high expectations of their students create positive atmospheres for them to  succeed. Subsequently, students internalize these feelings and believe they  are capable and act accordingly. Teachers need to recognize that their views  of students can negatively or positively impact their students academic success and must constantly engage in self-reflection to ensure they are always  holding high expectations of their students. Teacher education programs  must introduce teacher candidates to theoretical frameworks that provide  pre-service teachers PSTs the necessary lenses to better navigate their  classroom spaces and support their students growth. In addition, including  theoretical perspectives like Sanfords 1968 theory of challenge and support in training for both PSTs and ISTs can be helpful as they create their  lesson plans, assessments, and classroom spaces to support all students. Representation Matters: Impact of Black Teachers   on Black Students Ladson-Billings 2009 highlights the importance of Black students having Black teachers in their educational journey. Highly trained Black teachers are critical to the academic achievement of students in classroom spaces  and beyond. Mrs. Simmons was a caring teacher who deemed teaching confidence as essential to unlocking a students potential. Caring has also been  found to be a trait of Black teachers that positively resonates with Black  students Geelan, Mensah, Rahm,  Maulucci, 2010. Mrs. Simmons was a  source of support for me in high school and an exemplar of a Black, caring  teacher who positively influenced my teaching practice as a college professor. Simply put, the representation of Black teachers matters. Teacher  educators and school district leaders need to recognize the importance of  preparing highly qualified Black teachers to support the academic success  of Black students and actively commit to increasing the recruitment and  retention of Black teachers. CONCLUSION My aim in this chapter was to highlight Mrs. Simmons, a powerful Black  music teacher, and the ways she inspired and empowered me as a student  at HHS in Newport News, Virginia. Mrs. Simmons is a culturally responsive  teacher who created a magic space that positively contributed to the success of students in her music program. More broadly this chapter provides 
B. L. McGOWAN insights into the profile of a culturally responsive teacher and serves as a  guide for teacher educators to support the preparation and development  of numerous Mrs. Simmons across all disciplines. Doing so will allow students from diverse and disadvantaged backgrounds opportunities to excel,  dream, and achieve success in the classroom and beyond. REFERENCES Atwater, M. M., Freeman, T. B., Butler, M. B.,  Draper-Morris, J. 2010. A case  study of science teacher candidates understandings and actions related to  the culturally responsive teaching of Other students. International Journal of  Environmental  Science Education, 53, 287318. Butler, M. 2014. Second-class citizens, first-class scientists: Using sociocultural  perspectives to highlight the successes and challenges of African American  scientists during the Jim Crow Era. In M. M. Atwater, M. L. Russell,  M. B.  Butler Eds., Multicultural science education: Preparing teachers for equity and  social justice pp. 2940. New York, NY: Springer. Gay, G. 2002. Preparing for culturally responsive teaching. Journal of Teacher Education, 532, 106116. Gay, G. 2018. Culturally responsive teaching: Theory, research, and practice 3rd ed.  New York, NY: Teachers College Press. Geelan, D., Mensah, F. M., Rahm, J.,  Maulucci, M. R. 2010. Roles, caring and  learning to teach science. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 53, 649663. Ladson-Billings, G. 2009. The dreamkeepers: Successful teachers of African American  children 2nd ed. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Russell, M.,  Atwater, M. 2005. Traveling the road to success: A discourse on  persistence throughout the science pipeline with African American students  at a predominantly White institution. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,  426, 691715. Sanford, N. 1968. Where colleges fail: A study of the student as a person. San Francisco,  CA: Jossey-Bass. Souto-Manning, M., Llerena, C., Martell, J., Maguire, A.,  Arce-Boardman, A.  2018. No more culturally irrelevant teaching Not this but that. Portsmouth, NH:  Heinemann. Watkins, S. E. 2016. African American male PhD scientists and engineers: Perceptions  of factors that impact their persistence in STEM through a lens of critical race theory  Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Delaware, Newark, DE.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 105116 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 105 CHAPTER 11 MENTOR TEACHERS IMPACT  ON EDUCATOR IDENTITY  AND RACIAL LITERACY  DEVELOPMENT Yolanda Sealey-Ruiz and Lum Fube Mentorship has long been a means by which individuals aspiring toward  a particular goal, whether professional or personal, could obtain counsel  from a person who previously achieved that milestone. Though there is  no exact consensus on the definition of mentoring because it is frequently conflated with advising, numerous scholars have described the roles of  mentors and benefits to mentees or protges Darwin, 2000; Griffin, 2012;  Hansman, 2001, namely providing career and psychosocial support as one  works towards a goal. Though traditional mentoring relationships within  higher education may lead to desirable outcomes for students, mentors receive little to no reward for their service. Acknowledging that mentoring  is a cultural activity, mentoring models developed to support Black female  doctoral students and facultywhat Darwin 2000 situated within the radically humanistic perspectiveare mutually beneficial and operate within 
Y. SEALEY-RUIZ and L. FUBE a framework of collective achievement. This approach differs dramatically  from a mantra of survival of the fittest that exists within traditional mentoring models. Instead, this approach reflects what Molm as cited in Griffin,  2012 identified as generalized exchange and mutual dependence relationships. Similarly, mutual dependence relationships are marked by indirect  reciprocity but with a goal of collective success attached to a social justice  agenda. Though not directly benefiting from these types of mentoring relationships, some faculty express feelings of satisfaction knowing that they  have contributed to developing the next generation of scholars committed  to social justice issues and culturally responsive research Griffin, 2012; Pallas, 2001; Tillman, 2001. In this essay, Yolanda a tenured associate professor at an R1 university  and Lum a doctoral student at the same R1 university reflect on the  mentoring they received during their educational journeys. They recognize how the mentoring they receivedYolanda, from a Black woman,  and Lum from a Black malehelped them break through silence, awaken their social consciousness, and discover that their position as Black  women in academic institutions required a particular type of mentoring  to help them understand and navigate their experiences, develop their  research voice and agenda, and ultimately remain on the path of their  academic trajectory. As Lums story reveals, it is possible for Black women to navigate academic settings successfully within a cross-racial mentoring relationship Griffin, 2012; Tillman, 2001. Work by Jackson, Sealey-Ruiz, and Watson 2014  show the strengths of mentoring youth across gender through an ethos of  care and reciprocal love. Yolandas story affirms that Black female dyads are  particularly successful because of the mentors ability to understand and  relate to the ways in which the intersection of race and gender influences  their experiences in academia Collins, 2000; Grant, 2012; Hu, Thomas,   Lance, 2008. A study conducted by Johnson-Bailey, Lasker-Scott, and Sealey-Ruiz 2015 showed that mentoring relationships developed between  Black women revealed particular ways in which they read their experiences.  In what they call the gendered literacies of mentoring, their study revealed that  a Black womans social position in American society forces them to experience life, and thus their life experiences in predominantly White institutions, in ways that are vastly different from other women. Their study  showed that within the culture of individualism and publish-or-perish  reflected in academe, mentoring relationships grounded in Black Feminist  Thought Collins, 2000 supports the collective ideas of achievement that  Black female faculty desire and require to succeed.

Mentor Teachers Impact on Educator Identity and Racial Literacy Development    107 LUMS STORY The ever-present reality of abiding in multiple cultural spaces as an undergraduate student sent me running toward a sense of trying to understand  where I belonged. This quest started during my senior year of high school.  I ran for and was elected student council president. When the gavel was  handed to me during the inaugural ceremony, the teacher announced I  was the first African American to become president in the history of the  school. In my head, I corrected him. I was the first African to become student council president. I often made this correction in my head. One of our student council projects involved collecting books and donating them to the local library. We successfully organized and collected books  for the book drive. Another student council member and I were tasked  with delivering the books to the local library down the street. He loaded  most of the books in his car and the remaining books in my car. I arrived at  the library first and told the attendant at the help desk I was from our local high school to deliver books from our book drive. She told me to drive  around to the loading area and another attendant would help me unload  the books. I drove around to the other side of the library and waited for the  attendant. As I saw the doors begin to open, I climbed out of my vehicle and  walked towards the woman to introduce myself. The startled, surprised, and  confused look on her face caused me to slow down and approach her with  bewilderment. As I came closer, she frowned and crossed her arms. I introduced myself and said I was the student council president who was dropping off the donations from our book drive. Her arms remained folded and  she looked me up and down. She stood there in silence. A few moments later, my classmate, a White male student, pulled up in  his pick-up truck and walked over to my car. He looked at my face and saw  the confusion in my eyes. Opening the door to the backseat of my car, he  stacked some books in his arms and walked over to the entrance. He introduced himself to the attendant, in an almost verbatim greeting. This time,  she smiled and exclaimed, Of course! and directed him where to put  the books. I stood there in shock as he continued to unload the remaining  books in my car. Awakening Consciousness The awakening of consciousness around racial literacy Guinier, 2004;  Sealey-Ruiz, 2011; Singleton, 2014; Twine, 2003 was a slow and gradual  process for me. The vignette I shared above was the beginning of this awakening, but my understanding of what had unfolded would take years to  unpack. My track coach in high school, Mr. Gholston, would be an integral 
Y. SEALEY-RUIZ and L. FUBE part of my awakening, but I would not come to appreciate the lessons he  taught me until many years later. Attending a predominantly White high  school often meant Black students and their experiences existed on the  margins Archer-Banks  Behar-Horenstein, 2011; Ispa-Landa  Conwell,  2015; Murphy  Zirkel, 2015; Posey-Maddox, 2017. Mr. Gholston made it  a point to educate us on the Black excellence we were being deprived of  in our schools. He organized enrichment field trips and programs for the  Black students. He especially went out of his way to advocate for Black students when it came to disciplinary matters. Although Mr. Gholston extended himself to provide alternative narratives and histories of Black people, I often felt I could not relate to many  of them because they were very much situated in the U.S. context. The  histories and narratives I was familiar with were situated back home. I longed  to read stories by African authors, and during my undergraduate studies,  I nourished this hunger. My fixation with African literature and narratives  would bring me full circle to understanding African American history. I  started studying the transatlantic slave trade and moved on to reading slave  narratives and the narratives of Native Americans. If I had been born in a  different place and time, I could have been one of the women sold into  slavery. This perspective radically transformed how I read and interacted  with slave narratives. I could have been Celia, the Slave. I visualized myself as  Dona in Kindred and felt the whips on my body. I cried. At this precise moment, I remembered the silence and the look of disgust the woman gave me  at the entrance of the library loading dock, and for the first time, I understood what had transpired. I was being treated as I was because I am Black. A few years after graduating college, I visited Mr. Gholston and unearthed memories from my high school days. He asked me if I remembered the time I told him someone in my family said Black Americans are  lazy. I looked at him with pure embarrassment and shock. He laughed and  said I was young at the time and recently immigrated. He understood that  was something my family and people told me, and he also remembered  schooling with Africans and hearing similar things. I also shared many ignorant and hurtful comments I heard about Africans from other African  Americans. In that moment, sitting and drinking coffee with Mr. Gholston,  I realized the lessons he had tried to teach me through many field trips  and enrichment programs. First, contrary to the colorblind approach taken  by my predominantly White high school, racism existed and would be imposed on me, whether I identified as African or African Americanand  regardless of how many times I corrected them in my head. Second, Mr.  Gholston was pushing me to question the assumptions I was taught about  Black Americans by exposing me to what I had come to see as Black excellence and Black girl magic.

Mentor Teachers Impact on Educator Identity and Racial Literacy Development    109 What I appreciated most about Mr. Gholston was his pedagogy of love.  He did not get upset or berate me if I said an ignorant comment. He set out  to teach me something different and allowed me to counter the narratives  I had been taught, thus beginning the journey of challenging my assumptions and undoing my internalized racism. YOLANDAS STORY Mahatma Gandhi once said, In a gentle way you can shape the world. I  have always viewed the mentoring I received from Dr. Suzanne Carothers,  my first and only Black female professor during my doctoral studies at New  York University NYU, as her gentle way of helping to shape the world.  Even now, 15 years after completing my doctoral degree, I remain grateful for the mentorship I received from Suzanne. Suzanne saw her mentoring as a serviceto her doctoral students and to the world. It was her way  of leaving the world of academia a better place than how she found it,  through the students she guided along their educational journeys. I have so  many memories of the way Suzanne mentored my Black female colleagues  and me while we were in graduate school at NYU, but one particular event  stands out in my memoryone that shifted the way I saw myself as a doctoral student and deeply impacted my trajectory as a scholar. I distinctly remember the day. It was at the beginning of the spring semester during the second year of my doctoral program at NYU. I remember that the class had been a particularly tense one that day. My two best  friends Carmen Kynard and Avon Connell and I were taking the doctoral  seminar with Suzanne and four other professors. During class, there had  been a heated debate about the intersection of race and class and how it  perniciously played out in most urban public schools across the country for  Black and Brown children. New to the concept of debate using the research  I read in my classes, I just became angry and outwardly upset about what I  felt were uninformed comments made by the White students. They seemed  to speak with so much assurance about Black and Brown communities that  they had never lived in or visited. In my anger, I lashed out in class. Carmen,  who had much more experience in responding to these types of comments  in an academic way, jumped into the conversation and began citing scholars to help the students clearly see their racist remarks. Avon just rolled her  eyes in disgust and shut down from the conversation. When the seminar was over, Suzanne made eye contact with the three of  us from across the room. We were huddled in the back of the room talking  about what had just happened in class. She wanted us to join her in her office. We left the classroom and followed her down the hall.
Y. SEALEY-RUIZ and L. FUBE We entered her office, one behind the other, like ducklings following  their mother duck across a pond. I sat across from Suzanne in a black chair  that swiveled from side to side. I was nervous and moved side to side in the  chair as I thought about how I had let my impulsive nature get the best of  me and showed my hand in class. Carmen and Avon sat still in the stationary chairs also across from Suzanne. All eyes were on Suzanne. She leaned  forward, looked at the three of us, smiled, and asked, So how do you think  that went? We were silent, until I impulsively jumped in. What do you  mean? I asked. You mean the class? She nodded. It was clear she was referring to how I became angry, Carmen stood passionately and firmly in her refusal to have racist comments  made in our presence, and Avon shut down. Suzanne asked another question: What do you think could have been done differently? Again, out of  my nervousness, I jumped at the opportunity to answer her question. Maybe I didnt have to get so angry. Yeah, I guess I could have reacted  differently. Suzanne smiled at us. There we were, the only three Black women in  our cohort, and our Black female professor. Suzanne was one of two Black  women professors in our entire academic department. As the only three  Black females in our cohort, Carmen, Avon, and I had become accustomed  to hearing our White peers make racist, erroneous, and hurtful statements  about children who looked like us, lived in communities similar to ours, or  reflected the lives of the students we taught every day. Suzanne, who was my  first and only Black female professor, wanted to help each of us understand  the context we were in, the nature of the academy, and why it was important to understand it was not our job to protest every racist statement that  came out of the mouths of our White classmates. That day she reminded  us that we had the right to engage in the doctoral process as students, and  not just as defenders of our race. She helped us to remember that we were  admitted to NYU because we were smart and belonged there, and that we  did not have to prove anything to our White peers or anyone else about our  shared communities. We deserved to experience the doctoral journey just  as they didwe had that privilege and we should use it. I remember leaving her office feeling both relieved and enlightened. I often felt that way  whenever I left a mentoring session with Suzanne. Her mentoring that day  changed the way I interacted with my White peers in the program moving  forward. It also led me to take a specific interest in how to facilitate constructive conversations about race and racism in the classroom. In a very  significant way, Suzanne led me to my path of becoming a scholar of racial  literacy. Suzanne was the only Black woman teacher I ever hadfrom elementary  school throughout my college experience. I had been taught by a few Black  male teachers along my academic journey, but never a Black woman. Having 

Mentor Teachers Impact on Educator Identity and Racial Literacy Development    111 now acquired academic language for my experiences, I know that I would  have suffered even more severely from racial battle fatigue Smith, 2004 in  my doctoral program and later in my journey to tenure had it not been  for Suzannes mentoring of me. Now that I am a tenured faculty member  at a predominantly White institution, very similar to my alma mater, I have  become that same teacher to my students of color that Suzanne Carothers  was to me. Suzanne remains a significant presence in my life, and up until  my tenure at Teachers College a few years ago, I relied on her sage advice  for navigating a space where I often felt marginalized. Throughout my tenure journey, I often recall that day at NYU as well as other incidents where  I learned from Suzannes wisdomwisdom that led me to focusing my current research agenda on race. Why I Study Race Specifically, I study the impact of race and racism on the lives of students  and teachers. I write about my findings through the lens of racial literacy  development. I began to study race to help me understand my experience  as a Black woman in racist America, and specifically how it affects Black  and Brown people in schools. The concept of race is deeply rooted in our  lives and articulated through our legal system and schools; it affects how we  think, speak, and perform culture. Ruth Frankenberg 1993 noted that  race, like gender, is real in that it has real, tangible, and complex impact  on individuals sense of self, experiences, and life chances. Developing the  racial literacy of educators is critical to helping them succeed in school and  read the racialized world in which they live. If educators are able to engage  in these critical conversations, then they are better equipped to resist the  accepted racist practices that their students of color endure in their school  settings and in society. If my racial literacy had begun to develop while I was  a student at NYU, perhaps I would have responded differently that day in  the doctoral seminar. If my teacher education program had been focused  on developing the racial literacy of its students and faculty, perhaps the  conversations involving race in my seminars and other courses would have  been more constructive and productive. Racial literacy in teacher education, for example, can go against the ways  that colleges and universities perpetuate the status quo of White supremacy  through curriculum that normalizes Whiteness and discourages open and  critical conversation about race Churchill, 1995; Schick, 2002. Racial literacy in teacher education calls for self-reflection and moral, political, and  cultural decisions about how teachers can be catalysts for societal change first by learning about systems of injustice and then explicitly teaching their  students what they have learned through the use of dialogue, critical texts, 
Y. SEALEY-RUIZ and L. FUBE journalingall means of helping to develop their critical thinking and conversation skills around the topics of racism, discrimination, and prejudice.  Last, racial literacy asks that teachers take action against injustice in their  school settings once they recognize it. Three tenets guide the individuals  journey into becoming racially literate: question assumptions, engage in  critical conversations, and practice reflexivity. In education writ large, and  teacher education specifically, there is limited theorizing around racial literacy development Johnson, 2009; Rogers  Mosley, 2006; Skerrett, 2011.  Studying racial literacy not only helps me understand the power of my mentoring experience with Suzanne, but also helps to shape the way I mentor  my students today. My co-author and I recognize how our mentoring relationships led us to see our experiences with Mr. Gholston and Suzanne  Carothers as a way to develop our own racial literacy. This has been a lasting  strength of our mentoring relationships, and in my case has specifically led  me to become a scholar of racial literacy. In the next few paragraphs of this  essay, we briefly discuss aspects of racial literacy as a way to illuminate the  growth we experienced about our own understanding of race during our  mentoring relationships. DEVELOPING RACIAL LITERACY Racial literacy is a concept developed by sociologist and feminist researcher France Winndance Twine 2003. Twines research in the United Kingdom with English and Irish women who were members of interracial families parents of children fathered by Black men revealed a form of racial  socialization in which these parents engaged to protect and defend their  children against racism. Racism is a structural phenomenon that determines ones status and opportunity in society based on skin color and the  ascribed racial category to which they belong. Racism is the belief that one  race is superior over another. In the case of American racism, this belief  is supported by the legal system and practiced through acts of discrimination against as well as prejudice and antagonism toward other races. It is  codified through societal and cultural practices. Twine 2003 advanced  the notion that racial literacy is enacted through strategies and practices  that are linked to culture and heritage. This approach requires that one  must respond to acts of racial injustice in action and words with action  and words in order to counter racism. What Twine found significant in her  research on countering racism for African-descendant children was the  use of aesthetic and material resources that promote the intelligence, creativity, and significance of the culture of Black people across the Diaspora,  including in the United States.

Mentor Teachers Impact on Educator Identity and Racial Literacy Development    113 Racial literacy is a skill and practice in which individuals are able to  probe the existence of racism and examine the effects of race and institutionalized systems on their experiences and representation in U.S. society Rogers  Mosley, 2006; Sealey-Ruiz, 2011; Skerrett, 2011. A desired  outcome of racial literacy in an outwardly racist society like America is for  members of the dominant racial category to adopt an antiracist stance and  for persons of color to resist a victim stance. Racially literate students reflect  on their experiences with race and are reflexive about their attitudes and  beliefs. They read texts that are meant to elucidate their understanding of  race and racism and equip them with language to talk about these two concepts. The ever-increasing diversity of our classrooms and our world makes  a strong case for racial literacy education. The concept of racial literacy is  informed by scholarship that recognizes race as a signifier that is discursively constructed through language Hall, 1997; fluid, unstable, and socially  constructed Omi  Winant, 1986 rather than static; and not rooted in  biology, but as Frankenberg 1996 wrote, having real effects in the lives  of individuals. RACIAL LITERACY AND MENTORING IN TEACHER  EDUCATION PROGRAMS As witnessed in both our stories, teachers have varied and storied lives,  which influences their understanding of their context and surroundings.  We encourage preservice and in-service teacher preparation programs or  institutions to create spaces for ongoing interrogation of the self in relation  to the institutions and communities of which we find ourselves a part. This  interrogation involves learning and understanding the historical, sociopolitical, and cultural contexts, as well as our social positions and systems of  power and oppression that come with our ascribed social positions. Being  aware of the many selves that live within us awakens a critical consciousness  and awareness of our intersecting identities and the ways we see ourselves as  the oppressed and oppressors. Racist teacher assumptions that remain unchallenged can have harmful implications for the communities the teacher  serves because the teacher may continue to view the community unconsciously from a deficit lens. The tenets of racial literacy highlight how we  were mentored by Mr. Gholston and Suzanne Carothers, and offer implications for ways teacher education programs can engage their students and  faculty toward a more open environment for conversations on race, racism,  and education. The teaching and practice of questioning assumptions, engaging in critical conversations, and practicing reflexivity can serve as a  practical approach for mentoring as well as helping to develop the racial  literacy of students and faculty in the academy.
Y. SEALEY-RUIZ and L. FUBE Fundamental to racial literacy development is for individuals to question their assumptions about race, acknowledge their biases, and take the  stance that much of what they assume to know about race is faulty and  incomplete. In questioning assumptions about race, individuals can actively  resist and interrupt the racist and discriminatory practices, policies, and  beliefs they encounter in their teaching sites. Engaging in critical conversations is an integral component of racial literacy development. Individuals  must be encouraged to, and eventually develop, the confidence to discuss  their hesitancies and concerns about teaching in racially diverse settings.  The intent of these critical conversations is to focus on language and how  biases and racist attitudes are articulated, sometimes in an unconscious or  dysconscious manner. Critical conversations are outlets to question assumptions that individuals hold about race actively and openly. Reflexivity in  racial literacy development is a cyclical process of reexamining perceptions, beliefs, and actions relating to race. It is a crucial step in racial literacy  development. This promotes the idea of deconstructing and rebuilding  a base for new perceptions founded on open-mindedness and a more informed understanding of how race operates in academic spaces. REFERENCES Archer-Banks, D. A. M.,  Behar-Horenstein, L. S. 2011. Ogbu revisited: Unpacking high-achieving African American girls high school experiences. Urban  Education, 471, 198223. Churchill, W. Ed. 1995. White studies: The intellectual imperialism of U.S.  higher education. In Since predator came: Notes from the struggle for American  Indian liberation pp. 4564. Littleton, CO: AIGIS. Collins, P. H. 2000. Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness and the politics of  empowerment. London, England: Routledge. Darwin, A. 2000. Critical reflections on mentoring in work settings. Adult Education Quarterly, 503, 197211. https:doi.org10.117707417130022087008 Frankenberg, R. 1993. White women, race matters: The social construction of Whiteness.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Grant, C. M. 2012. Advancing our legacy: A black feminist perspective on the  significance of mentoring for African-American women in educational leadership. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 251, 101117.  https:doi.org10.108009518398.2011.647719 Griffin, K. A. 2012. Black professors managing mentorship: Implications of applying social exchange frameworks to analyses of student interactions and their  influence on scholarly productivity. Teachers College Record, 1145, 137. Guinier, L. 2004. From racial liberalism to racial literacy: Brown v. Board of Education and the interest-divergence dilemma. Journal of American History, 911,  92118.

Mentor Teachers Impact on Educator Identity and Racial Literacy Development    115 Hall, S. 1997. Race, the floating signifier. Northampton, MA: Media Education Foundation. Retrieved from http:www.mediaed.orgcgi-bincommerce.cgi?  preaddactionkey Hansman, C. C. 2001. Who plans? Who participates? Critically examining mentoring programs. In Proceedings of the 42nd annual adult education research conference pp. 161166. East Lansing: Michigan State University. Hu, C., Thomas, K.,  Lance, C. 2008. Intentions to initiate mentoring relationships: Understanding the impact of race, proactivity, feelings of deprivation,  and relationship roles. The Journal of Social Psychology, 1482, 727744. Ispa-Landa, S.,  Conwell, J. 2015. Once you go to a White school, you kind of  adapt: Black adolescents and the racial classification of schools. Sociology of  Education, 881, 119. Jackson, I., Sealey-Ruiz, Y.,  Watson, W. 2014. Reciprocal love: Mentoring Black  and Latino males through an ethos of care. Urban Education, 494, 394417. Johnson, M. T. 2009. Raceing around in rhetoric and composition circles: Racial literacy as the way out Unpublished doctoral dissertation. The University of  North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC. Johnson-Bailey, J., Lasker-Scott, T.,  Sealey-Ruiz, Y. 2015. Mentoring while Black  and female: The gendered literacy phenomenon of Black women mentors. Manhattan:  Kansas State University Press. Murphy, M. C.,  Zirkel, S. 2015. Race and belonging in school: How anticipated  and experienced belonging affect choice, persistence, and performance.  Teachers College Record, 11712, 140. Omi, M.,  Winant, H. 1986. Racial formation in the United States: From the 1960s to  the 1980s. New York, NY: Routledge. Pallas, A. M. 2001. Preparing education doctoral students for epistemological diversity. Educational Researcher, 305, 611. https:doi.org10.3102  0013189x030005006 Posey-Maddox, L. 2017. Race in place: Black parents, familyschool relations, and  multispatial microaggressions in a predominantly White suburb. Teachers College Record, 1191, 142. Rogers, R.,  Mosley, M. 2006. Racial literacy in a second-grade classroom: Critical  race theory, whiteness studies, and literacy research. Reading Research Quarterly, 414, 462495. Schick, C. 2002. Keeping the ivory tower white: Discourses of racial domination.  In S. H. Razack Ed., Race, space, and the law: Unmapping a White settler society  pp. 99119. Toronto, Canada: Between the Lines. Sealey-Ruiz, Y. 2011. Learning to write and talk about race: Developing racial literacy in a college English classroom. English Quarterly: Journal of the Canadian  Council of Teachers of English Language Arts, 421, 2442. Singleton, G. 2015. Courageous conversations about race: A field guide for achieving  equity in schools. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. Skerrett, A. 2011. English teachers racial literacy knowledge and practice. Race,  Ethnicity and Education, 1443, 313330. Smith, W. A. 2004. Black faculty coping with racial battle fatigue: The campus  racial climate in a post-Civil Rights Era. In D. Cleveland Ed., A long way 
Y. SEALEY-RUIZ and L. FUBE to go: Conversations about race by African American faculty and graduate students  pp. 171190. New York, NY: Peter Lang. Tillman, L. C. 2001. Mentoring African American faculty in predominantly white  institutions. Research in Higher Education, 423, 295325. Twine, F. W. 2003. Racial literacy in Britain: Antiracist projects, Black children and  White parents. Contours: A Journal of the African Diaspora, 1, 129153.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 117126 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 117 CHAPTER 12 A RETROSPECTIVE  NARRATIVE ON EFFECTIVE  TEACHING AFTER MOVING  FROM SEGREGATED TO  INTEGRATED SCHOOLS Implications for Policy and Practice   on Effective Teaching Zollie Stevenson, Jr. Narrative inquiry and autoethnography in research are being utilized as a  research strategy to collect more authentic research on different cultures  particularly in education settings Trahar, 2009. A premise of narrative  inquiry is that human beings find meaning in their lives through the stories  that they tell Andrews, Squire,  Tambokou, 2008. Related to the qualitative research approaches of interpretive hermeneutics and phenomenology, narrative inquiry is the form of research that uses written, oral, and  visual narratives that focus on the meaning people give to their experiences 
Z. STEVENSON, Jr. which can then be used to understand the complex interactions of our  lives. Riessman and Speedy 2007 offered the following definition for the  term narrative: The term narrative carries many meanings and is used in a variety of ways by  different disciplines, often synonymously with story . . . the narrative pays  analytic attention to how the facts got assembled that way. For whom was  the story constructed, how was it made and for what purpose? What cultural discourse does is draw on-take for granted? What does it accomplish?  pp. 428429 Personal scholarly narratives aid in the exploration and understanding of  knowledge from the past and not necessarily knowledge about the past from  those who share their stories Bochner, 2007. My retrospective story focuses on elementary and secondary school  teachers whom I perceived as effective has enabled me to reflect on my  educational experiences and the efforts and strategies that I believe were  effective in enabling me to engage with my teachers and to learn, as well  as to develop an enthusiasm for the activities that promote learning. My  elementary school experience began in racially segregated schools in rural Guilford County, North Carolina where I was taught by Black teachers  exclusively. Rena Bullock School, located in southeastern Guilford County,  contained Grades 19 during my enrollment and I attended Grades 13  there Buchanan, 2001. When my parents separated, my siblings and I  moved with our mother first to Greensboro, where I attended Mt. Zion  Elementary School, and later to a Rosenwald school, Brown Summit, in  northeastern Guilford County Brown Summit, n.d. All my teachers during those years were African American and mostly  female. The only male teacher that I had during Grades 18 was while in  7th and 8th grades at Brown Summit, Mr. Melvin Charles Smith. Mr. Smith  provided structure and discipline in class. He was a no-nonsense teacher  who engaged us with his sense of humor as well as his teaching. He was  always well dressed and often connected with us by sharing stories of his  own children and their schooling and home experiences. He was known  for using a ruler to discipline students when they were off task or unruly.  He was a gifted trumpet player, becoming a well-known jazz musician in  the community. Having a masters degree from NC AT State, as his family  grew, he left Brown Summit to become the first African American Chief  Federal Probation officer in the state of North Carolina. For a young Black  male who lived in a household with his mother and who would only see his  own college educated father every other weekend, Mr. Smith engaged me  in learning but also served as a positive model of an educated, talented,  and stable Black man during a time of upheaval in my young life WellsWilbon  Holland, 2001.

Effective Teaching After Moving From Segregated to Integrated Schools    119 I also received nurturance and reinforcement of my strong oral reading  skills and reading comprehension from my third-grade teacher Mrs. Verta  Mae Allen at Rena Bullock and my sixth-grade teacher Mrs. Louise Faucette  at Brown Summit Finnian, 2009. Mrs. Allen allowed me to assist with classroom chores and gave me a sense of responsibility and she always permitted  me to be one of the readers during oral reading time. She was warm and  grandmotherly and loved to have students read aloud in class. Mrs. Faucette  was a wonderful formal lady and great teacher who used a lot of music and  films to enhance learning and engage students. I was one of two students  in her class who was permitted to operate the Chapter 1 later Title I film  projector to show the various historical and science films that the school  purchased using federal funds. Fat and clumsy as I was then in my hand-medown clothes, I also was selected by Mrs. Faucette for speaking roles when  our class was responsible for hosting one of the school assemblies and for  special programs. Even after leaving Brown Summit, I kept in touch with  Mrs. Faucette through my high school years and would be invited for cookies and iced tea at her home in Greensboro. In 1967, the school districts in Guilford County began to implement  desegregation plans as a result of the Brown v. Board of Education 1954  Supreme Court decision. It took 13 years for school districts in North Carolina to take steps to comply with the courts binding ruling. To prepare  for the transition from segregated to integrated schools, Grades 912 were  removed from Brown Summit and students in those grades had to transition to formerly all White Northeast Guilford High School. As my class was  promoted from seventh to eighth grade, Brown Summit instituted a new  instructional model where we changed classes for the first time among four  teachers. We were being prepared to enroll at the new Northeast Junior  High School which was going to receive ninth graders from formerly predominantly White and predominantly Black elementary and reconfigured  schools in northeastern Guilford County. While the changes were being made in the schools, crosses were being  burned in the yards of Black students in our neighborhood who had chosen  to attend the predominantly White Northeast High School before the high  school grades at Brown Summit were eliminated. Gunshots were also being  fired at the homes of Black students who chose to integrate Northeast High  School. So, there was fear among Black students and their families as the  transition plans moved forward. Our eighth-grade teachers, Mrs. Lillie Alston mathematics, Mr. Smith  who moved with us from seventh to eighth and taught social studies, and  teachers such as Mrs. Faucette, worked with the students to allay our fears  and to teach us some of the strategies such as using our educated words  instead of curse words and fists if we encountered any negative interactions  when we moved to the newly integrated junior high school.
Z. STEVENSON, Jr. When the time arrived for us to move to Northeast Junior High as 9th  graders, we rode on segregated buses to the school looking very different  and with an air of nervousness. We did not know what to really expect in  terms of interactions and even if we would be smart enough to compete  with the White students at the school. I remember that I put extra Royal  Crown in my hair and wore a stocking cap to change the look and texture  of my hair. Others conked their hair and the girls mostly wore pressed hair  starting off. We wore our new and best clothes and wanted to appear equal  to the White students that we would meet in classes. Most of the faculty were  White, but we felt fortunate to have Mrs. Alston, the mathematics teacher  from Brown Summit on faculty at Northeast. The librarian from Brown  Summit also landed a position as librarian at the junior high school. They  were the only familiar faculty and staff persons. The faculty was overwhelmingly White. Busing was the means for moving us from our homes to Brown  Summit and from Brown Summit to Northeast which was another 30 minutes further than the busses that took us to Brown Summit which added to  the length of the day. We were received in class at Northeast without any drama by most of  the faculty, though I noticed that occasionally the raised hands of Black  students to respond to questions asked by White teachers in some classes  were ignored on a regular basis. Civics was my strongest class and I remember that I often knew more than most of the students in the class, but I was  overlooked when I raised my hand and if a White student did not answer  correctly a question that I knew the answer to, rather than call on me, the  teacher would provide the correct answer. I remember being reprimanded  by the teacher when, frustrated, I blurted out the correct answer to questions when none of the other students responded to her questions. There  were clearly favorites in most of my classes and none were Black. We made  it through the year with a few fist fights and protests because of the selection of all White cheerleader squads for sports teams that were composed  mostly of Black males. There were no sports teams for females in junior  high school. Children notice these things. Towards the end of my ninth grade year, my parents reconciled. They  bought a house in Greensboro, and so for my 10th grade year, we moved  from the country to the city, and I attended Walter Hines Page High School  in Greensboro. Page and Grimsley High Schools were the preeminent  predominantly White high schools in the city at that time. The school attendance area for my working-class neighborhood in northeast Greensboro was rezoned along with Black middle and upper class Benbow Park  neighborhood from southeast Greensboro to increase the Black presence  at Page High School. This was the period when freedom of choice was  also a part of the integration process used to determine where students attended school. Page had tracks and I was placed in college prep courses. 

Effective Teaching After Moving From Segregated to Integrated Schools    121 Mrs. Lillie Alston moved from Northeast Junior High to Page High School  and I was fortunate to have her for Algebra I after a poor start with a White  teacher who mostly socialized with the White students in class and ignored  the Black students. Schools in North Carolina were still adjusting to integration and thus the  few Black teachers on faculty were attempting to fit it just as Black students  were trying to adjust. Some of the Black students had attended junior high  school with some of the White students and had become friends. This was  particularly true among the guys who played football or basketball. Most of  the Black students were enrolled in businessvocational education classes  where in some classes they outnumbered the White students. I noticed after a short period during my 10th grade year that there was some tension  between the Black students in college prep classes and those in business vocational education classes. I noticed that some Black students enrolled  in businessvocational education classes who lived in my neighborhood  stopped speaking to me and occasionally tried to instigate fights with me  and others in college prep, and I learned that some college prep students  stopped associating with Black students in businessvocational education  classes. This dynamic continued throughout the 3 years of high school with  the only disruption of this pattern occurring when issues that frustrated  both the Black college prep as well as the businessvocational education  students brought us together . . . items such as the absence of Black cheerleaders on the varsity or junior varsity squads; the failure of faculty to select  or students to elect Black students for the homecoming court; the absence  of Black presence on student council; or to be elected to senior class superlatives. Black students were present but not necessarily considered a part of  the school, so it seemed. I also noticed that differences were being made by some Black students  in terms of their families perceived social standing within the college prep  student track. There were a few middleand upper-class Black students who  did not interact with the working-class Black college prep students outside  of class, even in the cafeteria. This situation did improve over the 3 years.  No administrator, teacher, or counselor Black or White, attempted to  build bridges between or within the various student group configurations.  I believe as I think back that the same divide existed for White students in  the college prep and businessvocational tracks, but at the time I was not  focused on their experiences. At Page High School, I felt connected in the classroom with Miss Sue Ellen Medley 10th grade English; Mrs. Margaret Garrett Advanced Composition; Mr. Dwight Bartlett U.S. History; Mrs. Lillie Alston Algebra  I; Mrs. Winifred Woodruff World History; and Mrs. Lorraine Gail career counselor. Each expressed an interest in the work that I completed  for class and provided helpful and considerate feedback that helped me to 
Z. STEVENSON, Jr. improve my performance. They were kind and inclusive of all the students  in their classrooms. We did a lot of writing in the English classes taught  by Miss Medley and Mrs. Garrett. Miss Medley was very approachable and  while Mrs. Garrett very traditional and reserved, she was an excellent and  detailed teacher and made no difference in the students in our class. Because of Mrs. Alston, I learned to love Algebra I and II and did well in those  classes. The history teachers, Mr. Bartlett and Mrs. Woodruff were engaging teachers of that subject, especially Mrs. Woodruff. All those teachers,  except Mrs. Alston, were White. It was in those college prep courses that I  began to actualize my belief that I was going to go to college and that I was  college material. It was in high school that learning and the desire to know more really hit  me. That spark was ignited by Mrs. Winifred Woodruff who taught World  History. Not only did she engage me in the classroom, she also influenced  my career interest in teaching, research, and scholarship. Winifred Woodruff, in her manner and style would remind most of us of the quintessential  history teacher lost in the history books and texts as well as her memories  of actual visits to the sites where Revolutionary and Civil War battles and  other significant historical sites. She and her husband spent summers taking train trips and learning deeply about history, beyond what was covered  in sanitized textbooks, and they traveled the world developing a deeper  understanding of this information. A middle aged White woman with salt  and pepper hair with a cropped cut, she had this wonderful bang covering  part of her forehead that she would flip or toss back as she elucidated details on an event in world history, hands emphasizing the particular point  that she was making. She wore huge glasses which made her eyes seem even  larger when she was expressively sharing details, her eyes growing larger as  she elucidated on the topic. I was so engaged by her in the classroom that  I religiously read my World History text and I would sit with her during  study hall or at the end of the class day to learn more. She gave me additional information to read so that I developed a deeper understanding.  It was Mrs. Woodruffs class that I was first exposed to African history via  a student teacher who was assigned to her. Mrs. Woodruff helped me to  understand that the voluminous world history book that we were using in  class did not contain all the facts or context associated with history. That  knowledge helped me understand that part of what had not been shared in  the World History textbook was valid and important context of history and  that exploration and reading would help me to be able to know the context  of history and other content as well if I explored more deeply. It was via Mrs.  Woodruff that I really began to read books that focused on African history  and literature, using the city libraries to learn more. By the time I reached  my senior year, I was determined that I would attend college and become a  history teacher, just like Mrs. Woodruff.

Effective Teaching After Moving From Segregated to Integrated Schools    123 CONCLUSION I have been engaged by many but not all teachers in my elementary and  secondary experience. I felt motivated to learn by those teachers who made  the effort to get to know me and to learn the strategies that motivated me to  engage with the learning process. I felt nurtured, cared about and valued by  Mrs. Allen, Mrs. Faucette, Mr. Smith, and Mrs. Alston, Black teachers all, during the days of segregation. At Page High School, connections with teachers mostly seemed to evolve around the content that they were teaching in  which I had an interest i.e., social studieshistory, felt challenged English  composition and creative writing or with whom I felt a connection the Algebra I teacher who seemed to relocate as I moved from Brown Summit to  Northeast Guilford to Page High School and the career counselor at Page.  In particular, the Algebra I teacher and career counselor, African American  women, both took an interest in me. It was in those college prep courses that  I began to actualize my belief that I was going to go to college and that I was  college material . . . despite the comment by my White high school guidance  counselor that I was not college material. I ultimately did my internship for  the masters degree in counseling and though not assigned to her, got to  work collaboratively with that guidance counselor 5 years after she disparaged my ability to get into or be successful in college. The final section will  highlight some recommendations for policy and practice. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR POLICY AND PRACTICE The world has changed considerably since my days in a segregated public  school setting and transition to an integrated public school setting. Some  might say that our public schools have regressed and become more segregated in the 21st century, 65 years since Brown v. Board of Education, than  they were in the 20th century Frankenberg, Ee, Ayscue,  Orfield, 2019. Policy School Districts Should Establish Policies That Promote   Cultural Competence The intercultural presence in our public schools has increased dramatically since my matriculation in the elementarysecondary system. With the  racialethnic and language diversity that now exists, it is critical that teachers and school leaders receive training on how to effectively engage students and their family members with an understanding of cultural norms  for their racialethnic andor language groups so that children can be 
Z. STEVENSON, Jr. effectively engaged in their classrooms and to also engage families in the  education of their children. Strategies for preparing teachers to effectively  education students of color, particularly African American children, are  highlighted in a study and recommended strategies published by LadsonBillings 2009. Several districts across the county have used Ladson-Billings  cultural competence paradigm as a professional development opportunity  to enhance the cultural competence of teachers. Practice Engage Students in the Learning Process Teachers who engaged me while I was in elementary and secondary  schools, got the best learning results from me as measured by traditional  and non-traditional methods. I was attentive in class, I completed homework  assignments, I followed directions, I worked well with most of my classmates,  and I was not disruptive. Engagement means that The Center for Teaching  and Learning at the University of Washington provides information and strategies for engaging students in their learning as well as dealing with classroom  management and organization Center for Teaching and Learning, 2020. 	 It is important to engage the students in active learning projects,  hands on activities, working in small groups, use of manipulatives,  etc. 	 Use technology to enhance learning using clickers, iPads and other  mobile technology, and so on. Develop creative ways to use cell  phones as an instructional tool. 	 Provide service-learning projects so that students can learn from  their experiences and connect those experiences to content provided in class. 	 Use in class time for inquiry, application, and assessment rather  than traditional lecture and discussion. This approach provides opportunities for students to ask questions of their classmates as well  as the teacher. Rather than focus on lectures, assist your students  in using Socratic strategies and themes with guided questions to  engage student conversations. 	 Make connections from the textbook learning to the student experience. Translate the textbook learning materials into activities and  discussions that are relevant to students everyday life. Develop an Understanding of What Motivates Each Students   Best Efforts in Learning Each of the teachers who effectively engaged with me observed how I  responded to the various instructional strategies, how I related to them as 

Effective Teaching After Moving From Segregated to Integrated Schools    125 teachers and my classroom was affected to provide opportunities for me  to demonstrate my strengths and to work on the areas where I was not as  strong in my learning. 	 Effective teachers learn to know their students and the skills that  those children possess so that they can effectively engage their students York, 2014. 	 Understanding the unique skills and interests of students can aid  the teacher in engaging students and incorporating strategies in  teaching that will reach all their students. The policy and practices proposed as a result of my retrospective narrative  are huge in scope. With the intercultural diversity that has grown exponentially over the last few decades argues for the effective teacher to be both  culturally competent and to have a menu of strategies and approaches that  they can employ in public school classrooms to engage students in their  learning and to promote high levels of student achievement. REFERENCES Andrews, M., Squire, C.,  Tamboko, M. Eds. 2008. Doing narrative research.  London, England: SAGE. Bochner, A. 2007. Notes towards an ethics of memory in autoethnographic inquiry. In N. Denzin  M. Giardina Eds., Ethical futures in qualitative research  pp. 196208. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press. Brown Summit Middle School. n.d. Our schools history. Retrieved from https: www.gcsnc.comdomain20854 Brown v. Board of Education, U.S. National Archives and Records Administration,  1954. Retrieved from https:www.ourdocuments.govdoc.php?doc87 Buchanan, B. 2001, December 28. Students recall beloved school: Rena Bullock  served Black students in southeast Guilford County in the 1950s and 60s. Greensboro News and Record. Retrieved from https:greensboro.comstudents-recall  -beloved-school-rena-bullock-school-served-black-students-in-southeast-guilford  -county-inarticle1c64a614-690e-5b35-98e4-683431488188.html Center for Teaching and Learning. 2020. Engaging students in learning. Retrieved from  https:teaching.washington.edutopicsengaging-students-in-learning Finnian, C. 2009 Supporting and nurturing students and teachers in grades 36.  Phi Delta Kappan, 906, 400403. Frankenberg, J., Ayscue, J. B.,  Orfield, G. 2019. Harming our common future:  Americas segregated schools 65 years after Brown. Retrieved from https:www  .civilrightsproject.ucla.eduresearchk-12-educationintegration-and-diversity  harming-our-common-future-americas-segregated-schools-65-years-after-brown  Brown-65-050919v4-final.pdf
Z. STEVENSON, Jr. Riessman, C. K.,  Speedy, J. 2007. Narrative inquiry in the psychotherapy professions: A critical review. In D. Jean Clandinin Ed., Handbook of narrative  inquiry: Mapping a methodology pp. 426456. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. Wells-Wilbon, R.,  Holland, S. 2001. Social learning theory and the influence  of male role models on African American children in PROJEECT 2000. The  Qualitative Report, 64, 117. York, B. 2014. Know the child: The importance of teachers knowledge of individual  students skill KISS. Retrieved from https:cepa.stanford.educontent know-child-importance-teacher-knowledge-individual-students-skills-kiss

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 127140 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 127 CHAPTER 13 LOVE MANY, TRUST FEW;  LEARN TO PADDLE YOUR  OWN CANOE What Teacher Practitioners Can Learn  From Racial Counterstories of a Master  Teacher in Rural North Carolina Terrell L. Strayhorn BACKGROUND TO THE TOPIC An old proverb says, A good teacher goes a long way. Working to identify the characteristics and qualities of good teachers has been the focus of  hundreds of books and studies over the last 50 years or so. For instance,  the weight of empirical evidence suggests that effective teachers are loving, supportive, patient, caring, and knowledgeable, to name a few Foster,  1994. Good teachers, according to research, are joyful, patient, and treat  all students fairly Rushton, Morgan,  Richard, 2007. In one study using  surveys and essays from 43 students at a prestigious secondary school, good 
T. L. STRAYHORN teachers were believed to be good-looking, objective, and skilled in making  difficult subjects understandable Ida, 2017. Other scholars have emphasized what good teachers do. For example, analyzing data from 134 pre-service teachers at a large, southern university  in Georgia using sequential mixed methods, one study found that nearly  one-third of pre-service teachers believed good teachers were ethical and  good class managers, while over half of them emphasized being studentcentered Minor, Onwuegbuzie, Witcher,  James, 2002. Relatedly,  Ladson-Billings 1995 argued on several occasions that effective teachers  employ culturally relevant pedagogy in their practice. That is, they draw from  the cultural wealth of students local cultural communities to ensure the  academic success, cultural competence, and sociopolitical awareness of  students, especially racially diverse learners. She went on to clarify that effective teachers possess the pedagogical and relational dispositions to connect well with students and their families in the classroom and beyond.  Good teachers employ other-mothering1 practices Foster, 1993 that treat  all students just like ones own. Despite reams of studies depicting African American teachers in the  South before and after segregation as victims of their oppressive environment, equity-minded scholars like Siddle Walker 2001 have used historiography and archival data to rewrite the dominant narrative of Black  teachers as culturally competent, politically engaged, caring role models.  In her pioneering work on the topic, Professor Siddle Walker 2005 has  challenged the omission of Black teachers in the larger portrait of public  schooling and cast a critical gaze on the ways in which they organized resistance to advocate for better facilities, longer school terms, more transportation, and equitable opportunities for their students. So whereas we now have considerable evidence about the general qualities and traits of highly effective teachers Foster, 1993, 1994; Rushton et al.,  2007, as well as the habits and ways in which they go beyond the call of duty to  help their students, we know comparatively less from anecdotes, narratives,  and counterstories that honor educators, especially Black2 teachers, who  leave an indelible mark on their students, communities, and the greater  good. The present chapter is part of a volume intended to fill this critical  gap in scholarship. PURPOSE OF CHAPTER The purpose of this chapter is to tell the story of a highly effective, public  school Black teacher in rural North Carolina whose career provides many  lessons from which all teacher practitioners can learn. In this chapter, I  will use counterstorytelling3 methods, as articulated in critical race theory 

Love Many, Trust Few; Learn to Paddle Your Own Canoe    129 CRT, to paint a racialized portrait that honors and memorializes the professional legacy of Creola Evelyn Warner my maternal grandmother. The  chapter is organized into three major sections. First, I introduce readers  to Miss Warner, as the admirable teacher of focus and identify the characteristics that qualified her for this designation. Then, through counter  storytelling, I describe in rich, thick details how she used these qualities in  her teaching practice, both inside and outside the classroom, to equip and  empower her students. Lastly, I show through wordsincluding interview  data from several of her former studentsthe impact that she made and  continues to make posthumously on them, her community, and the lives  of many others whom she taught. A final section highlights key recommendations for future practice, policy, and pedagogy. THE LIFE HISTORY OF MISS WARNER Born October 6, 1925 to Snowd Ephraim and Dollie Wilder, Creola Evelyn was one of four children: Urcher, Garvin aka Buck, Creola, and  Martha in birth order. She attended grade school in the local community and transferred to Pollocksville High School in 7th grade, where  she excelled academically. There was no school in her neighborhood at the  time so she and her siblings had to walk over two miles each way, back and  forth to school in the rain, sleet, and snow, if they wanted to learn. Papa  Ephraim was OK at first . . . but he got sick of them having to walk so far  to school, so he let them stay with his sister who lived in-town closer to  Pollocksville High, from Sunday through Friday until they finished school. Young Creola loved to learn and she loved her teacher who went by  the name Miss Jenkins. She taught in a single-room schoolhouse, teaching students with varying learning styles, different grade levels, and very  different abilities, but she did it all with no teaching assistant, no assistive technology, and little to no training about differentiated instruction  Alexander  Winne, 2006, multiple intelligences Gardner, 2000, or  self-directed learning styles Canipe  Brockett, 2005. What she lacked  in formal training, Miss Jenkins more than made up for in creativity, commitment, and personal investment in the success of her students, especially  Creola. Miss Jenkins attended Elizabeth City State University ECSU, a  historically Black collegeuniversity HBCU, and often encouraged her  students, Get your lesson out, study hard, and you can go as far as you  wanna sic go. Thats exactly what Creola did. She loved to study, and get her lesson  i.e., homework out of the way early, so she could devote most of her discretionary time to helping her mother in the kitchen, looking after her  younger sister Martha, and picking tobacco out in the backfields, as she 
T. L. STRAYHORN would often recount. After graduating high school, she attended ECSU, following in the footsteps of her beloved teacher, earning a bachelors degree  in Language Arts with a concentration in elementary education. With a degree in hand, Creola Evelyn landed her first teaching job in a  public school district in the state of Georgia. She taught reading and writing to students in every grade they had at the time, so the story goes. Her  teaching skills were recognized quickly by district leaders and she was called  upon to work with more novice teachers, offering advice about how to work  with troublesome kids, or those with poor behavior in the classroom. After  5 years of service, she moved back to her hometown and accepted a job at  Trenton Elementary School where she taught for many years. Consistent with  the times, Miss Warner taught almost everyone in town, especially all the  Black kids, including her own niece Jackie, another niece Angie, and,  believe it or not, her own daughter my mother, Linda. But youd never  know that any of us were related to her because we couldnt call her Aunt  Creola . . . we had to call her Miss Warner and she treated us just like all the  other kids . . . fair sic, warm, and with love, as Jackie shared with me. In so many ways, Miss Warner was a master teacher based on her years  of professional experience, her teaching competence, and her documented  effectiveness in teaching students from different backgrounds and varying  modalities to excel academically. Upon retiring after 50 years of professional service, Miss Warner was acknowledged as one of the longest-serving  educators in Jones County North Carolina. The week following her retirement, Miss Warner went back to substitute teaching and continued doing  so until her death in 2013. She was a Sunday school teacher, Vacation Bible  School instructor, and tutored kids in the neighborhood all the time for  free . . . she never charged nobody nothing sic, her sister Martha clarified. She wasnt in it for the money . . . she never was; she just loved to teach  and loved for them her students to learn, she continued. By all accounts, Miss Warner was and is a gifted instructor, a highly effective educator, and exemplified the prevailing traits and qualities characteristic of a good teacher. She was fair, imaginative, joyful, patient, studentcentered, and held high expectations for all students to succeed. Indeed,  a good teacher can inspire hope, ignite the imagination, and instill a love  of learning Jan, 2017. Thats exactly what she did. The next section uses  counter-storytelling methods to demonstrate how she did this, both inside  and outside the formal classroom.

Love Many, Trust Few; Learn to Paddle Your Own Canoe    131 HOW MISS WARNER TAUGHT THEM:   A COUNTER-STORY A Quick Word About Counter-Storytelling Counter-storytelling emanates from a long line of scholarship arguing  for the use of CRT in education research as a way of engaging a more  robust racial analysis Cook  Dixson, 2013, p. 1238 in a field education where race was once largely under-theorized, according to prominent  scholars Ladson-Billings  Tate, 1995. CRT provides theoretical justification for the use of narrative and counterstorytelling as legitimate aspects  of methodology, methods, and authentic ways of knowing. And in keeping  with that tradition, I acknowledge that critical race theory writing and lecturing is characterized by frequent use of the first person, storytelling, narrative, allegory, interdisciplinary treatment of law and related subjects,  and the unapologetic use of creativity Bell, 1995, p. 899. Despite my predominantly positivist leanings in conducting quantitative  educational research, I see myself as a quantitative criticalist Stage, 2007.  I readily recognize the enormous power, possibilities, and utility of CRT  generally, and counter-storytelling specifically, as a tool for challenging  dominant narratives by intentionally centering analysis on the marginalized  voices Cook  Dixson, 2013, p. 1243. In this chapter, those marginalized,  all-too-often overlooked and silenced voices are the experiences and insights  of a Black public school teacher in a rural southern district and her churrin sic southern dialect for children, as she often referred to her  students. Contrary to popular and dominant narrative beliefs, whether in the  classroom, courtroom, cornfield, or churchhouse, Miss Warner taught  her students using the resources, strategies, and tools necessary to reach  them where they were located within a larger social context. Her methods  morphed and changed aswhen needed, but consistently exemplified the  very best of what we know from research nowadays about effective, engaging  pedagogy. In this way, she was both before her time and of her time, and her  career success speaks against the master narrativea narrative that is based  on the social and cultural history of the dominant race Cook  Dixson,  2013, p. 1243. Below, I use counter-storytelling methods to illustrate how  she taught her churrin to learn, learn, and keep on learning . . . , as her last-living  sister shared with me during an interview4 recounting the teaching career  of her big sis.
T. L. STRAYHORN Sets Clear, High Expectations for All:   Mind the First Time . . . and Love Many Now the one thing about Cre short for, Creola is she was good at making  her students mind the first time and no matter what they was gonna learn. She  would tell em that all the time. You are going to learn. You can learn. You  aint no dumb dummy. Dont let nobody tell you that. Youre Black. Youre  beautiful. And you can emphasis added learn. Stop saying you cant . . . oh,  she would get so frustrated when theyd say that. I cant, they say sic. Shed  come back with, Can kicked cant out laughing, that was one of Cres  many mottos seem like. She had a way of making you believe you could do  anything. I mean anything, hun short for honey. Conquer the world. Go  to the moon and be back by supper laughing . . . um, um, um, lawd I had  me a good sister. I miss my sister, yes I do shaking her head, fighting back  tears. Now she was a teachers teacher. She could out-teach all them White  teachers down there laughing. They couldnt teach them kids referring  to the White teachers who moved in after desegregation. All dem kids, like  our kids, Cre taught em. Mustve been thousands or thousands more . . . she  taught em all hun. Let me see, she taught Jack Marthas daughter, Angie,  Annie Pearl, Duck, Lin short for, Linda . . . umm, I cant name em all.  I mean she taught bout every childBlack and Whitefrom here to New  Bern, Trenton, Pollocksville, Maysville, all of em hun. And the one thing I  know they know is my sister believed in them, all of em. The White ones and  the Black ones. Black aint got nothing to do with your brain, shed say. She  was strictthey had to mind and mind the first time. You know, its easy to mind  the second and third time after you done got sic in trouble, but looked to  me like she was trying to teach them to learn how to mind the very first time. She  knew it would keep the Black kids safe and alive, especially at that time when  they were just looking for any ole reason to hit us, or hurt us, or burn us, or  something. And she would tell em, The man i.e., police, White authorities  aint gonna give you a second chance . . . youve got to listen and mind the very  first time. You hear me?! Say yes, maam . . . yes, sir . . . have a good day . . . good  morning . . . speak up and be polite. You can do it! You can be kind to your  enemytreat your neighbor right . . . thats what the song says referring to a  gospel hymn Heaven Belongs to You. Love many . . . love everybody churrin  and youll live a long life. I think a lot of them thought she was just preaching  sometimes laughing, but Cre knew what she was doing . . . she was teaching  them how to avoid the man, how to make it out here, and how to stay alive.  Shed say all of that in school, Sunday School, Vacation Bible School, it didnt  matter. That was one of Cres big, big things to say . . . Love Many . . . and she  really loved her students. She believed in them. Martha Consistent with everything we know from research about the power of teachers high expectations on performance of students of color Gershenson   Papageorge, 2018; Rojas  Liou, 2017, Miss Warner held very high expectations for her students and messaged her endless belief in their potential 

Love Many, Trust Few; Learn to Paddle Your Own Canoe    133 in many obvious and tacit ways, both inside and outside the classroom.  Though situated geographically, racially, and politically within a physical  context and broader system that denied Black peoples agency e.g., to  vote, questioned their intelligence, threatened their safety, and suffocated  their local economies e.g., tobacco, cotton, Miss Warner consciously resisted  those oppressive forces, held high expectations for all students, shielded her  Black churrin from its decimating blows, and intentionally instilled in them,  through her teaching and telling, Black cultural pride, hope, imagination,  and a love for learning, all hallmarks of a good teacher Jan, 2017, p. 51. Uses Analogy, Metaphor, and Music: Love Many,   Trust Few . . . Rell short for, Terrell, the one thing you got to make sure you tell em  about Aunt Creola, your grandmother, is she was one emphasis added smart  woman. Im talking like really smart. Aunt Creola, well, we couldnt call her  Aunt Creola at school. Did they already tell you that? Nodding, I said, yes  Ok, good. Well, that was 100 true laughing, she was my Aunt Creola because she married my mothers brother. You follow me? And I could call her  Aunt Creola in church, at home, or whenever we went to visit her and Mr.  Joyner her husband. But at school she was Miss Warner and thats what  we called her. She didnt just teach us academics though. She was my 4th  grade teacher. I cant even remember now what you learn in the 4th grade  laughing but I know Miss Warner taught us way more emphasis than that.  Oh, I remember she would teach us about place values and roman numbers  sic and how to add numbers with a whole bunch of digits . . . I wasnt really  good at that at first laughing. I would whine and complain, Miss Warner, I  cant . . . and she would come right back with, Of course you cant because  you keep telling yourself you cant. Can kicked cant out. You can do it. Now  try and try hard, even if you gotta count on your fingers and toes laughing.  That was always funny to us because we knew Miss Warner knew we didnt  have that many toes and fingers, but one thing we know is that she really cared  about us emphasis added. Not just as students, but as kids, as real people  who had, you know, a fighting chance to be something in this world. And she  was gonna help us get there by teaching us. Every morning, she would make  us singit wasnt even music classbut she loved to sing. Wed sing, Good  morning to you, good morning to you, were all in our places with sun-shining  faces; this is the way to start our new day . . . Look like she knew we needed  something to cheer us up early, you know, times werent easy back then. And  she would tell us, Love many, trust few . . . you cant trust everybody to be your  friend, churrin. She wasnt mean or evil about it, but you could tell what she  meant. Trust was earned, not given. You had to build trust by watching what  people say and do . . . you dont just go out here throwing your trust away. You  aint gotta sic be grumpy and nervous, always looking over your backnah,  she didnt want us to be like that. But she wanted us to be wise and discern134    T. L. STRAYHORN ing. She would always tell us a story about an ugly farmer and a pretty worm  laughing. The ugly farmer went out to the field one field and got startled  by a pretty worm. The worm pleaded with the farmer, Please dont kill me,  miss farmer, I wont hurt you or your crops. I want to be your pet, winking her  pretty little worm eyes. The ugly farmer was tempted to take the pretty worm  inside and let it live with her, but then a big red rooster, I think it was, came  out of nowhere shouting, There she is, get her! The ugly farmer was scared,  thinking the rooster was launching an attack against her. Just then, a gang of  animals grabbed the pretty worm and yanked its cover off, revealing that it  was a poisonous male snake. You cant judge a book by its cover . . . a snake is a  snake, pretty or ugly laughing, shed say. Love many, love everybody, treat  your neighbor right, but trust few . . . watch out for them pretty, eye-battin  snakes, shed tell us laughing. We never knew all the morals to that story,  to be honest. It mightve been that she wanted the girls to know they could  be farmers and leaders, just like boys. Or maybe she wanted the boys to watch  out for fast girls. I dont know if any of that was in the curriculum back then,  but it shouldve been sic. Vernon Another way Miss Warner taught her students about themselves and the  world around them, as one former student put it, was by using associative  teaching techniques like analogy, allegory, and metaphor that link events  or problems with a relevant context, local examples, or even humor as a  way of breeching relatively serious and sensitive topics like race, racism,  and trust. For instance, Vernon and others recalled how Miss Warner  taught kids how to multiply numbers by engaging their imagination and  knowledge of nearby cornfieldsspaces and places with which most of her  students were very familiaras a way of helping them to sense and see  mathematical concepts; associating classroom learning with students senses has been ranked a powerful recall stimulator Market, 2001. Countless  examples were shared by her former students, like this one, If you got  sic six rows of corn and five stalks per row, how many stalks do you have  total? she would ask students in private tutoring sessions. She would be  asking questions and waiting for the answer from across the roomwed  be at her dining table working and shed be in the kitchen cooking her dinner . . . but shed still be teaching laughing, recalled one former student  turned banker. As an elementary school teacher, Miss Warner covered a range of subjects including math, reading, writing, and more. Former students explained how she taught them to read and write using everyday items. She  would teach us to read, write, and practice our handwriting by making us  write out scriptures from the Bible over and over again, another former  student shared. It really didnt matter if your people family were churchgoing or not, you were going to learn and the Bible became like a textbook  for us . . . we used to joke, Miss Warner could teach us using anything. Indeed, Miss Warner seemed to specialize in drawing upon local knowledge 

Love Many, Trust Few; Learn to Paddle Your Own Canoe    135 funds and the community cultural wealth Yosso, 2006 of her students to  make learning real relevant, as she would often say. She accomplished  these learning goals using a mix of methodsanalogy, metaphor, music,  and parableall the while encouraging her Black students to fight hate  with love, overcome darkness with light, and trust few in a way that was  still forward-facing, optimistic, and empowering. She did all of this despite  earning a college degree in the 1940s long before the cultural congruency  movement in curriculum and instruction led to the production of books,  articles, and courses on the topic. Theres no evidence, from informants,  archival records, or her personal belongings at home, that Miss Warner  ever read a book or article on culturally relevant pedagogy or analogybased instruction, yet she practiced it regularly, lived it courageously, and  was it authentically. MISS WARNERS LASTING IMPACT:   LEARN TO PADDLE YOUR OWN CANOE Miss Warner peacefully surrendered her life, answering Gods final call  on November 23, 2013, as described in her published obituary. Her longtime pastor, Reverend Sidney Harper, and then-church leader, Reverend  Angelo Brown, served as co-officiants. At the request of my family, I delivered my maternal grandmothers eulogy, celebrating her life that mattered  so much for so many. The printed bulletin read: Ms. Warner was a consummate teacher, devoting over 50 years of her life to public school teaching.  She was a member of Zeta Phi Beta Sorority, Inc., American Legion Ladies  Auxiliary, and Trent River Temple of Elk. She was a lifetime member of  Freewill Baptist Church, where she taught Sunday school, sang in the choir,  and directed the childrens choir. Miss Warner will be remembered for her  personal motto: Love many, trust few; learn to paddle your own canoe.  Interestingly enough, I wrote, designed, and produced my grandmothers  obituary. Once ready, I drove into town New Bern to have it printed at  Kinkos. Kinkos was right near Hardees, where my grandmother took me  and my siblings for breakfast every weekday morning after swimming lessons. She would walk in, same routine. Half dozen adults would rush around  her, proclaiming, Miss Warner?! Wow, its so good seeing you. She would  look surprised, smirking, and ask, Honey, do you know me? They always  respond affirmatively, Yes, Miss Warner, you were my 4th grade teacher.  Or, You were my 5th grade teacher. Or, You were my 6th grade teacher,  reflecting the fact that my grandmother taught many students across most  grades in her rural elementary school in Trenton. I pulled up at Kinkos, overcome with mental images of all the good  times at Hardees, and walked in to grab copies and be on my way. The desk 
T. L. STRAYHORN agents name was Alexandra Ill never forget it and I handed her a folder, fighting back tears, and asked for 300 copies . . . double-sided please.  Alex opened the folder and burst into tears, Miss Warner died . . . what?!  Shocked, I stood up, looked around, and asked, Honey, did you know  her? Shaking her head, Alex nodded, Yes, she was my 4th grade teacher.  Ill never forget her. Love many, trust few . . . Learn to paddle your own  canoe, we said in unison. Thats the final verse of this counter-story about Miss Warners lasting  impact on her students, Black and White, straight and gay, rich and poor.  Each and every one of them remembered her life motto and, in several instances, it became their own motto or mantra as well. They interpreted the  codalearn to paddle your own canoeto be her way of teaching them  about the importance of self-reliance, self-efficacy, and having a go-get-em  attitude, as one put it. She would tell us that we cant just sit back and wait  for somebody to do it for us . . . weve got to do things for ourselves, one  former student, now charter school teacher shared. She went on to explain: Thats what she did as a teacher toowe didnt have clubs back then so she  created clubs for us and she would make us awards for good behavior by letting us get into groups . . . well, they were clubs really and we could do stuff  together as Black kids, just like the White kids got to do at their schools. She  didnt wait for them to give us clubs and stuff, she made em up herself. I  think thats learning to paddle your own canoe, cuz most of us didnt even  know what a canoe was back then laughing. So shed change it up from  time-to-time . . . Learn to tie your own shoe . . . anything ole thang sic that  rhymed would work as long as you knew that youve gotta get up and to take  responsibility for your own education and never stop learning. Thats what I  remember about Aunt Creola laughing, well, Miss Warner. Jackie DISCUSSION The purpose of this chapter was to tell the story of a highly effective, public  school Black teacher in rural North Carolina whose career achievements  provide many lessons from which all teacher practitioners can learn. Using  critical race theory as a lens and racial counter-storytelling as a method, I  describe in indigenous detail how Miss Warner enabled the success of all students, especially her Black students, by setting and maintaining high expectations; using analogy, metaphor, and music; as well as nurturing their selfefficacy, intrinsic motivation to learn, and sense of responsibility to learn  to paddle their own canoe. Pre-service and inservice teachers can learn  a lot from this counter-narrative. Dozens upon dozens of studies have praised the importance of teachers holding high expectations of their students. High expectations work. 

Love Many, Trust Few; Learn to Paddle Your Own Canoe    137 Teachers should check their biases at the door and encourage all students to  dream, imagine, and stretch beyond their comfort zone. This is particularly  important for teachers working with students of color or those from marginalized backgrounds where success is rare or achievement is not often  expected according to dominant norms. Setting high goals, supporting  students growth, and positively reinforcing their performance e.g., You  can do it, or Can kicked cant out are effective strategies for doing so. Weve known that Black educators are part of the community and also  part of the schooling structure Cook  Dixson, 2013, p. 1238. They are  powerfully affected by what happens in both. This is illustrated in Miss  Warners story when institutional racism denies her students access to certain resources e.g., books, clubs, which would negatively impact her ability to teach as well. Exercising autonomous agency and creative capacity,  Miss Warner finds a way to address the problem. Pre-service and inservice  teachers today may face similar circumstances due to inequitable school  funding formula, unequal local tax bases, and persistent institutional racism that privileges high-performing suburban schools while ignoring  the social miseries that cripple predominantly minority urban and rural  public schools. Teachers remember this: Circumstances shouldnt matter.  Demographics should not determine destiny. That is, where a student is  born and grows should not determine their occupation or opportunities,  even though a good deal of research shows that is the case. Teachers have  the power to intervene. Just like one can feel alone in the midst of millions, creative, committed, compassionate teachers can find wealth in the  midst of famine and genius within goof-offs, so to speak. It starts with  high expectations, but it also requires teachers to acknowledge race and  racism, expose inequality in systems allegedly as egalitarian as education,  and assume the powerful role that they play in either reinforcing or removing inequality through their teaching practices. Culturally relevant pedagogy doesnt have to be complicated or hocus pocus. Its reflected in your  examples, texts, videos, language, and rewards. Find ways to incorporate  your students culture and real-life experiences in the classroom. Translate complex topics into simple messages, using their vernacular or terms  where possible. Conduct a cultural audit of your teaching materialswhos  represented, whos not? What can you do to change it? When in doubt, ask  your colleagues, especially colleagues of color, regardless of your own race.  Dont be afraid to ask your students toothey can be both consumers and  producers of indigenous knowledge. There are also critical implications for future research based on information presented in this chapter. For example, the chapter itself demonstrates  the power and possibilities of using counter-storytelling methods to position a Black teacher in rural North Carolina as a strong advocate for her  students, community, and social justice, challenging dominant narratives 
T. L. STRAYHORN about Black andor rural life in America that tend to emphasize poverty,  powerlessness, and problems rather than cultural wealth, courageous power, and creative solutions. Paying closer attention to the counter-stories of  people of color is important and necessary. Future researchers should also  analyze how counter-stories speak back to non-racialized, canonical constructions of Black and Brown teachers that typically position them as  ordinary, underprepared, and unlicensed to teach. Making the teacher  of colorwhether pre-service or in-servicethe prominent unit of analysis and telling the story through hisher eyes is one way to rewrite the  wrongs in extant literature. CONCLUSION I could go on and on with many attempts to connect Miss Warners story  to practical applications for pre-service and inservice teachers. Follow your  gut. Realize that everything isnt in a book or conference. Know your students and avoid cookie-cutter approaches that wont work. But, in my intellectual spirit of sorts, I believe and feel that Ive said enough. Well, actually,  the story itself has said enough and more than I may realize to those engaged in the life-changing, revolutionary act of teaching. Love many. Trust  few. Learn to paddle your own canoe. May love and light show us all the way. NOTES

1.	 I use the term othermothering to reference a long-held tradition of education within Black communities, which according to scholars, acknowledges  the nurturing, supportive, kinship-like roles that some Black educators assume when working with students Strayhorn, 2015.

2.	 Throughout this chapter, I use the terms Black and African American  interchangeably to refer to people of African descent e.g., West Indian, Caribbean, Haitian, African living in the USA.

3.	 Associated with critical race theory CRT, counterstory-telling is a methodology or approach to storytelling that posits narratives as credible, crucial, and  valued sources of legitimate knowledge Delgado Bernal, 2002, p. 169.  Counterstory-telling also challenges mainstream societys denial of the ongoing significance of race and racism Yosso, 2006, p. 10.

4.	 A quick point about method. The impetus for this project came from my  deep, profound love and respect for my maternal grandmother. Ive always  been enamored by her, her life story, and the many vivid stories she would tell  me growing up about her life with Papa Mr. Ephraim, in the 1960s civil  rights era, and as a decorated educator. For the purposes of this chapter, I  tapped into existing family and professional networks to learn more about the  missing pieces of my grandmothers narrative. This led to a very purposeful 

Love Many, Trust Few; Learn to Paddle Your Own Canoe    139 sampling of informants who were interviewed in homes, coffee shops, family  reunions, churches, and by phone, especially since some information rich  cases Patton, 2002, p. 230 are well into their 80s and above. REFERENCES Alexander, P. A.,  Winne, P. H. 2006. Handbook of educational psychology 2nd ed.  Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Bell, D. 1995. Racial realismAfter weve gone: Prudent speculations on America  in a post-racial epoch. In R. Delgado Ed., Critical race theory: The cutting edge  pp. 28. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press. Canipe, J. B.,  Brockett, R. G. 2005. Mixing apples and oranges? Self-directed  learning and learning styles. Perspectives: New York Journal of Adult Education,  42, 617. Cook, D. A.,  Dixson, A. D. 2013. Writing critical race theory and method: A  composite counterstory on the experiences of Black teachers in New Orleans  post-Katrina. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 2610,  12381258. Delgado Bernal, D. 2002. Critical race theory, Latino critical theory, and critical  raced-gendered epistemologies: Recognizing students of color as holders and  creators of knowledge. Qualitative Inquiry, 81, 105126. Foster, M. 1993. Othermothers: Exploring the educational philosophy of Black  American women teachers. In M. Arnot  K. Weiler Eds., Feminism and social  justice in education: International perspectives pp. 101123. Washington, DC:  Falmer Press. Foster, M. 1994. Effective Black teachers: A literature review. In E. R. Hollins, J. E.  King,  W. C. Hayan Eds., Teaching diverse populations: Formulating a knowledge base pp. 225241. Albany: State University of New York Press. Gardner, H. 2000. Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences for the 21st century. New  York, NY: Basic. Gershenson, S.,  Papageorge, N. 2018. The power of teacher expectations: How  racial bias hinders student attainment. Education Next, 181, 64. Ida, Z. S. 2017. What makes a good teacher? Universal Journal of Educational Research, 51, 141147. Jan, H. 2017. Teacher of 21st Century: Characteristics and development. Research  on Humanities and Social Sciences, 79, 5054. Ladson-Billings, G. 1995. But thats just good teaching! The case for culturally  relevant pedagogy. Theory Into Practice, 343, 159165. Ladson-Billings, G.,  Tate, W. F. 1995. Toward a theory of critical race theory of  education. Teachers College Record, 971, 4768. Market, R. J. 2001. What makes a good teacher? Lessons from teaching medical  students. Academic Medicine, 768, 809810. Minor, L. C., Onwuegbuzie, A. J., Witcher, A. E.,  James, T. L. 2002. Preservice  teachers educational beliefs and their perceptions of characteristics of effective teachers. The Journal of Educational Research, 962, 116127.
T. L. STRAYHORN Patton, M. Q. 2002. Qualitative research  evaluation methods 3rd ed. Thousand  Oaks, CA: SAGE. Rojas, L.,  Liou, D. D. 2017. Social justice teaching through the sympathetic  touch of caring and high expectations for students of color. Journal of Teacher  Education, 681, 2840. Rushton, S., Morgan, G.,  Richard, M. 2007. Teachers Meyers-Briggs personality  profiles: Identifying effective teacher personality traits. Teaching and Teacher  Education, 234, 432441. Siddle Walker, V. 2001. African American teaching in the south: 19401960. American Educational Research Journal, 384, 751779. Siddler Walker, V. 2005. Organized resistance and Black educators quest for  school equality, 18781938. Teachers College Record, 1073, 355388. Stage, F. K. 2007. Moving from probabilities to possibilities: Tasks for quantitative  criticalists. In F. K. Stage Ed., Using quantitative data to answer critical questions  pp. 95100. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Strayhorn, T. L. 2015. Using Othermothering to study administrative work life  at historically Black colleges and universities. In V. A. Anfara  N. T. Mertz  Eds., Theoretical frameworks in qualitative research 2nd ed.; pp. 119132.  Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. Yosso, T. J. 2006. Critical race counterstories along the ChicanaChicano educational  pipeline. New York, NY: Routledge.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 141150 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 141 CHAPTER 14 TEACHER EFFECTIVENESS   IN A PREDOMINANTLY WHITE  PUBLIC SCHOOL   IN WEST VIRGINIA Jason A. Ottley Over the past three decades, educational researchers and sociologists have  investigated the term teacher effectiveness Anderson, 2015; Gay, 2010; Irvine,  1990; Ladson-Billings, 1992; Milner 2016. While debates continue among  scholars and teacher education practitioners on the tenets of teacher effectiveness Duckworth, Quinn,  Seligman, 2009; Stronge, 2013, this  chapter contributes to the body of knowledge using an autoethnography  methodological approach. First, I discuss my transition from Washington,  DC to West Virginia during my childhood. Second, I share my racialized experiences in a West Virginia junior high school. Third, I discuss the positive  impact that my White male teacher had on enhancing my confidence and  academic achievement. Last, I offer practical recommendations to White  teachers who teach Black students.
J. A. OTTLEY As a native of Washington, DC, I despised moving to West Virginia as  a junior high school student. For 11 years, I was surrounded by distinct  soundsof neighbors arguing about playing the lottery, block parties  crooning to the tunes of Run DMC and Slick Rick, the Good Humor Ice  Cream truck joyriding outside of our house, and Ms. Wanda policing the  block with her tambourine and her incessant clamoring of Wont He Do  It. It wasnt moving from the hood as we called it that upset me, but what  was depressing was moving to a state I could not locate on a map. Despite  all the promises Mayor Marion Berry made each week, my fathers morning  NPR ritual alluded to the city getting worse, not better. Crime in Washington, DC during the early 1990s was at an all-time high. Flashbacks of coming home one evening after our church revival and  seeing flashing lights and yellow tape around our next-door neighbors  yard was just the beginning. Someone had robbed them at gunpoint,  which left every resident on our block on edge all week. By the weeks end,  my mothers van was stolen in the middle of the day; all that remained was  her empty purse turned upside down and photos of my brothers and me  scattered across the front lawn. Until we could afford another car, I had to  walk 13 blocks to school. It would not have been so bad if the weather was  warm, but the people who stole my mothers car did so in the middle of  winter, forcing me to wear two pairs of socks and long johns underneath  my school clothes. MY CULTURAL ROOTS Our history was mostly Black history. Rosa Parks and Dr. King were common themes in homeroom. Actually, all our subject areas referenced Black  history. In science, we talked about the most famous chemist, George Washington Carver, whose research on peanuts helped poor farmers improve  their diets and vary their crops. In history, we talked about Frederick Douglass, who was one of the pioneers of the anti-slavery movement. In math,  we discussed a self-educated mathematician and astrologer, Benjamin Banneker, who is best known for the creation of the first clock and accurately  predicting a solar eclipse in 1789. I was deeply engaged in school because I  felt a deep connection to the content that was taught. Tatum 2008 argued  that texts that specifically engage Black males are often absent from the  curriculum, teachers often lack strategies to increase Black males engagement with texts, and educators often find it difficult to use texts to counter  in-school and out-of-school context-related issues that heighten the vulnerability level of African American males p. 163. Furthermore, Black  children need to be exposed to curriculum that builds on their strengths, 

Teacher Effectiveness in a Predominantly White Public School in West Virginia      143 affirms their culture, and treats the with dignity and compassion Toldson,  2019, p. 101. MOVING TO WEST VIRGINIA Considering my observation of groundbreaking African Americans, it is important for me to note that my father was the first man I ever saw wear a  suit. Not too many Black men on my block wore custom tweed suits from  the cottage industries in the Outer Hebrides of Scotland. Routinely, I would  run my fingers over his carefully hung suits, dreaming one day I would have  a suit of my own. While I did not see many men wearing suits in my community, historical moments like the Harlem Renaissance gave me a glimpse of  the beauty of Black art, fashion, literature, and music. Black history wasnt  just taught in my school, but it lived and breathed in our home. Our home  was the oasis of W. E. B. Du Boiss intellectual prowess, Zora Neale Hurstons  folklore writing, and Billie Holidays mastery of jazz and pop. My father  made sure Black history was represented in each of our rooms. My mother  reinforced our commitment to Black spirituality by praying over us before  bed and humming James Weldon Johnsons Lift Evry Voice and Sing as  she tucked us in. Therefore, my disdain for moving to rural West Virginia  was because Black history was nowhere to be found and no one ever talked  about how to navigate a world without color, a world remiss of Black faces. The 20-foot U-Haul sputtered up our new, windy driveway. The paved  road was short-lived and soon the dust from the gravel rocks clouded my  fathers view. He pulled our 95 Dodge Caravan onto the grass and we sat  still, awaiting the cloud of smoke to clear. He opened his car door and  motioned for us all to get out. Not only was seeing so much grass a new  experience for me, but even the air smelled different; freshly cut grass and  cow manure made an interesting convergence. I could tell I was nowhere  near home. My father tried to bring excitement to the endless possibilities.  He directed a lot of the clean, fresh start conversation to me. His eyes  were staring through my soul and I knew all the mischievous things I did  in DC would no longer be happening here in West Virginia. It seemed like  my brothers were more excited about being there than me. Probably because they were younger and the idea of finally having their own room was  appealing. As we made our way up the rest of the windy, gravel driveway, I  started thinking about all my former teachers and classmates. I didnt have  a chance to say good-bye. No one knew I had left, and as I stepped foot in  this new world, I had no way of communicating with my old world that life  outside of DC even existed.
J. A. OTTLEY MY SCHOOLING EXPERIENCES IN WEST VIRGINIA I was used to walking 13 blocks to school, so walking up and down our  half-mile-long driveway seemed like a breeze. The cool crisp air on that  first day of school was pleasant, but the butterflies in my stomach made me  more nervous. When the bus driver opened the door for us to get on, his  acknowledgment of us was lost behind his long, scraggly beard. He muffled  something but I had no idea what he said. My mother raised us to speak  when entering a room and so speaking to the bus driver was no different.  We must have been his first stop because the bus was completely empty.  My brothers ran to the back of the bus, very excited to be riding to school  instead of walking. For the next eight or nine stops, the students who got  on the bus were all White. I had never seen so many White people my age except on television commercials. They were all staring at us and I was certainly staring at them. At  first, my brothers didnt notice that most of the attention on the bus was  towards us, but as soon as we were grabbing our book bags to exit the bus,  Jon looked at me and said, Why are these White kids looking at us like  they never seen anyone Black before? I laughed it off and said, Because  they havent and until now, neither have we. Starting in the middle of the  school year was always tough. Students already knew each other and teachers exercised their rhythm. We made our way to the front office to check in.  The skinny, middle-aged blonde stood from behind the desk and said, You  must be the Ottleys.welcome to your new school. I thought to myself: how  in the world did you know who we were? But then it dawned on me that  there probably werent many Black kids in this school. If our bus ride was  any indication the number of Black kids enrolled here, I would bet on my  brothers and I being the only chocolate chips in this cookie. After we signed in, a few student volunteers escorted my brothers and  me to our classes. I told them to drop me off last so that I could make sure  my brothers arrived without fail. Each classroom looked quiet and reserved.  Students were writing feverishly, their heads bent down. No one jumped  out of their seats, no laughing, no hi-fives, no noise at all. I thought to myself, What kind of school is this? I whispered to my brothers to meet me  back at the office as soon as school was over. I had no idea what the rules  to this game were, so we needed to arrive together and leave together. We  didnt know the rules or understand the terrain, and we certainly couldnt  negotiate conversations on equity and race. The name on the outside of  my classroom door read Mr. Lange. Before opening the door, I re-read  the name several times. I was surprised to have a White male teacher. Until  now, the only male teacher I had was my PE teacher. As I entered the room,  clutching onto my bookbag tightly like someone was about to take it, all  the students were seated evenly in rows. Once again, Tupac said it best: 

Teacher Effectiveness in a Predominantly White Public School in West Virginia      145 All eyes on me. Mr. Langes 6-foot 2 muscular frame beckoned me into  the room and his baritone voice made everyone in the room straighten  up. Come in, young man, and close the door behind you. He walked over  to exchange greetings and the closer he got, the more he grew. He towered over me and reminded me of my favorite NBA guardTim Hardaway  aka Killer Crossoverexcept Mr. Lange was white. Im Mr. Lange and  you must be Jason, he said. No words would come out; instead, my firm  handshake acknowledged me. In one swoop, Mr. Lange asked me to sit in  the empty desk in the middle of the room and he returned to the chalkboard. In cursive penmanship, he had written, Distributive Property with a  heavy line beneath it. I hated math! I had no idea what a distributive property was. I could  barely pronounce the word and was hoping Mr. Lange did not call on me  to answer anything. It was my first day and I wasnt sitting far enough in  the back to hide. The students hands were flying up in anticipation of Mr.  Lange calling on them. I surveyed these strange hands. Looking for just  one hand that resembled mine. Not even one! One of those lucky hands  was invited to the board to solve the problem. The student explained his  answer with pride. Mr. Lange stood watching him without even a grin. It  looked more like a grimace. I knew itthis kid was way off, and he was  about to feel that baritone thunder. Mr. Lange crossed his arms, exhaled,  and told the kid good job. On his way back to his seat, the kid walked past my row, looked at me, and  whispered, Your turn, nigger! Before the r planted on my eardrums, I  jumped out of my desk and tackled the kid. He didnt see it coming as my  fists took turns against his face. Like any good fight, the kids circled around  us yelling, Fight! Fight! Before I could get comfortable wreaking havoc, I  felt a firm hand around my neck pulling me off the kid. In that moment,  I snapped back to reality; I realized I was not in DC anymore but standing  in a foreign land defending what my great-grandfather fought so hard for  me not to have to experience. Mr. Lange held me firmly in one hand and  the kid in the other. All the other kids quickly made their way back to their  seats and the interrogation began. Why were you fighting one another? My  face was stained with anger and my fists were still clenched. Before I could  respond, the kid said I attacked him for no reason. Mr. Lange looked at me  and asked, What happened? The silence in the room was growing uncomfortable, so I looked at him and said, Just send me to the principals office.  I want to go home. I sat alone in the principals office awaiting my fate. The principal stated, I called your father, but hes at work and your  mother isnt home. Any idea where she is? I replied, Shes in class. He  looked at me strangely and said, Oh, shes a teacher? I looked up still in  rage and exclaimed, Shes in school, in school to become a nurse. We  talked about where I was from and why the sudden move to West Virginia. 
J. A. OTTLEY For the next 20 minutes, we spoke like peers, discussing what I missed about  DC, and he told me what it was like for him to grow up in West Virginia. He  had three kids, one of whom was a year younger than I. He said he always  knew he wanted to be a principal. Following in the footsteps of his father,  his dream became a reality. Well, my dream was to play college basketball  for Georgetown University and one day make it to the NBA. He shared that  his favorite player was Patrick Ewing, who once played at Georgetown. In  the middle of our conversation, the secretary pushed the door wide open  and said that my Mom was on line 2. Mr. Principal grabbed the phone  and introduced himself to my Mom. I couldnt hear what she was saying,  but the word fight was said several times before he hung up. The verdict:  I would be suspended for a week and my parents would have a meeting with  the principal before I would be allowed to come back to school. I couldnt  ride the bus home and my parents were not able to come pick me up. I  slumped in the wingback chair, thinking I might be here for a while. STUDENT AND FAMILY ENGAGEMENT When the final bell rang, Mr. Lange pushed through the principals office,  brown leather satchel in his strong hand and a flashy red apple in the other.  Mr. Ottley, grab your bookbag, Im taking you and your brothers home. I  was too exhausted to argue or question him. In addition, I was ready to leave  the principals office. My brothers were sitting in the front office. When they  saw me, they jumped up and ran towards me and asked, Bro, you okay? I  replied, Yeah, Im good. Ill tell you more about it when we get home. We  piled in Mr. Langes station wagon. I was heading for the backseat until his  stern baritone voice reversed my steps. Jason, sit up front. We drove in silence for most of the way. I could hear the harmony of a  French horn and snare drum. I started tapping my hand against my knee  in rhythm. He turned the receiver up, glanced my way, and shared a slight  grin. What did Mr. Lange know about Sam Cookes A Change Is Gonna  Come? My father played this song most Saturday mornings around the  house while he would do his chores. I listened more intently to the words  this time. I glanced over at Mr. Lange as he made a sharp left into our long  driveway. He was singing the wordsall the words. He knew this song. His  voice convicted me and, in that moment, I knew I could trust him. My Mom  was already home and she met us at the door. She invited Mr. Lange in and  announced my father would be home any minute. The thought of my Dad  walking through that door made me anxiously nervous. In a weird way, I  was glad Mr. Lange was present; he could be a buffer between my Dad and  the wrath I was soon to receive. When my Dad arrived home, he kissed my  Mom, warmly greeted us boys, and invited Mr. Lange into his study. No one 

Teacher Effectiveness in a Predominantly White Public School in West Virginia      147 spent time in his study, not even my Mom. I tried to eavesdrop a few times,  but my mother would catch me and call me back to complete my chores.  When they finally pushed the door of his study back, they both were laughing hysterically. What could possibly be funny and, more importantly, what  could they possibly have in common? Mr. Lange stayed for dinner. My parents did not have White friends, and  this was the first time a White person dined with us at the dinner table. Mr.  Lange talked about life in West Virginia. My Dad talked about life in the  Bronx. My Dad discussed race and politics in an inner city. Mr. Lange discussed the lack of race and backward political affiliation in a rural mountain state. They discussed family, friendship, and faith. Hours had passed,  and for the first time I could remember, I was invited to listen to an adult  conversation. My suspension letter read I could return to school in 7 days and my parents had to come in and meet with the principal. The feared conversation  between my Dad and me lasted only a few minutes. He was proud I stood  up for myself but was unhappy that violence was my first recourse. He  opened his Bible and read 1 Thessalonians 5:15: See that no one repays  another with evil for evil, but always seek after that which is good for one  another and for all people. We talked about racial inequities and social  justice until I was dozing off while he talked. He assured me that if I set  the example for how people should treat one another, God would bless  me tremendously. My father placed a great responsibility on my shoulders,  and I was up for the challenge. The next day my father made a phone call to the school, and shortly after, he came into my room with a huge grin. Jason, the school has decided  that you will finish the rest of your suspension in school under the care of  Mr. Lange. You will catch the bus tomorrow morning with your brothers. TEACHER DISRUPTS CLASSROOM CLIMATE I twirled the spaghetti with my fork and sat bewildered, wondering how  my suspension had changed. The next morning, I checked in at the front  office and received instructions that I would be working most of the day  out of one of the teachers resource rooms. My teachers had put together  a student homework packet. I spent the first half of the day working independently and the second half of the day I would meet with Mr. Lange  to go over my homework. I never had enough time to complete my math  homeworkwell, at least that is what I said. Instead of sending me home to  complete it, we sat and worked through it together. What I hated the most  was word problems. Rather than attempt even one-word problem, I skipped  over all of them. Mr. Lange helped me break down the word problems step 
J. A. OTTLEY by step so that, first, I understood what was being asked and, second, I knew  how to answer it. During my suspension, we practiced math word problems  every day. This new routine even had me doing math problems at home. After completing my suspension, I entered the school with a whole new  attitude. My freshly cut high-top fade and FUBU for us, by us jacket was  the one part of home I was able to bring with me. For the first time, I was  eager to be in class, but more eager to be part of the math conversation I  always shied away from. Class, I would like to welcome back to our community Mr. Jason Ottley. I did  not properly welcome Jason to class a week ago and I apologize to him, to  you, and to his family. Jason is an African American malethat is no surprise  to any of us. He comes to us from Washington, DC, and his family has decided to make West Virginia home. It is my job and your job to make Jason  feel at home. I dont know what your family thinks of African Americans, but  I love this young man like he was my own son, so if any of you have a problem  with that, you will have to answer to me. If any of you show this young man  anything less than love and respect, you will have to answer to me. Jason,  welcome to your new home. Now everyone, stand up and come introduce  yourself to our new classmate. I did not anticipate such a warm welcomethe high-fives, daps well, the  White version, and a few hugs. The energy in the room was different that  day than it was last week. The air grew quiet when the White student I physically attacked approached me. I could feel the tightness in my fists start to  swell and the anger return until I felt the assurance of Mr. Langes palm on  my shoulders. I released all anger and rage. Before he could say anything, I said, Bro, I am sorry for putting my  hands on you. I was totally out of character. He responded, No, it was my fault. I should not have called you that  bad word. He extended his hand as a peace treaty. We shook hands, embraced as  young men, and let the world well, the class know that we would stand  together on the right side of justice. Mr. Lange and I continued to meet after school to work on math problems. Before the end of the year, I was tutoring other students in math. As  much as I thought I hated math, it no longer intimidated me once I gained  confidence. Mr. Lange set high expectations for me and he believed in me.  His support changed the trajectory of my academic matriculation and gave  me the confidence to pursue advanced courses after I was successful in his  class. The dream I had of graduating high school and going to play in the  Major Leagues never came to pass. But what I gained in my educational  pursuit has better prepared me for life in ways I am not sure dribbling a basketball after high school would have. As much as I enjoy watching the NBA 

Teacher Effectiveness in a Predominantly White Public School in West Virginia      149 draft each year, I can only hope those athletes have found a mentor who  is as concerned about their personal growth and success as they are about  winning. While my dream took a different shape, it was the shape I needed  to have the impact I was predestined to make in this world. PRACTICAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR WHITE TEACHERS  WHO TEACH BLACK STUDENTS 1.	 When you make phone calls to students homes, address parents by Mr.,  Ms., or Mrs. When possible, first discuss with the parents the positive things about the student. Give parents facts only, no assumptions or personal opinions. Ask the parents for help andor advice.  Invite the parents to come meet you in school when it is convenient  for them. Be open to meeting outside of the school. 2.	 Do not send students to other teachers who share the same racial identity as  you if the student does not have a relationship with them. When students  are sent to other staff members, the teacher loses an opportunity to  build a relationship with the student. It also sends the message that  you do not care and would rather someone else solve your problem. Care enough about the student to build a relationship with  that studentacademically, emotionally, and socially. 3.	 Name the privilege that blinds you from understanding what it means to  be a Black student. What does your position of authority signify to  Black students? Provide love, empathy, and respect. Talk about your  White privilege and how you are working in your classroom to  make sure you provide an equitable space for all students. 4.	 Let go of the White Savior complex. You can have good intentions, but  do not think that your gift to the world is to save Black students.  Black students benefit from your social and cultural capital, so find  ways to share that currency. Get to know your students outside of  the academic space. Volunteer to coach a sport in their neighborhood, attend their church, spend time with their family, read books  written by Black authors, among other possibilities. 5.	 Become a lifelong learner. The best teachers are the best learners. You  are the subject-matter expert, but your students are experts in their  cultures. 6.	 Remove colorblind from your vocabulary. You need to see color because color is beautiful. Colorblindness erases a students identity  and ancestry. When you embrace color, you validate a students  unique experiences and perspectives. You need to see color because Black students do not have an opportunity not to see color. 7.	 Set the bar high. Have high expectations, high support, and high  compassion for Black students.
J. A. OTTLEY REFERENCES Anderson, K. A. 2015. An introduction to Optimal Resource Theory: A framework  for enhancing student achievement. The Journal of Negro Education, 841,  2529. Duckworth, A. L., Quinn, P. D.,  Seligman, M. E. 2009. Positive predictors of  teacher effectiveness. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 46, 540547. Gay, G. 2010. Culturally responsive teaching: Theory, research, and practice. New York,  NY: Teachers College Press. Irvine, J. J. 1990. Black students and school failure. Westport, CT: Greenwood. Ladson-Billings, G. 1992. Liberatory consequences of literacy: A case of culturally  relevant instruction for African-American students. Journal of Negro Education,  61, 378391. Milner, H. R. 2016. A Black male teachers culturally responsive practices. The  Journal of Negro Education, 854, 417432. Stronge, J. 2013. Effective teachers student achievement: What the research says. New  York, NY: Routledge. Tatum, A. 2008. Toward a more anatomically complete model of literacy instruction: A focus on African American male adolescents and texts. Harvard Educational Review, 781, 155180. Toldson, I. A. 2019. No BS Bad Stats: Black people need people who believe in Black  people enough not to believe every bad thing they hear about Black people. Leiden,  The Netherlands: Brill-Sense.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 151154 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 151 AFTERWORD THE IMPACT   OF CLASSROOM PRACTICES Teacher Educators Reflections   on Culturally Relevant Teachers Dawn G. Williams This book is a compilation of accomplished educators, education researchers, and educational leaders providing their powerful narratives of effective  teachers: both familial and professional. It begins by paying homage to the seminal text written by Gloria Ladson-Billings 2009, The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African American  Children and then acknowledges those educators that have kept the dream  of prosperity through education, pervasive and alive. One can only believe  that the strong teachers cited in their upbringing have played a pivotal role  in developing the scholarship produced by these acclaimed leaders. The  authors of this text are educators and scholars that have studied the patterns of American education and assessed it through mirrors and windows.  The phrase mirrors and windows was initially introduced by Emily Style. A  mirror is a story and style of pedagogy that reflects a students culture and 
D. WILLIAMS helps to build and understand their identity. A window is a portrayal that  offers you a view into someone elses lived experience. Education is much  more than knowledge transmission. Obviously, a combination of the two  pedagogical resources are needed in the toolkit of culturally relevant teachers, as windows and mirrors emphasize the need for students to learn about  themselves as well as others. In this inspirational mixture of scholarship and storytelling, the authors  in this collection articulate and illustrate ways that their teacher was able to  hold them to high standards while acknowledging their strengths or gifts. In  many cases their teachers were able to create the opportunity to learn in the  absence of optimism. Each chapter is a constant reminder and affirmation of  the importance of critical pedagogy, where social change is linked to education. These narrative or ethnographic accounts frame their personal reflexive  views of the self where their data are situated within their lived experiences. The posthumous recognition of educators such as Mary McCloud-Bethune and Anna Julia Cooper alongside parents, Big Mamas, and everyday  classroom teachers, have affirmatively shaped the authors and their epistemological view of the education system. They have acknowledged the  weighted contribution that these unsung heroes had on their lives. Many  of these stories included some affiliation or connection to HBCUs. This  comes as no surprise since HBCUs have played such a significant role in  training Black teachers and building the Black middle class. I am reminded of my pathway to become an educator. People often are  surprised to hear that as a student in the NYC Public Schools, I had no  Black teachers. Because of that lack of diverse academic representation, I  enrolled at an HBCU. There I learned and felt the benefits of a culturally  affirming education. However, my first informal role as a teacher was by the  invitation of a Black kindergarten teacher when I was in the 3rd grade. She  asked for me and a classmate to come to her class twice a week to grade papers and work with small groups of students. This unforgettable experience  provided a glimpse of the intrinsic rewards that are often felt by teachers. Students of color comprise more than half of the student population in  public elementary and secondary schools; however, teachers of color represent approximately 20 of the teaching force. Despite research showing the  benefits of a diverse teaching staff for all students, we have not adequately  diversified our nations teaching force. Adding to this dynamic is research  that shows that teachers of color provide more culturally relevant instruction and develop stronger rapport with students of color. They also hold  more positive expectations of students of color compared to their White  counterparts. Clearly, schools must make diversifying the teaching force  a primary goal, but they must go furtherthey must change the way educators teach students of color by incorporating culturally affirming strategies that have demonstrated success for traditionally marginalized student 

The Impact of Classroom Practices     153 populations. Many of these strategies are repeated in multiple personal accounts in this text. We have seen what appears to be a linear progression towards the inclusion of culture in teaching and learning. From the era of teaching tolerance, to cultural relevance, to now cultural responsiveness. Each more  progressive than the last, we have worked to transform pedagogical techniques to better meet the needs of students that have historically been underserved. Many of these movements were introduced by scholars within  the discipline of educator preparation. It is where the next generation of  educators are trained and best represents the future of the profession. As  schools are the epitome of learning organizations we should be open to the  insistence of continuous improvement to reach these goals. We have been provided a roadmap from scholars such as Gloria LadsonBillings, A. Wade Boykin, Donna Ford, Linda Darling Hammond, and so on,  to build and foster an environment that inspires inquiry, discovery, and honors educators as facilitators. This roadmap describes the importance of being student centered, learning within the context of culture, communicating  high expectations, and having positive perspectives of parents and families. Culturally affirming practices advances this movement from efforts of acknowledgement to proactive efforts of empowerment. This requires a level  of appreciation and not just tolerance. This appreciation should be visible  to students of all backgrounds. This looks like educators working to understand, respect, and meet the needs of students who come from culturally  diverse backgrounds. It requires the enthusiastic inclusion of parents, families, and the cultural community at large. Alongside the community at large,  educators will co-construct critically reflective learning experiences for the  purpose of achieving academic success and positive identity development. While the adoption of culturally affirming practices and pedagogy has  great significance in culturally diverse schools, it also holds value for schools  in which the student population is majority White. All students need to see  educators embrace the appreciation and affirmation of our diverse society, even if that diversity is not present in their classrooms. This expression  of inclusion provides a more just presentation of our democratic society  in which our youth will eventually participate. Students of all racial backgrounds can benefit from a diverse teacher workforce and a culturally affirming curriculum that represents the nations overall demographics. At the time of this publication, we are in the midst of a global health  pandemic: the coronavirus. The rapid spread of the coronavirus has forced  all schools elementary through post-secondary in the country to close for  months. It has necessitated distant learning and remote instruction. Every  sector of the society is feeling the impact of this virus, but these effects  are hardest among those who were already most vulnerable. The inequities  in our country are being magnified by the masses and are most visible in 
D. WILLIAMS our education system. The pandemic has brought greater attention to the  disparities among racial and economic groups. It has magnified just how  uneven the playing field is. Herein lies an opportunity to rebuild an education system that does not include structural deficits, but does include the  positive pedagogical strategies cited throughout this text. Mark Twain once stated, History doesnt repeat itself, but it often  rhymes. We cannot afford to experience dj vu and double down on the  now layered inequities in schools. Texts like The Impact of Classroom Practices:  Teacher Educators Reflections on Culturally Relevant Teachers aid in increasing  our awareness and understanding in order to address factors which contribute to inequities. We all have a critical role to play in dismantling ineffective  structures and co-constructing affirming educational spaces. REFERENCE Ladson-Billings, G. 2009. The dreamkeepers: Successful teachers of African American  children 2nd ed. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 155156 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 155 ABOUT THE EDITORS Antonio L. Ellis, EdD, is an adjunct professor of educational leadership and  policy studies at Howard University. In addition, Antonio is the director of  specialized instruction with the District of Columbia Public Schools. His research focuses on critical race theory in special education with an emphasis  on African American male students who are speech impaired. Nathaniel Bryan, EdD, PhD, is an assistant professor of early childhood education at the Miami University. His teaching and scholarship explores issues of equity and diversity, critical race theory, culturally relevant teaching,  urban education, and Black education. Though he studies broadly these  frameworks, he is particularly interested in the constructed identities and  pedagogical styles of Black male teachers and the schooling and childhood  play experiences of Black boys in early childhood classrooms through a  critical lens. In his spare time, Dr. Bryan enjoys reading novels, traveling  abroad, and spending time with family. Yolanda Sealey-Ruiz, PhD, is an associate professor of English education  at Teachers College, Columbia University. Yolanda is a former research associate with the NYU Metropolitan Center for Urban Education, and has  worked for Business Week, The New York Times, and New York University in  marketing and promotion positions. Her research interests include racial  literacy development in urban teacher education with a specific focus on  the education of Black and Latino males, literacy practices of Black girls,  and Black female college reentry students.
About the Editors Ivory A. Toldson, PhD, is a professor of counseling psychology at Howard  University, the president of Quality Education for Minorities, the editor-inchief of the Journal of Negro Education, and executive editor of the Journal  of Policy Analysis and Research, published by the Congressional Black Caucus  Foundation, Inc. He is the author of Brill Bestseller, No BS Bad Stats: Black  People Need People Who Believe in Black People Enough Not to Believe Every Bad  Thing They Hear about Black People Brill.  Christopher Emdin, PhD, is an associate professor in the Department of  Mathematics, Science and Technology at Teachers College, Columbia University; where he also serves as director of the science education program  and associate director of the Institute for Urban and Minority Education.  He is an alumni fellow at the Hutchins Center at Harvard University and  served as STEAM Ambassador for the U.S. Department of State and Minorities in Energy Ambassador for the U.S. Department of Energy.

The Impact of Classroom Practices, pages 157160 Copyright  2021 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 157 ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS Anthony Broughton, PhD, is an assistant professor and interim department  chair at Claflin University. His research interest focuses on culturally relevant pedagogy, Hip Hop Pedagogy, Black children, and pedagogies of care,  and social emotional learning. Kenneth D. Brown, PhD, is an assistant principal with the District of Columbia Public Schools. Special education instruction, advocacy, and compliance has been his primary focus where he has worked with both general  education and exceptional learners in grades Prekindergarten through  12th. His research focuses on mentoring programs for boys of color and  how participation impacts the mentees mental and social success. Antonio L. Ellis, EdD, scholar in residence and director of the Institute on  Education Equity and Justice at American University. In addition, Antonio is  the director of specialized instruction with the District of Columbia Public  Schools. His research focuses on critical race theory in special education with  an emphasis on African American male students who are speech impaired. Lum Fube, MA, is a doctoral student in curriculum and teaching at Teachers College, Columbia University. Her research focuses on wellbeing, pedagogies of love and care, and pop culture. Chaz T. Gipson, PhD, is currently a senior program manager at the United  States Department of Education in the Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, where he manages a 150 million dollar budget for multiple 
About the Contributors school districts. In his immediate past position, he worked in the Office of  Post Secondary Education in the Division of Student Services, where he collaborated with over 120 colleges and universities to enhance educational  programs, while improving access and opportunities for low income and  first generation students nationwide. Cleveland Hayes, PhD, is a professor of education foundations and science  education at Indiana University School of EducationIndianapolis. His research focuses on the pedagogical practices on Black teachers historically  and contemporarily, the experiences of Latinx male teachers from a critical  race theory perspective. Tiffany Hollis, PhD, is an assistant professor at Coastal Carolina University.  Her research interests focus on the intersection of trauma, culture, and  special education, while focusing on the ecological factors of students who  have emotional and behavior disabilities or mental health-related issues.  She also focuses on the importance of familyschoolcommunitycollege  partnerships to help youth thrive in the face of risk. James T. Jackson, PhD, is a professor of special education at Howard University. His research addresses the impact of stress on behavior and learning of  students, and the usefulness of the arts in teaching and teacher preparation. Jubria Lewis, EdD, is the director of school improvement for the SEED  Foundation. Dedicated and committed to educational equity, Jubria Lewis  has over 15 years of experience working in public education in Washington,  DC; Maryland; and Chicago. As the director of school improvement, Jubria  supports all three SEED schools with school improvement initiatives and  works collaboratively with school leadership to establish ambitious student  performance targets. Prior to joining The SEED Foundation, Jubria served  as principal for 8 years at a DC charter school. Marvin Lynn, PhD, is the dean of the College of Education COE at Portland State University. Dr. Lynn possesses decades of leadership and community service experience on prestigious national, state, and local committees. His leadership experience in other schools of education includes his  role as program coordinator at the University of Maryland and later at the  University of Illinois at Chicago. Dr. Lynn also was the associate dean at the  University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire and dean of the School of Education at  Indiana University South Bend. Brian L. McGowan, PhD, is an associate professor of education and the  associate director of pedagogy and higher education research in the Center for Teaching, Research, and Learning at American University. Brian is  a former project associate with the Center for Postsecondary Research at 

About the Contributors    159 Indiana University and has worked in higher education administrative positions at The Ohio State University and Rutgers University. His research is  driven by questions that unearth the experiences of Black college men and  faculty across different educational contexts. Jason Ottley, PhD, serves as an assistant director of First Year Advising at  American University. Prior to this position, Jason was a visiting assistant professor at California University of Pennsylvania. Jason personifies a perfect  blend of scholarship, innovation, grit, professionalism, and heart. Having a  strong reputation of student development, strategic planning and empowering both educators and students to strive for the best version of themselves, Jason unapologetically is a natural-born leader who will prove to be  essential to how the world views progressive education in the 21st century. Dr. Yolanda Sealey-Ruiz, PhD, is an associate professor of English Education at Teachers College, Columbia University. Yolanda is a former research  associate with the NYU Metropolitan Center for Urban Education, and has  worked for Business Week, The New York Times, and New York University in  marketing and promotion positions. Her research interests include racial  literacy development in urban teacher education with a specific focus on  the education of Black and Latino males, literacy practices of Black girls,  and Black female college reentry students. Zollie Stevenson, Jr., PhD, recently retired as vice president for academic  affairschief academic officer and associate professor of psychology tenured at Philander Smith College in Little Rock, Arkansas. In retirement  he continues to serve a consultancy as special assistant to the president of  Philander Smith College focused on grant development and strategic planning. In addition, Stevenson teaches undergraduate courses in psychology  at Philander Smith and graduate classes in educational leadership and policy at Howard University.  Terrell Strayhorn, PhD, is provost and senior vice president of academic  affairs a Virginia Union University, where he also serves as professor of  urban education and director of the Center for the Study of HBCUs. An  internationally recognized equity scholar, Strayhorns research expertise  centers on the social psychological determinants of student success. He has  published 10 books and over 200 chapters and journal articles. He serves  as chief editor, Higher Education Specialty of Frontiers in Education journal,  subject editor of Social Sciences  Humanities, as well as serves on several  editorial boards and review panels. William F. Tate IV, PhD, is the provost and executive vice president of academic affairs at the University of South Carolina, where he is also U of SC 
About the Contributors Education Foundation Distinguished Professor with appointments in Sociology and Family and Preventive Medicine. He previously served as dean  and vice provost for graduate education and the held the Edward Mallinckrodt Distinguished University Professorship in Arts  Sciences at Washington University in St. Louis. His research has focused on the development of  epidemiological and geospatial models to explain the social determinants  of educational attainment as well as health and development outcomes. Dawn G. Williams, PhD, is the dean of the Howard University School of  Education. Her teaching experience spans over 2 decades where she has  taught elementary students, high school students, undergraduate students,  graduate students, and PhD STEM faculty. Underlying all of her work are  premises that include the indoctrination of social justice through teaching,  research, and service. Prior to serving as dean, she served as a department  chair and program coordinator. Dr. Williams is author and co-author of  articles and book chapters that highlight the impact of K12 macro educational policies targeted for urban school reform. She has also published  largely in the emergent interdisciplinary field of engineering education.  Over the past decade, she has been a recipient of several federal grants  totaling approximately 4.3 million. Her research in the STEM and educational policy arena are focused on issues of access and diversity while  promoting a conscious social justice agenda.