Carol Ann Tomlinson Marcia B. Imbeau Leading and Managing ADifferentiated  Classroom 2nd Edition 

Leading and Managing ADifferentiated  Classroom 2nd Edition 
Shirlington Road, Suite 1001  Arlington, VA 22206 USA Phone: 800-933-2723 or 703-578-9600  Fax: 703-575-5400 Website: www.ascd.org  Email: memberascd.org Author guidelines: www.ascd.orgwrite Penny Reinart, Deputy Executive Director; Genny Ostertag, Managing Director, Book Acquisitions  Editing; Mary Beth  Nielsen, Interim Director, Book Editing; Katie Martin, Editor; Thomas Lytle, Creative Director; Donald Ely, Art Director;  Georgia Park, Senior Graphic Designer; Valerie Younkin, Senior Production Designer; Kelly Marshall, Production Manager;  Shajuan Martin, E-Publishing Specialist; Christopher Logan, Senior Production Specialist Copyright  2023 ASCD. All rights reserved. It is illegal to reproduce copies of this work in print or electronic format  including reproductions displayed on a secure intranet or stored in a retrieval system or other electronic storage device  from which copies can be made or displayed without the prior written permission of the publisher. By purchasing only  authorized electronic or print editions and not participating in or encouraging piracy of copyrighted materials, you support the rights of authors and publishers. Readers who wish to reproduce or republish excerpts of this work in print or  electronic format may do so for a small fee by contacting the Copyright Clearance Center CCC, 222 Rosewood Dr.,  Danvers, MA 01923, USA phone: 978-750-8400; fax: 978-646-8600; web: www.copyright.com. To inquire about site  licensing options or any other reuse, contact ASCD Permissions at www.ascd.orgpermissions or permissionsascd. org. For a list of vendors authorized to license ASCD e-books to institutions, see www.ascd.orgepubs. Send translation  inquiries to translationsascd.org. Figure 2.1 on page 51 is used with permission from Differentiation and the Brain: How Neuroscience Supports the LearnerFriendly Classroom by David A. Sousa and Carol Ann Tomlinson. Solution Tree Press, 555 North Morton Street, Bloomington, IN 47404, 800.733.6786. All rights reserved. Solution Tree is a leading provider of educational strategies and tools  that improve staff and student performance. Visit solution-tree.com for more information. All web links in this book are correct as of the publication date below but may have become inactive or otherwise modified  since that time. If you notice a deactivated or changed link, please email booksascd.org with the words Link Update  in the subject line. In your message, please specify the web link, the book title, and the page number on which the link  appears. PAPERBACK ISBN: 978-1-4166-3177-4  ASCD product 122012 PDF EBOOK ISBN: 978-1-4166-3178-1; see Books in Print for other formats. Quantity discounts are available: email programteamascd.org or call 800-933-2723, ext. 5773, or 703-575-5773. For  desk copies, go to www.ascd.orgdeskcopy. ASCD Member Book No. FY23-3 Dec. 2022 P. ASCD Member Books mail to Premium P, Select S, and Institutional Plus I members on this schedule: Jan, PSI; Feb, P; Apr, PSI; May, P; Jul, PSI; Aug, P; Sep, PSI; Nov, PSI;  Dec, P. For current details on membership, see www.ascd.orgmembership. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Tomlinson, Carol A., author.  Imbeau, Marcia B., author. Title: Leading and managing a differentiated classroom  Carol Ann Tomlinson, Marcia B. Imbeau. Description: 2nd edition.  Arlington, Virginia : ASCD, 2023.  Includes bibliographical references and index.  Identifiers: LCCN 2022047464 print  LCCN 2022047465 ebook  ISBN 9781416631774 paperback  ISBN  9781416631781 pdf Subjects: LCSH: Individualized instructionUnited States.  Inclusive educationUnited States.  Classroom managementUnited States. Classification: LCC LB1031 .T67 2023  print  LCC LB1031  ebook  DDC    371.394dc23eng20221102 LC record available at https:lccn.loc.gov2022047464 LC ebook record available at https:lccn.loc.gov2022047465 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

For the teachers who didnt give up on us,  whose aspirations helped us find something better  in ourselves than we had seen before,  and who then, through experience and by example,  taught us the enlivening power of learning.  And to the people whose steady love compels  us to ask each time we enter a classroom,  Which person in this place is not in need  of the same sense of possibility these teachers have given us?

Leading and Managing a Differentiated  Classroom 2nd Edition Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1 Part I: Leading for a Differentiated Classroom  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 1.  Understanding Differentiation in Order to Lead: Aiming for Fidelity to a Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28 2.  Teaching What You Believe: A Philosophy to Guide Teachers Who Lead for Differentiation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43 3.  The Invitation to the Vision: Talking with Students, Parents, and Other Educators About Differentiation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  63 Part II: Managing a Differentiated Classroom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  89 4.  Learning Environment: Setting the Stage for Academic Success . . . . . . . . . . . . .  94 5.  Classroom Routines: Preparing for the Work Ahead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122 6.  Routines in a Differentiated Classroom: Once the Work Begins  . . . . . . . . . . . 139 7.  Yes, But . . .: Common Sticking Points About Differentiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188 Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193 About the Authors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199
Far away there in the sunshine are my highest aspirations. I may not reach  them, but I can look up and see their beauty, believe in them, and try to follow  where they lead. Louisa May Alcott I couldnt tell you much in detail about my sixth year of teaching, or my tenth,  or any other specific year in the 21 years I spent in high school, preschool, and  middle school classrooms except for my first and fourth years. There are memories from each of the years I taught in public school that will always reside in me,  of course, but no other particular years exist in my mind with the sharp detail of  those two. It was in those two years that I established my compass as a teacher. As a teenager, I vowed Id never be a teacher. My mother was a teacher and  immensely proud of her work, which was fine with meuntil she and I ended  up in the same school during my 6th grade year. It was a hard year for me. Not  only was I entering adolescence with an impressive case of self-consciousness,  but I was also attending a new school in a new town. On principle, I didnt want  to like anything. My teacher that year was one of the best I ever had. Nonetheless, it was clear to me that my mother came home with knowledge of things I  Preface
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom had said or done during the school day. I felt spied on, and that nourished my  self-consciousness. With the lack of logic that is adolescence, I concluded that I  did not want to be one of those spy people who watched kids and told on them.  Forget that my teacher was supportive and kind and tried to make my life better;  in my adolescent mind, she was a spy . . . and I was the one spied upon. So, I declared I would do anything but teach when I grew up. Over the next  10 years, I persisted with that declaration at appropriate pointsincluding when  my mother suggested I take education courses in college, just in case. With  some disdain, I reminded my mother that I was a young adult who had earned  the right to make her own decisions. In turn, my mother explained, with remarkable calmness, that she was the one paying my college tuition bill. She would  support any major I chose so long as I took the education courses required for  certification. I took the education courses. As expected, I found them pointless and  renewed my vow that I would never, ever, under any circumstances be a teacher. A Career Begins I got my first job as a teacher in my second year out of college. I was working as an  advertising manager for a university press, and despite my natural introversion, I  just couldnt warm up to a job that called on me to sit alone in a small room, day  after day, working with esoteric copy for esoteric books. Then, at lunch one day  in October, I saw a newspaper ad for a teaching job. Magically, it sounded like  salvation. I took the afternoon off, went for the interview, and was hired on a oneyear contract to be a high school English and history teacher. On Monday, I arrived at my new K12 school, which was about an hour and  15 minutes from my house. It was in an area that gave sharp definition to the  word rural. The little town had a name, a post office, a flue shop it sold tobaccocuring supplies, and an autobody shop. The post office closed shortly after I  arrived because it had too little business. The flue shop fared well enough because  of the local tobacco growers. The body shop thrived because of its location: near  a railroad track where the road dipped about 12 inches with no warning. The principal of the school where I was about to begin what I assumed would  be a one-year career seldom came to school during the early part of the day. He  was shy and, I think, quite afraid of the older students. So it was the assistant 
Preface principal who took me to my new classroom on Day 1 and announced to the very  small, elderly teacher in the classroom that he was fired. Understandably angry,  the teacher told me that, since he was no longer employed, I should jump right  in and see what I could do with the class. Despite befuddled terror and my own  massive shyness, I found enough voice to say to him that Id been promised a day  to observe and get textbooks before I started teaching, and so I believed it would  be better if I just sat in the back of the room. And thats what I did. For the rest of the day, I watched as high school girls  giggled and chatted and high school boys crawled in and out of the first-floor window and tried unsuccessfully to set a large freestanding bulletin board on fire.  Two thoughts kept playing on a loop in my mind: What am I going to do with  this chaos tomorrow? and I dont think I need a job this badly. Recall that, as a college student, I found my education classes to be without  merit. Whether that was the result of the classes themselves or of my attitude  about taking them, the reality of my new situation was that I had no idea how to  teach. Yet this seemed less important than the realization that I had not the first  clue about how to manage the high school students who were clearly in need  of being managed. In my overwrought condition, I completed my very first lesson plan at 3:42  a.m. on Tuesday morning. It was a truly stupid plan that seemed completely  acceptable at the time: I would have the students complete a crossword puzzle  with me. The intent of the plan was twofold. First, it would buy me a day to figure  out what these students knew and didnt know about American literature and  world historythe two subjects I had been hired to teach. Second, it would let  me establish myself as someone who gave clear and effective directions to students so we would have order in the classroomin other words, Id be able to  keep the kids in their seats. This crossword puzzle had very little to do with either literature or history.  Its main qualification for my first lesson plan was that it was the only crossword  puzzle I could find in the middle of the night. It provided no window at all into  my students knowledge of our content, and my thought that they would follow  directions simply because I gave them was beyond nave. By all rights, my first day as a teacher should have been a cosmic disaster.  Instead, it taught me the first of many lessons I learned that year that have continued to serve me well ever since.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Classroom Management 101, Lesson 1 It turned out that my students were from a universe largely unrelated to the one  I knew. Most of them had never left the insular area where they had been born.  None of them had college-educated parents, and few of them had any aspirations  for a careeror even a job. With little meaningful interaction with the wider  world, old suspicions and animosities permeated their community. Outsiders  didnt show up there very often. And yet these students were happy, thoughtful,  full of a wisdom the likes of which I had never encountered, and wide open to  new possibilities, despite the fact that they were pretty sure I was from an alien  planet. On my first Tuesday as a teacher, I got my students attention when I asked  them to take assigned seats as they entered the room. This caught them off guard;  they were unaccustomed to having assigned seats, and for a moment, the surprise  made them uncharacteristically quiet. Quiet was promising! Then I passed out  copies of the crossword puzzle, explaining to students that they would work in  pairs on specified portions of the puzzle, and after a while, we would reassemble  as a whole class to check the portion of the work they had completed. My plan  was to solve the entire puzzle in stages: work in pairs, come together, check work,  then go back to the pairs to solve another portion. It was less a lesson plan than  choreography of a teacher giving directions and students following them. The big, unanticipated problem was that not a single one of my 10th grade  students had ever seen a crossword puzzle, let alone solved one. They turned the  purple ditto sheets over and over as if they were seeking some sort of physical  orientation to the task. Realization dawning, I adjusted my plans accordingly:  Id just give directions to the class as a whole, and wed solve the entire puzzle  together. After all, the answers to the crossword puzzle were secondary, werent  they? What mattered was that I gave good directions and that the students followed them. What mattered was that I maintained order. I hit another, more serious roadblock when I read the first clue aloud. It said,  Our country, abbr. The puzzle had three blank boxes for the answer. In the  moment that followed, my students faces and a few verbal hints revealed the  following: 1 no one knew what the clues had to do with the boxes, 2 there  might have been some confusion about the meaning of across versus down,  3 no one knew what an abbreviation was yielding a serious problem with the  abbreviation of abbreviation, and, most significantly, 4 not a single student  seemed to know the name of our country. After a painful sequence of hint-fueled 
Preface guesses had finally led us to the United States of America, we encountered a  fifth problema country with a four-part name but only three boxes to enter its  abbreviation. All five of my classes that day ended with me announcing, as the  bell rang, that our country was called the United States of America and the abbreviation for that name was USA. It took an entire class period, but we were finally  ready to enter an answer for 1-Across. But do you know what? The students  stayed in their seats. At the end of the day, I was exhausted, delighted with the extreme orderliness of my classes, and devoid of ideas about what I should do on Wednesday.  Although I was also too tired and too new to understand what I had just learned,  my first principle of classroom management eventually became clear: When students are engaged, they have no motivation to misbehave. My students were models  of deportment on that daynot because I stood in front of them and gave directions, of course, but because I had happened onto a task albeit a vacuous one  that intrigued them. Classroom Management 101, Lesson 2 My education as a teacher continued throughout the year, with a second pivotal lesson about classroom management coming about two weeks later. In the  interim, my students and I had good moments and bad. Although I was trying hard, I truly didnt know what I was doing. I couldnt steer a steady course  because I didnt yet know why some things worked and others didnt. It was to my advantage that I was a novelty for the studentsa very tall  teacher from the outside world who continued to do the unexpected in a school  where nearly all the faculty were lifers in the community. I continued to use  seating charts, and I was still big on making sure I gave clear directions for my  unorthodox assignments. Thats what I was attempting to do during first period  on a Monday when, about 10 minutes after the tardy bell, a formidable-looking  girl entered the classroom by slamming the door against the wall. She stood in the  threshold with her hands on her hips and an I dare you to mess with me look  on her face. The rest of the class looked wide-eyed at the student in the doorway, their  expressions telling me both that they knew who this was and that they were not  about to mess with her. A switch flipped in my head, and I recalled that there was  a student in this class whod been absent since I arrived. I smiled at the girl in the  doorway and greeted her. I bet youre Estralita, I said. Im Carol Tomlinson, 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom and Im the new teacher for this class. Everyone has an assigned seat now, and  yours is right up here. I pointed to a vacant seat in the front row. She stared for  another second or two, emitted a sound that can only be described as a snort, and  headed for the back of the room. What happened next could have gone in a very different direction. Again,  I smiled broadly at Estralita and said mildly, Weve missed you, Estralita. Im  glad youre back. Now get your sorry self in your assigned seat up here so you  can work with us. Then I immediately launched back into the assignment directions. The class inhaled collectively. Estralitas eyes flashed. She looked around,  puzzled, I think, by the sight of all of her classmates sitting there not misbehaving.  Estralita stopped, pivoted, and then stalked to the front of the room. She threw  her books on the floor and sat in desk like an angry bull for the rest of the class. I  smiled at her again as the period ended and told her I was looking forward to getting to know her. Her only reply was another one of those snorts. The next day was a rerun of this scenario. Estralita bashed in about 10 minutes into class, and I smiled at her and said, Im so glad you came today; I was  afraid you were absent. Again, the class froze. Again, Estralita stared and headed  with a harrumph toward the back of the class. Once again, I said, Estralita, get  your sorry self in your assigned seat and continued without pause with what  I had been saying. And once again, she surveyed the territory, noticed that the  class was with me, stalked to the front of the room, and deposited herself in the  designated seat. We continued this perilous ballet for four days. By Friday, all the moves were  predictable. As Estralita propelled herself to the rear of the room, I began my now  well-rehearsed response, Estralita . . . . I know, she said, interrupting me. I gotta get my sorry self in my assigned  seat. And she did. At the time, I didnt realize that something important had happened; I just plowed ahead. In that moment, though, Estralita decided to join us.  She made the choice to be a member of the class rather than a combatant. Again, I didnt know for several months the importance of Estralitas decision  in my survival as a teacher, and it was good that I didnt. It would have undone my  fragile sense of efficacy. Much later in the year, I learned that Estralita had missed  my first week in the classroom due to suspension. In fact, she had argued with  the teacher I replaced and literally knocked him unconscious to the floor. I had 
Preface been hired not because I had great credentials in English and clearly not because  I knew history but because I was physically large enough to confront Estralita. In the end, however, it was not my size that won the day with Estralita. It was  her sense that I was somehow accepting of herthat I felt she belonged in the  class and that there was a place for her there. In time, I came to understand my  second lesson of classroom management: If students understand that their teacher  sees them as worthwhile people with significant potential, it opens doors to learning. My get your sorry self in your assigned seat comment could be seen as challenging or sarcastic. It was, however, delivered with a sincere smile and a sense  of endearment. She saw in my face and heard in my tone that something had  changed in this classroom. For the first time she could remember, someone was  greeting her with positive expectations. It took weeks, if not months, for Estralita  to truly begin trusting me, but from our first encounter, she felt invited. That was  enough to buy us both some timeand to teach me once again that my penchant  for directions was not enough to make me an effective classroom manager. Classroom Management 101, Lesson 3 I learned many more lessons about life and managing a classroom during that  first year as a teacher. I learned how to pace lessons, how to organize materials,  how to start and stop class with purpose, and how to shift gears if something  wasnt going well, to name just a few. When the year ended and I moved to  another state, it was hard to leave Estralita and her peers. I still think about them  nearly four decades later. My second year as a teacher was spent as the director of and teacher in a preschool with a very international population in a metropolitan area. Once again,  I had no idea what I was doing. Once again, I learned important lessons through  instinct, error, and luck. Once again, my students taught me more than I was  prepared to teach them. It was in my third setting, this time in a district where I would go on to teach  for 20 years, that my third career-shaping lesson about managing a classroom  presented itself. As had been the case with my first two schools, the student  population pushed on the perimeter of my experiences. In this school, we had  a bimodal population. By that, I mean that nearly 50 percent of the students in  my 7th grade language arts classes read four or more years below grade level, and  nearly 50 percent of them read four or more years above grade level. In other  words, there were almost no students in the middle.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom At this point in my development, I finally believed I was a teacher. The  students had not devoured me in terms of classroom management during my  initial years, and now I even had a clear sense of my curriculum, thanks to a thick  teachers guide I developed with some of my colleagues during the summer after  my first year in the school. Gone were the days of staying up late on Monday  to figure out what to teach on Tuesday and then staying up late on Tuesday to  figure out what to teach on Wednesday. With my guide, I not only knew on Monday what I should teach on Tuesday, but I knew in September what I would be  teaching in May. Confident that I was in control of the students and curriculum,  I was jazzed about beginning of my fourth year in the classroom. My world shifted rapidly when I met Golden, a 15-year-old who had just  been placed in my second period 7th grade class. Two weeks into the school year.  Golden approached me during a class change and whispered something I could  not hear. The hall resonated with student talk. He was short and I was tall. He  spoke with his hand over his mouth. After three tries, I said to him, Im so sorry,  but its really noisy and I just cant hear what youre saying. Lets try this once  more. Ill bend down so Im closer to you and I can hear better. You keep your  hand down this time. I want to hear what youre trying to tell me. What Golden was saying to me was I cant read, and he was telling me the  truth. He was three years too old for 7th grade, and he did not know the whole  alphabet. For my part, I didnt know how to teach reading, but I did know that  his confession was an act of courage and trust, and there was no way I could let  him down. In that flash of time in the hallway, a rush of questions filled my mindand  they have driven my work ever since. How do I teach reading when Ive never  been trained for that? How do I make this boy a respected member of the class  when he can neither read nor write? Do I seat him near someone who is really  smart and let that student help him? Do I try to hide the fact that he is so far  behind? What materials will I use with him? How can I find time to work with  him on the things he needs? How in the world will I handle report cards in a way  that is not demoralizing? Perhaps my most frightening realization was that the  curriculum notebook I was sure would pave the way to my success as a teacher  was suddenly an encumbranceat least in my work with Golden. For months, I obsessed about Golden as I tried to answer these questions  and others that wouldnt leave me alone. We made some progress, and I began  to figure out a rhythm for working with him while also teaching the 35 other students in the room. Goldens needs were very different than what the curriculum 
Preface anticipated, so I began to create a different curriculum for him that was embedded within the wider curriculum I had to teach everyone. Then I thought about Jonathan. He had been in class all year. He was a good  kid, he was smart and funny, and he made good grades. It was not until the early  spring, though, that I really saw Jonathan for the first time. I was teaching a lesson on symbols in literaturea tricky topic for 7th graders who are often still a  bit concrete in their thinking. I was proud of my concept attainment lesson on  the topic. It was well planned, and the kids couldnt have responded better. After  an examination of objects and photos of objects, I felt comfortable that the students were ready to name the concept we were pursuingin this case, symbols.  They offered their labels with only modest hesitation. Most students thought the  objects I had shared with them in an attempt to evoke the idea of symbols should  be called signs. One suggested trademarks. After a long silence, one final student proposed that we call them logos. When it was clear that no one else had any options to offer and silence  overtook the class, many students literally looked across the room to Jonathan.  In compliance with their silent signal to please save the teacher from all this awkwardness, he raised his hand, sighed, and said with audible weariness, Theyre  symbols. The other students were satisfied that this was the right answer,  because it was Jonathans answer. We then tried to define the things wed been happily investigating. The task  was too ambiguoustoo riskyfor most students. Back then, I didnt know  about Think-Pair-Share or reflective journals or even wait time, and so the silence  wrapped around us again. Once more, the other students looked to Jonathan,  and once again, he raised his hand. What do you think a symbol is? I asked him  gratefully. Once again he sighed and offered without pause a definition he seemingly carried in his headhad carried in his head for goodness knows how many  years. A symbol, Jonathan said, is an abstract representation of a concrete  entity. In that moment, I understood my third principle of classroom management:  The classroom cant work for anybody until it works for everybody! The problem wasnt that Golden had one set of needs and everyone else had  another. The problem was that I had a room full of students with widely differing needs. I couldnt make the classroom work for Golden as well as it needed to  because I was trying to fit him in around the edges of the real agenda. At that  point, I saw clearly that my magical curriculum guide failed Jonathan as surely  as it failed Golden. I somehow had to learn to plan a classroom where flexibility 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom provided opportunity for everyone. In other words, I understood at that moment  that an effective teacher is not someone who just teaches content. An effective  teacher is someone who teaches content to distinct human beings, and the classroom has to work in such a way that each individual in it has a legitimate opportunity to grow as much as possible from their starting point. I realized, then, that classroom management is the process of figuring out  how to set up and orchestrate a classroom in which students sometimes work  as a whole group, as small groups, and as individuals. The goal would be to have  everyone work not only on things they all need to do in common but also on  things that were of particular importance for their own individual growth. This insight indicated considerable growth in me as a teacher. I had progressed from defining classroom management as 1 keeping kids in their  seats to 2 giving good directions to 3 being rooted in engaging curriculum  to 4 stemming from genuine respect for each student, and, finally, to 5 making room for individual and group needs. Each new realization built upon and  broadened my understanding of what it meant to be a teacher. Each year in the  classroom, each new class, and each student in those classes were catalysts for my  continuing growth in understanding and practice. In time, I came to be a little uncomfortable with the term classroom management. I dont like being managed myself, and I realized that I respond much  better to being led. Ultimately, I understood that a part of my role was leading  students and managing the details and mechanics of the classroom. Therefore, I  began to think about the distinction between being a leader in and a manager of  the classroom. Still later, I came to understand the interdependence of learning  environment, curriculum, assessment, and instruction. I understood more clearly  the ways in which classroom leadership and management were part of one system and how they could enable me to use all of the classroom elements to reach  each of my students. Throughout my career, I learned to think about time, space, materials,  groups, and strategies in ways that balanced content requirements and the needs  of young learners. I happened upon and invented ways to make the classroom  more efficient for me and more effective for my students. Likewise, I happened  upon and invented ideas that appropriately met a quick demise. This book  reflects much of that learning, both things worth considering and things to avoid. Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom is presented in two parts.  The first part focuses on what it means for a teacher to effectively lead students  in a differentiated classroom. The second part focuses on the mechanics of 
Preface managing a differentiated classroom. In practice, of course, teachers must think  about both elements at once. Its likely, however, that looking at the roles of  leader and manager separately clarifies two complementary but distinct lines of  thinking that contribute to teacher and student success. My coauthor for this book is Marcia Imbeau, a good friend, colleague, and  stellar mentor for novice teachers. Her own teaching experience is as rooted in  the elementary classroom as mine is rooted in the secondary classroom. We both  know that the principles of managing and leading an effectively differentiated  classroom are the same across grades and subjects, but we also know that teachers want and need to see illustrations that match their teaching assignments. We  have tried to provide authentic and tested examples of the principles at work in  varied grade levels and in varied subjects. In addition, we both know there is no recipe for effective leadership and  management in a differentiated classroom. We dont pretend to provide one. Our  goal is to think aloud from the principles that govern our experiences and invite  you to think along with us to discover ways to expand your capacity as a teacher  who works tirelessly to make room for each student. For us, this is an aspirational guide. We have no illusions that any teacher even the best among usreads a book and emerges with a radically different  teaching style in tow. We do believe, however, that there are many teachers who  aspire to grow as professionals every day. We believe there are teachers who will  read and reread ideas in pursuit of understanding and insight. We believe there  are teachers who, despite powerful forces to the contrary, will act with professional integrity in their classrooms and realize both deeply held and emerging  beliefs to benefit each of their students. We believe those teachers exist because  we have been taught by them and watched them teach. Weve written this book  for those aspirational teachers who mean to change themselves and their studentsand do. This new edition of Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom is based  on more than a decade of new research that has evolved since the first edition  was published in 2010. It provides readers not only with updated citations but  also with narration and examples that derive from that research. It also reflects  the continuing development of our thinking about what characterizes effective  learner-centered classrooms, based both on research and ongoing experience in  our own classrooms as well as in the classrooms and schools across the United  States and internationally. In addition, the second edition contains an expanded  discussion of approaches that honor and support the diversity of learners in 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom contemporary classroom and uses modified language with a focus on the inclusion of all students in effective differentiation. Our intention here, as in all of our  work, is to help build a foundation from which educators can create learning  environments and opportunities appropriate to their own particular and unique  contexts. Thanks for thinking along with us! Carol Tomlinson
Part I Part I
Leading for a Differentiated Classroom The teachers overriding moral purpose is to meet the needs of students, even  when it conflicts with personal preferences. Lorna Earl, Assessment as Learning A chorus of voicesrepresentative of experts in virtually every aspect of  education continually asserts that current ideas about how to do school  are inadequate, both as a reflection of our current knowledge of teaching and  learning and as a means to address the learning needs of an increasingly diverse  student population. In terms of incorporating contemporary knowledge of how  people learn into the classroom, experts make the analogy that were settling for  a Model T Ford instead of drawing on 21st century automotive engineering.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom New Expectations to Meet the Needs  of a New Generation of Learners More to the point, the old images of effective classrooms are anachronistic in  terms of todays students and their needs. Not only do learners in our schools  compose an increasingly diverse group, but they are also young people who live  in a world of personalization, at least outside school. They watch the entertainment they want on demand rather than on some network programmers schedule. They order custom computers that are specifically equipped for their needs  and desires. They get news on demand and the information they need, when they  need it. In school, however, theyre often still taught as though their variance in  readiness, individual interests, and particular approaches to learning are of no  consequence. It is becoming increasingly difficult to pretend that batch processing of a vastly diverse student population supports them as learners or that we are  preparing them for productive citizenship in a world with complexities, uncertainties, and challenges that demand the very best from each of them. Consider the following sets of excerpts from documents published by five  key education organizations in the United States. Together, they provide a comprehensive look at the expectations for teachers in todays classroomswhats  necessary to work effectively with a broad range of learners and the spectrum of  strengths and needs those learners bring with them into the classroom. Some general expectations for teachers The first set of excerpts comes from the Interstate Teacher Assessment  and Support Consortium InTASC, an organization that publishes standards  reflecting professional consensus about what teachers should know and be able  to do, regardless of their specialty areas. The surge in learner diversity means teachers need knowledge and skills to customize learning for learners with a range of individual differences. These differences include students who have disabilities and students who perform above  grade level and deserve opportunities to accelerate. Differences also include  cultural and linguistic diversity and the specific needs of students for whom  English is a new language. Teachers need to recognize that all learners bring to  their learning varying experiences, abilities, talents, and prior learning, as well  as language, culture, and family and community values that are assets that can  be used to promote their learning. To do this effectively, teachers must have a  deeper understanding of their own frames of reference e.g., culture, gender,  language, abilities, ways of knowing, the potential biases in these frames, and 
Leading for a Differentiated Classroom their impact on expectations for and relationships with learners and their families. Finally, teachers need to provide multiple approaches to learning for each  student. Council of Chief State School Officers CCSSO, 2013, p. 4 Teaching begins with the learner. To ensure that each student learns new  knowledge and skills, teachers must understand that learning and developmental patterns vary among individuals, that learners bring unique individual  differences to the learning process, and that learners need supportive and safe  learning environments to thrive. Effective teachers have high expectations for  each and every learner and implement developmentally appropriate, challenging learning experiences within a variety of learning environments that help all  learners meet high standards and reach their full potential. Teachers do this by  combining a base of professional knowledge, including an understanding of how  cognitive, linguistic, social, emotional, and physical development occurs, with  the recognition that learners are individuals who bring differing personal and  family backgrounds, skills, abilities, perspectives, talents and interests. Teachers  collaborate with learners, colleagues, school leaders, families, members of the  learners communities, and community organizations to better understand their  students and maximize their learning. Teachers promote learners acceptance  of responsibility for their own learning and collaborate with them to ensure  the effective design and implementation of both self-directed and collaborative  learning.  Standard 1: Learner Development. The teacher understands how  learners grow and develop, recognizing that patterns of learning and development vary individually within and across the cognitive, linguistic, social,  emotional, and physical areas, and designs and implements developmentally appropriate and challenging learning experiences.  Standard 2: Learning Differences. The teacher uses understanding  of individual differences and diverse cultures and communities to ensure  inclusive learning environments that enable each learner to meet high  standards.  Standard 3: Learning Environments. The teacher works with others  to create environments that support individual and collaborative learning,  and that encourage positive social interaction, active engagement in learning, and self-motivation. CCSSO, 2013, p. 8 Some expectations for accomplished teachers The second set of excerpts comes from the National Board for Professional  Teaching Standards NBPTSthe body that provides the framework for  National Board certification of accomplished teachers in the United States. 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom The National Board provides standards in most content areas that describe the  attributes of such teachers. Written by teachers, the standards guide the rigorous  requirements for receiving National Board certification. While the standards in  each content area reflect the nature and processes of that discipline, standards in  all content areas assert that accomplished teachers prioritize the following:  Knowing students as individuals.  Creating a learning environment in which the varied cultures, experiences,  strengths, needs, and pathways to learning of every learner in the class are  respected.  Using curriculum that reflects the principles and practices of the discipline  and emphasizes student engagement and understanding.  Employing persistent formative assessment to understand the development of individual students in critical knowledge, understanding, and skills.  Using formative assessment information to plan instruction that meets the  varied student needs, strengths, and interests that exist in all classrooms, and  to help students develop agency as learners.  Planning instruction that is guided by formative assessment and that  enables every student to work successfully with problem solving, collaboration, developing meaningful products for meaningful audiences, and mirroring the work of experts in the discipline.  Creating and leading classrooms that use time, space, materials, and other  elements to consistently address the needs of both individual students and  the class as a whole. Although these principles form the architecture of effective differentiation  and accurately describe accomplished teachers, the authors of the National  Board did not borrow the underpinnings of differentiation any more than differentiation borrowed the language of the National Board standards. Rather,  both draw on our current best knowledge of teaching and learning and simply  commend to educators the value of using that knowledge to guide our work  every day, throughout a career, with the goal of maximizing the learning of every  student in our care. Here are a few representative examples of National Board standards in language arts and mathematics.
Leading for a Differentiated Classroom Accomplished English language arts teachers use their knowledge of students  to strategically match the best instructional practice with individual students  or groups of students, differentiating support as needed to foster students  literacy development. Accomplished teachers adjust the curriculum to match  the student in ways that promote learning within each students optimal range  of development. They know that targeting instruction that is challenging to  a student while being sensitive to his or her developmental level enhances the  potential for student engagement with learning and fosters growth . . . and do not  assume that students share the same background or aspirations. Accomplished  English language arts teachers are adept at creating assignments that build on  individuality, and they provide students with opportunities to read, view, write,  and produce varied types of texts about topics that interest them. Teachers also  can help students develop knowledge and skills in areas in which they might  not currently have an interest, skillfully creating engagement with subjects that  might otherwise provoke boredom or resistance. Accomplished teachers ensure  that every student has the opportunity for their individual voice to be heard.  NBPTS, 2014, pp. 2324 Accomplished English language arts teachers understand that the equitable  treatment of students may sometimes involve treating students differently.  To be fair and equitable, teachers must know their students needs and consider each student individually. This consideration means that teachers play  to their students strengths and provide extra support when needed, allowing  students differentiated opportunities to demonstrate their knowledge and skills.  Accomplished teachers deliberately seek out paths that will provide insights  into their students strengths and needs and then they connect this information to their instructional decision making. Teachers sensitively frame the way  they approach a lesson, a piece of literature, or a classroom discussion using  detailed knowledge of students diverse outlooks and backgrounds. Accomplished English language arts teachers recognize that students come  to the classroom with prior experiences and perspectives that both differentiate them from and connect them with their peers. Accomplished teachers are  well attuned to this variety and guide students to create classroom norms that  address, accept, and celebrate these differences and similarities. Moreover,  accomplished teachers understand the many ways students seek to distinguish  themselves from their peers. They monitor and respond appropriately with  strategies that will not only advance student learning, but also improve understanding among students and foster a shared sense of community. NBPTS,  2014, pp. 2829
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Accomplished teachers take into account the individual needs and developmental levels of students when designing instruction. Teachers know how to  observe and listen to students interactions in order to blend instructional goals  for the lesson with the learning goals of students. Teachers constantly reflect on  the interaction between the purpose of the lesson and the requirements of the  student to effectively satisfy both. Teachers use these observations to differentiate their instruction by providing different entry points to the same assignment  with different skill sets. NBPTS, 2010, p. 33 Accomplished teachers value mathematics. They take joy in it. They appreciate how knowledge in mathematics is created. They are excited by the ideas  they explore with students. Teachers communicate that joy to their students.  Teachers use the power of mathematics to fascinate students. Teachers elicit  mathematical excitement and provide students with opportunities to experience the intellectual satisfaction that comes from finding a solution to a problem or justifying a conjecture. Instead of simply telling students how to solve  a problem, the teacher may scaffold activities to help students recognize and  celebrate their ability to use their knowledge of mathematics to answer questions. NBPTS, 2010, p. 35 The look of the classroom of an accomplished mathematics teacher also  tells something about the role mathematics plays in students everyday lives in  school. Student work, mathematical models, and manipulative materials likely  to pique students interests and encourage their involvement in mathematics  are evident in these teachers classrooms. The physical arrangement of space  and furniture, along with teachers use of space, is purposeful and designed to  foster mathematical discourse and support both collaborative and independent  student work. Teachers working in circumstances in which they have little or no  control over their physical setting make whatever accommodations they can to  contribute to students learning in and thinking about mathematics. NBPTS,  2010, p. 37 Accomplished teachers view ongoing assessment as an integral part of their  instruction, benefitting both the teacher and the student. Teachersguided by  well-defined instructional goals of the current class and students future mathematical classesdesign appropriate assessments and activities to monitor  the progress of the class as a whole, as well as the work of individual students.  Mathematics teachers skillfully incorporate opportunities for assessing students  progress into daily instruction. Using levels and types of questioning, teachers  assess students abilities to comprehend, apply, and synthesize. Teachers use a  variety of strategies to explore and expand their students thinking and a variety  of methods to check for students understanding, and teachers use this information to shape their teaching. Throughout the assessment process, teachers 
Leading for a Differentiated Classroom monitor the skills that students may be missing and find ways to design or  modify instruction to minimize gaps in learning. NBPTS, 2010, p. 41 More expectations for all teachers The other excerpts we want to share come from the National Association for  the Education of Young Children NAEYC, the Association for Middle Level  Education AMLE, and the National Association of Secondary School Principals NASSP. Together, these three organizations cover the full sweep of professional expectations for teachersfrom novice to expert, preschool level through  high schooland their message is clear and consistent: student differences matter, and effective teachers attend to those differences thoughtfully, proactively,  in ways that reflect quality practice in all aspects of teaching and for all learners,  and with firm intent to open the way for each learner to have equity of access to  excellent learning opportunities. Lets begin with some recommendations for early childhood educators set  by NAEYC:  Uphold the unique value and dignity of each child and family. Ensure  that all children see themselves and their daily experiences, as well as the daily  lives of others within and beyond their community, positively reflected in the  design and implementation of pedagogy, curriculum, learning environment,  interactions, and materials. Celebrate diversity by acknowledging similarities  and differences and provide perspectives that recognize beauty and value across  differences.  Recognize each childs unique strengths and support the full inclusion  of all childrengiven differences in culture, family structure, language,  racial identity, gender, abilities and disabilities, religious beliefs, or economic class. Help children get to know, recognize, and support one another as  valued members of the community. Take care that no one feels bullied, invisible, or unnoticed.  Develop trusting relationships with children and nurture relationships  among them while building on their knowledge and skills. Embrace childrens cultural experiences and the languages and customs that shape their  learning. Treat each child with respect. Eliminate language or behavior that is  stereotypical, demeaning, exclusionary, or judgmental.  Consider the developmental, cultural, and linguistic appropriateness  of the learning environment and your teaching practices for each child.  Offer meaningful, relevant, and appropriately challenging activities across all  interests and abilities. Children of all genders, with and without disabilities,  should see themselves and their families, languages, and cultures regularly and 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom meaningfully reflected in the environment and learning materials. Counter  common stereotypes and misinformation. Remember that the learning environment and its materials reflect what you do and do not value by what is present and what is omitted. NAEYC, 2019, p. 7 Further, NAEYC advocates that teachers do the following:  Use their knowledge of each child and family to make learning experiences meaningful, accessible, and responsive to each and every child.  Building on the relationships they nurture with each child and family and  between children . . . educators design learning activities that reflect the lives and  cultures of each child. 2020, p. 21  Be prepared to individualize their teaching strategies to meet the specific needs of individual children, including children with disabilities and  children whose learning is advanced, by building upon their interests,  knowledge, and skills. 2020, p. 22  Actively promote childrens agency. Provide each child with opportunities for rich, engaging play and opportunities to make choices in planning  and carrying out activities. Use open-ended activities that encourage children  to work together and solve problems to support learning across all areas of  development and curriculum. 2019, p. 7 In The Successful Middle School: This We Believe, AMLE asserts the following: Challenging curriculum addresses substantive concepts and skills and is appropriately geared to each students level of understanding and readiness. . . .  Attuned to the vast developmental and identity-related diversity of their learners, middle school teachers know students prior experiences, social and cultural  backgrounds, and learning preferences. This knowledge, along with thoughtful  use of formative and summative assessment data, informs curriculum. In successful middle schools, learning tasks are perceived as achievable, even if difficult,  and reflect high expectations for all students. Bishop  Harrison, 2021, p. 47 Expecting students to grapple with and master advanced concepts requires  middle grades teachers to stretch themselves well beyond covering material.  . . . Using their professional judgment and in consultation with students, teachers guide the selection of ideas and concepts for in-depth study. To help these  issues come alive, teachers invite students to examine values, assumptions, basic  principles, and alternative points of view, addressing why things happen as well  as how. Students learn skills and concepts as they become explorers, thinkers,  and communicators. Bishop  Harrison, 2021, p. 46
Leading for a Differentiated Classroom Learning in middle schools can be complex, messy, and wonderful, as students  regularly set personal goals, chart their growth, work independently and collaboratively, and reflect on their progress. The wide variety of teaching approaches,  the personalization of learning opportunities, and the presence of integrative  curriculum call for assessment practices that are equally varied. Evidence of  middle grades learning can be demonstrated in many ways, including presentations, performances, portfolios, projects, journals, artwork, teacher and peer  feedback, teacher-designed tests, and audio or video documentation. Bishop   Harrison, 2021, p. 61 Finally, NASSP makes the following points in its 2018 publication Building  Ranks: A Comprehensive Framework for Effective School Leaders:  School leaders guarantee that each person is known, valued, treated justly,  and receives the individualized, high-quality education necessary to succeed in  a global society. p. 46  Although the focus is often on addressing the needs of students who are  struggling, its important to ensure that each studenthigh-performing, lowperforming, and in-betweenhas access to the supports he or she needs to be  successful. p. 62  Schools were historically designed to teach to the middle. You the principal have the responsibility to shift the mindsets and practices that target  the majority of students to ones that address the learning, physical, and socialemotional needs of each student. p. 60  Expectations should be high for each person and void of biases associated with  an individuals background . . . and tailor the growth opportunities to the specific needs of each student . . . to maximize his or her personal development and  academic . . . learning. When leaders individually address each persons learning  needs, they maximize growth. p. 84  Ensuring that each student is known and feels he or she is part of the learning  community is the foundational element of equity. Without knowing each of  your students, you cant be certain that each one is receiving equitable treatment. Nor can you identify supports to meet each students full range of needs.  pp. 8586  Relationships enable learning by fostering a sense of belonging as well as a  commitment to shared goals. When students have strong relationships with one  another and with staff members, they are more committed to their education  and more engaged in their learning . . . . Strong relationships are characterized by  trust, communication, mutual respect, and support. p. 100  Curriculum, instruction, and assessments . . . should be aligned to high expectations for student learning . . . . intellectually challenging, anchored in authentic  learning experiences, and strengths-based. p. 100
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom  Differentiated and personalized quality curriculum, instruction, and assessments also regularly check for student understanding within lessons and use  interim and summative assessments to track student progress. Data produced  by those various assessments inform continuous adaptations and improvement.  p. 204 Despite consistent and often urgent calls for teachers to attend to individual  learners needs, and in spite of daily evidence that one-size-fits-all instruction fails  many if not most students, it is extraordinarily difficult for us to pull away from  antiquated conceptions and embrace more contemporary and effective ways of  thinking about teaching and learning. There are many reasons the idea of teaching with the individual in mind is  challenging if not confounding, not the least of which are classroom images  that are indelible in the minds of teachers, students, and parents alike. These  familiar images and impressions have become second nature to so many of  us because they are continually reinforced throughout our young lives. We all  think we know the right way to do school. Even very young children who play  school at home know the rules: The teacher is in charge and the students  sit silently in straight rows and watch the teacher, who tells the students what  to learn. Students learn what theyre told and repeat it back to the teacher. The  teacher teaches everyone alike which is only fair, and students who cant follow the rules or get restless with the routine get booted out of class. Students  who cannot keep up with the schedule of coverage, or otherwise fall behind,  are regularly placed into low-track groups or classes and taught by teachers who  are often less experienced or less well-prepared for the work they need to do than  are teachers assigned high-track classes. We generally accept that in low-track  classes, teachers must teach down to students in order to meet them where  they are academically, even though this practice often leads to students falling  even further behind more educationally advantaged students, whose academic  fare is considerably more likely to prepare them for the world in which they will  lead Berwick, 2019; Lieberman, 2020; Truong, 2022. While this description may sound like a caricature of an actual classroom, it  represents a set of beliefs about teaching and learning that are deeply embedded  in most people. Whether we are teachers, parents, or students, these beliefs are  a common set of blueprints for thinking about the right way to do school; it is  difficult to conceive of the classroom in any other way. Nevertheless, if we aspire  to teach so that each of our students is prepared to assume meaningful and satisfying roles in a world that is quite different from the factory-based era that the 
Leading for a Differentiated Classroom current model of schooling was designed to serve, learner-focused change is not  an option but an imperative. Classroom Teachers as Leaders for Change Responsibility for supporting change toward student-focused instruction belongs  to many kinds of educators. Superintendents, principals, curriculum coordinators, specialists, grade-level coordinators, department chairs, media directors,  and counselors are some of the educational players who have pivotal roles to  play in recrafting classrooms so that they more effectively teach the diverse learners who populate them. This job is vastly easier when everyone works as a team  toward a shared goal, and it is unacceptable for anyone in the chain to abdicate  their responsibility to make school work for each and every student there.  Nonetheless, the role of the classroom teacher in bringing about such change is  central. No one else is as vital. If every other educator fails to assume the responsibility of leadership for student-focused change, the classroom teacher still has  the power to re-envision and reinvent teaching and learning. It is the classroom teacher who has an unspoken contract with each learner  to make productive use of time spent in the classroom. It is the classroom teacher  who is in a unique position to see beyond multilayered distractions and disguises  to know each learner as an individual human being. It is the classroom teacher  who identifies or creates the links that exist between each individual learner and  the critical content. It is the classroom teacher who taps into hidden motivations, builds bridges to span damaged trust, and reveals to each student how the  learning process makes us fully human. Quite simply, the classroom teacher is an  irreplaceable leader in moving differentiation from an abstract idea on paper or in  a professional development session to a fundamental way of life in the classroom. This book will highlight four different audiences for whom teacher leadership is essential to make student-focused instruction a reality. First, teachers must  do the daily work of motivating themselves to plan and implement instruction that  keeps students in the foreground and of primary concern. Second, teachers must  motivate, lead, and direct students to understand, contribute to, and participate in  a classroom that is designed to take into account the needs of individuals and the  group. Third, teachers need to lead parents to understand the goals of a studentfocused or responsive classroom, how those goals will benefit their children,  and how they can contribute to the success of their children and of the classroom. Finally, teachers can be important leaders for other teachers and for school 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom administrators in understanding and contributing intelligently to academically  responsive instruction. This audience is of particular note, since teachers often  dont see themselves as leaders of school leaders, but that role is just as important as the other three. Strong, informed, mission-driven leadership from school  administratorsparticularly a schools principalis necessary for the kind and  degree of support needed for schoolwide change. Teachers who communicate  their hopes, aspirations, successes, and struggles to designated school leaders can  be a powerful and convincing source of information and motivation for principals  and other school leaders who want to expand their efforts beyond meeting the  demands of daily school operations. Successful teachers are natural leaders. Along the way, we manage the details  necessary to achieve goals that we have every reason to believe will benefit those  who follow us. Genuine leadership indicates an ethical orientationone that  merits the trust of followers. To achieve such a level of leadership, we must do  the following:  Work from and aspire to practices that are an evident improvement over  the status quo.  Articulate a vision for change so that those who are asked to follow the  vision have a compelling reason to do so.  Move knowledgeably toward this vision while simultaneously attending to  the voices and needs of those who will necessarily help enact it.  Be patient with and supportive of those we lead yet impatient with artificial  barriers to progress.  Maintain a pace that consistently ensures visible progress without pushing  the system beyond its capacity to change.  Monitor outcomes of the change and be willing to adapt, when necessary,  to achieve desirable outcomes and eliminate undesirable outcomes. Teacher Leadership for  Differentiated Classrooms The three chapters in Part I of this book are designed to help teachers be more  confident and effective leaders for and in student-focusedresponsivedifferentiated classrooms. We do not presume that these chapters contain all there is to  know about the topics they address; each chapter provides, at best, an overview  of a much more complex issue. We also know that individuals who invest their 
Leading for a Differentiated Classroom energies in any approach continue to transform and augment that approach. Our  goal, then, is not to present the final word in regard to teacher leadership for differentiation but rather to offer a framework for an intelligent beginning. In our experience, teachers who are most effective with differentiation operate from strong and growing knowledge bases that are rooted in a philosophy  of what classrooms could be like if they maximized the capacity of each learner.  These teachers invite learners to help them construct such a classroom and to  attend to its health as the academic year progresses. For these teachers, differentiation is not a set of strategies but rather a demographically necessary, ethically  focused, pedagogically informed, and empirically tested way of thinking about  the work they do. Effective teacher leaders are knowledgeable about and continue to nurture  their knowledge of the areas in which they seek to lead. Chapter 1 reviews the elements of differentiated instruction for teachers who want to lead toward differentiation. Effective leaders work from a philosophy or belief system that informs  the vision they commend to others. Chapter 2 articulates the philosophy that  undergirds what we call differentiation so that teachers who seek to lead toward  differentiation are grounded in their own views on teaching. Leaders engage followers in understanding and contributing to a shared vision. Chapter 3 provides  suggestions for talking with students, parents, and other educators about differentiation so that teacher leaders can confidently invite them to participate in  creating a place and processes that benefit the broadest possible array of learners.
1 Understanding Differentiation  in Order to Lead Aiming for Fidelity to a Model Few would argue that opportunity in life is strongly connected with educational opportunity. However, we have often misconstrued the notion of equal  access to education to mean that all students should receive precisely the same  pacing, resources, and instruction. The result is a one-size-fits-all education  system. Differentiated instruction recognizes that students are not the same  and that access to equal education necessarily means that, given a certain goal,  each student should be provided resources, instruction, and support to help  them meet that objective. John Stroup, University of Virginia doctoral student My district wanted all of its teachers to differentiate instruction, a young  woman told me. So they created a notebook of differentiation strategies for us.  Its really nicebound and everything. I guess it must have a dozen strategies in  it. 1 Understanding Differentiation in Order to Lead Aiming for Fidelity to a Model
Understanding Differentiation in Order to Lead Im glad you found it useful, I responded. She paused, searching for a reply. I did find it useful, she said. I used every  one of the ideas. And now I guess Im just waiting for the next notebook. This young teacher was puzzled. Having now done differentiation cover to  cover, she seemingly had no idea where to go next. Without an understanding of  how the ideas in the notebook had been generated, she had no basis for taking  the next steps. I was reminded of Ralph Waldo Emersons caution that if we only  learn methods, we are tied to those methods, but if we learn principles, we can  develop our own methods. My conversation with this young teacher reflected several common misunderstandings about differentiation: Misunderstanding: Differentiation is a set of instructional strategies. Reality: Differentiation is a philosophya way of thinking about teaching and  learning. It is a set of principles that, once adopted, can become a way of being in  the classroom. Misunderstanding: Its adequate for a district or school leader or professional developers to tell, or even show, teachers how to differentiate instruction  effectively. Reality: Learning to differentiate instruction well requires rethinking ones classroom practice and results from an ongoing process of trial, reflection, and adjustment in the classroom itself. Misunderstanding: Differentiation is something a teacher does or doesnt do  as in, I already do that or I tell our teachers that they already differentiate  instruction. Reality: Most teachers who remain in a classroom for longer than a day do pay  attention to student variation and respond to it in some wayespecially with  students who can jeopardize order in the classroom. However, very few teachers  proactively plan instruction to consistently address student differences in readiness, interest, and learning preferences based on ongoing assessment insights,  including focused classroom observation and conversations with students. Misunderstanding: Differentiation is just about instruction. Reality: Although differentiation is an instructional approach, effective differentiated instruction is inseparable from a positive learning environment,  high-quality curriculum, assessment that informs teacher and student decision  making, and studentteacher partnerships to develop and use flexible classroom 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom routines. To the degree that any one of those elements is weak, the others are also  diminishedand student growth is diminished as well. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a brief summary of what we call  differentiated instruction; you can find a full explanation of the elements of this  approach in other resources e.g., Sousa  Tomlinson, 2018; Tomlinson, 2014,  2017, 2021, 2022; Tomlinson  McTighe, 2006; Tomlinson  Moon, 2013;  Tomlinson  Murphy, 2015. A clear understanding of the individual elements  of differentiation and how they relate to and shape the classroom system paves  the way for a more robust exploration of the philosophy of differentiation, which  directs how teachers manage and lead an effectively differentiated classroom. Whats important to understand before reading on is that the core intent of  differentiation is to help teachers place the student, singular, at the center of all  classroom decisionsnot the students, plural as though they were a single, uniform entity; not a standardized test; not content coverage; and not technology  or texts or time or spaceand to do so with the goal of enabling every student  to access genuinely excellent curriculum, instruction, assessment practices, and  human support. Working diligently toward those things constitutes fidelity to the  concept of differentiation. The guidelines we provide in this book for accomplishing those goals reflect  our best understanding of each of the classroom elements as well as what it means  to honor each learner and distinguish our profession. We cannot offer a foolproof  recipe for effective differentiation, but we can provide guidance and counsel in  the form of proven principles and practices that can help you grow in understanding and application of differentiations core intent. We also know that your  work will be enhanced and extended as you more fully understand your students  strengths and needs and as you amplify the model of differentiation with your  own creativity and problem-solving skills. Key Elements of Differentiated Instruction Differentiation can be accurately described as classroom practice with a balanced  emphasis on individual students and the class as a whole. In other words, in an  effectively differentiated classroom, it is understood that  Students differ as learners in terms of background experience, culture, race,  language, gender expression, strengths, interests, readiness to learn, modes of  learning, speed of learning, support systems for learning, self-awareness as a 
Understanding Differentiation in Order to Lead learner, confidence as a learner, independence as a learner, learning exceptionality, and a host of other ways.  Differences profoundly affect how students learn and the nature of scaffolding they will need at various points in the learning process.  Teachers have a responsibility to ensure that each of their students masters  the most important ideas, processes, and skills in the disciplines they study.  Teachers make specific and continually evolving plans to connect each  learner with that essential content.  Teachers work persistently to understand the experiences, strengths, and  needs of each of their students, in addition to the nature of the content they  teach.  The goal in a differentiated classroom is to support each learners access to  high-quality curriculum, instruction that inspires learning, and the support  necessary to succeed.  A flexible approach to teaching and learning makes room for student  variance.  Teachers continually ask, What does this student need at this moment in  order to be able to progress with this key contentand what do I need to do  to make that happen? At the core of the classroom practice of differentiation is the modification of  four curriculum-related elementscontent, process, product, and affectwhich  are based on three categories of student need and variancereadiness, interest,  and learning preferences. Content The knowledge, understanding, and skills we ask students to learnor how students  access that knowledge, understanding, and skill. In differentiation, we emphasize varied methods or modes that students can  use to access key content e.g., text at varied levels of complexity, recorded text,  podcasts, videos, images, graphics, apps, websites with working models, interviews, demonstrations, small-group instruction, and so on rather than change  the content itself Tomlinson, 2021, 2022; Tomlinson  McTighe, 2006.  There are instances, however, when some students need to go back to prerequisite content in order to move ahead, when advanced learners need to move  ahead before their classmates are ready to do so, when students would benefit 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom from interest-focused investigations, and when student individualized education  programs IEPs direct the teacher to change the content itself. Process How students come to understand or make sense of the content. Real learningthe sort that enables students to retain, apply, and transfer  contenthappens in students, not to them National Research Council, 2000;  Tomlinson, 2021, 2022; Wiggins  McTighe, 2005. The word process is often  used as a synonym for activities. However, activities can be misaligned with content goals; fail to require students to think through, grapple with, or use essential  knowledge, understanding, and skills; and even be mind-numbingly tedious.  Therefore, it is wise to substitute the term sense-making activities to emphasize  that what we ask students to do in the name of learning should most often help  them to own the content, see how it makes sense, realize how it connects with  their lives, understand how it is useful in the world outside the classroom, examine varied perspectives on it, address issues and solve problems using it, role-play  it, debate it, represent it graphically, and so on. Product How students demonstrate what they have come to know, understand, and be able to  do after an extended period of learning. A product is not something students generate in a single lesson or as a  result of an activity or two. Rather, it is a rich culminating, authentic assessment  that calls on students to apply, extend, or transfer what they have learned over  a period of time. Tests can reflect these characteristics when they present students with complex problems to solve or issues to address in ways that require  understanding of key ideas, transfer of knowledge, and application of skills. Effectively designed performance assessments inevitably have these characteristics  McTighe et al., 2020; Tomlinson, 2021; Tomlinson  Moon, 2013. Affect How students emotions and feelings impact their learning. Emotions and feelings originate in the brain based on past experiences and  reactions to current experiences. They impact our motivation to learn, ability to  work with others, and self-concept as a learner. In that way, affect is integral to,  rather than apart from, curriculum and instruction. When a student has a positive  affect regarding learning and themself as a learner, it opens the door to academic 
Understanding Differentiation in Order to Lead growth. Conversely, a students negative affect regarding learning or their own  abilities as a learner effectively shuts the door to learning Sousa  Tomlinson,  2018. The most effective teachers dont just observe student behavior; they  work to understand the affect or emotion that drives behavior so they can guide  and support students in a positive direction and help them develop confidence  and agency as learners and as people Tomlinson, 2021, 2022. Readiness A students current proximity to specified knowledge, understanding, and skills. Readiness is not a synonym for ability, and the two terms should not be used  interchangeably. The term ability connotes what we sometimes believe to be a  more or less fixed and inborn trait. Readiness suggests a temporary condition; it  fluctuates in response to curricular changes and high-quality teaching. Youll see,  as this chapter continues, that thinking in terms of student readiness rather than  student ability is beneficial to both student and teacher. To grow academically,  students must work consistently with tasks that focus on essential knowledge,  understanding, and skills and that are a bit too difficult for their current level of  proficiency with that content. In addition, students must have a support system  in the form of peers and teachers who will help them surmount this difficulty and  emerge from the task or sequence of tasks at a new and more advanced level of  readiness Sousa  Tomlinson, 2018; Vygotsky, 1978, 1986. Further, teachers  who believe in each students capacity to learn more than the student may believe  themselves capable of and who vigorously support each learners forward progress  are likely to have students who come to believe in their own worth as learners and,  therefore, become more engaged and successful learners Dweck, 2006, 2017. In  differentiating for student readiness, then, a teacher uses careful formative assessment and classroom observation to understand each students individual learning  trajectory relative to knowledge, understanding, and skills that are critical to mastering current content. Then the teacher provides assignments, timelines, materials, and support systems that enable the learner to grow steadily in proficiency. Interest That which engages the attention, curiosity, and involvement of a student. Student interest is tied directly to student motivation to learn and to learning itself. When student interest is high, motivation to learn is heightened, and  learning is enhanced. Working with areas of personal interest helps students  try harder, persist longer, think more clearly, understand more deeply, process 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom information more efficiently, and remember more accurately. Interest has the  power to transform struggling performers and lift high achievers to a new plane.  Personal interests are typically linked to a students strengths, cultural context,  personal experiences, questions, or sense of need Collins  Amabile, 1999;  Csikszentmihalyi, 1990; Paul, 2013. Learning preferences An inclination to take in, explore, and express content at a given time and in a given  context. Giving students choices as to how they will take in, make sense of, and  express learning is also an important aspect of differentiation. Offering these  choices signals to students that the teacher trusts them to make beneficial choices  while also helping them be more metacognitive about their own learning. Learning preference options can also increase student ownership of learning and promote the development of both individual voice and decision-making prowess  Dack  Tomlinson, 2015; Draeger  Wilson, 2016. Noted psychologist and educator Jerome Bruner 1996 wrote that agency  presupposes choice. Thus, when learner-centered teachers elicit student voice in  what will be learned and howwhen, for example, they provide choice of topic  or focus for an assignment, mode of learning, or mode of expressing learning they are likely helping the young people they teach become more independent.  After all, the process of achieving agency includes learning to plan for and make  fruitful decisions. Thus, teachers help students consider what it means to choose  a learning path wisely in light of ones goals, strengths, interests, and context by  guiding them to consider questions like these:  How do I decide what my options are?  How can I monitor my progress as Im working?  How can I think about ways in which varied choices will support or  diminish outcomes that I value?  How can I recognize when a learning path I have chosen is not serving me  well?  How might I weigh and choose from other options that are available to  me? As students learn how to work independently, with a peer, and with a small  group of peers, choice of working conditions is a simple way to honor students 
Understanding Differentiation in Order to Lead learning preferences. For example, a teacher might provide the option of working alone or with a partner; sitting at a desk, table, or on the floor; using earplugs  or headsets if conversation is distracting; or reading a story or other text or  listening to a recording of that text. Options for exploring or expressing learning  can include but are certainly not limited to using print, video, and audio sources;  writing a paper; creating an animation; building a model; generating a set of  graphs; and creating a photo essay, a role-play, a demonstration, an infographic,  or a set of storyboards. The idea is not to provide a string of options for every  single assignment but rather to suggest a few options that seem to be a match for  the nature of the assignment and students points of development. Its also easy,  and often effective, to encourage students to propose additional ways to learn or  express learning that were not on your list of choices. Researchers e.g., Katz  Assor, 2007 point out that the choices teachers  offer need to feel meaningful to the student to produce beneficial outcomes. So,  for example, giving students a choice of how to complete an assignment that they  find to be irrelevant or redundant will not be as likely to make a difference in  their development as giving learners an assignment that they find interesting and  appropriately challenging. It may also be productive for the teacher to explain the  reasons behind the specific options for an assignment, product, or assessment; to  encourage students to present other options; and to ask students to reflect later  on whether particular choices were helpful in their learning Parker et al., 2017. A teacher in an effectively differentiated classroom seeks to develop increasing insight into students readiness levels, interests, and learning preferences. The  teacher then modifies content, process, product, and affect in order to develop  instruction that maximizes each students opportunity for academic growth.  Figure 1.1 see p. 36 provides specific examples of how this can play out in the  classroom for content, process, and product. By contrast, attending to students  affective needs is generally a matter of the teacher adapting the learning environment or working conditions rather than the other three classroom elements. Differentiation and the Classroom System Differentiated instruction is a principle-guided method to approach teaching and  learning, and it is implemented in the context of a classroom system that contains five interdependent elements: learning environment, curriculum, assessment, instruction, and leading students and managing flexible routines. In all  classrooms, there is a learning environment that is shaped by a teachers beliefs, 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Figure 1.1 A Few Examples of Differentiation Based on Student Need Readiness Interest Learning Preferences Content  Materials at varied readability  levels  Recorded text  Video  Images, graphics  Spelling and other skills  assigned by current student  proficiency  Alternate presentation methods  Targeted small-group instruction  Front-loaded vocabulary  Highlighted texts  Range of reading materials,  videos, interviews, etc., that apply  key ideas and skills to a variety of  real-world situations  Teacher presentations designed  to link essential content to student  interests  Varied teaching modes e.g.,  verbal, visual, rhythmic, practical  demonstrations, role-play  Video or audio versions of  directions andor presentations  for students who learn better with  repeated listening or viewing Process  Tiered activities  Mini-workshops  Flexible use of time  Learning contracts  Varied homework assignments  RAFT options  Flexible grouping  Small-group instruction  Use of resources written in   English learners home language  andor initial drafts of products  written in home language  Expert groups  Interest centers  Spotlight on individuals from  many cultures who makehave  made significant contributions to  a discipline  Supplementary materials based  on student interests  Jigsaws  Independent inquiries  Interest-based application  options  RAFT options  Choice of working conditions  e.g., alone or with a partner,  seated or standing, quietly or with  conversation  Tasks designed around realworld applications  RAFT options  Blogs, vlogs, animations, podcasts, etc., to explore a topic  Voice-to-text apps for writing Product  Tiered product assignments  Personal goal setting  Varied resource options  Check-in requirements  based on degree of student  independence  Providing samples of quality  student work at varied levels of  complexity  Teacher use of student interests  in designing products and performance assessments  Options for students to propose  alternate products  Design a Day options  Personalized inquiries  Use of a range of technologies for student exploration and  expression  Complex instruction  Varied formats for expressing  key content  Varied working arrangements  Varied modes of demonstrating learning e.g., video, audio,  graphic novels, graphic explanations of content in varied disciplines, interviews, photo essays experiences, and actions. There is a curriculum, shaped by a teachers content  knowledge, text materials, and local or federal mandates. There is some form of  assessment, again shaped by both the teacher and forces external to the teacher. 
Understanding Differentiation in Order to Lead Finally, all classrooms benefit from instruction that individual teachers design or  follow established designs for and implement. The way in which the teacher envisions and enacts each of these elements  shapes each of the other elements. For example, an assessment that feels judgmental to students will negatively impact the learning environment. Likewise, a  classroom in which curriculum is highly prescribed, with few or no options for a  teacher to make professional decisions on behalf of students, limits that teachers  options for instruction. This book focuses on the fifth foundational element in  effective differentiation: leading students and working with them to establish and  implement classroom routines that allow flexibility in teaching and learning while  ensuring stability that is necessary for both. The particular model of differentiation supported in this book adopts the  position that each of these five elements must be shaped and cultivated to provide opportunities for every student to maximize their learning capacity. Only  when each of the elementsseparately and in conjunction with one another supports maximum learning for each student is the classroom functioning as it  should. Learning environment The physical and emotional context in which learning occurs. The appearance, organization, and structure of a classroom can invite learning with appealing colors, effective displays of student work, spaces for both  solitary and collaborative work, easy access to materials and supplies, furniture  arrangements that focus attention on peer input rather than largely or solely on  the teacher, and visible cues to support quality work. Conversely, a classrooms  physical environment can diminish learning by being barren, drab, cramped,  teacher-focused, distracting, or limiting with seating arrangements that isolate students from one another. More significant than this physical climate,  however, is the classrooms more intangible emotional climate. Students learn  best when they feel safe, respected, involved, challenged, and supported. Thus,  a learning environment that invites each student to be a full participant in the   classroomwith full support for the journeyis a necessity for robust differentiated instruction. Effective differentiationin other words, effective attention to the learning  needs of each studentrequires a learning environment in which  The teacher is attuned and responsive to the affective, cognitive, and social  needs of learners.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom  Students feel safe, both physically and affectively.  The teacher respects and supports the possibilities inherent in each  student.  Individual differences are accepted as natural and positive.  Students learn to respect and support one another as learners.  Each student makes meaningful contributions to the class.  The teacher and students share in the decision-making process about daily  routines and classroom operation.  Hard work is an expectation.  Physical arrangements are flexible and support student access to a variety  of learning options.  A range of resources are available and support student access to content.  Flexible student grouping capitalizes on student strengths and allows effective attention to student weaknesses. Curriculum An organized plan to engage learners with important knowledge, understanding, and  skills. A list of standards is not a curriculum. A textbook is not a curriculum either.  Rather, both are ingredientsresources necessary for developing a curriculum. A high-quality curriculum begins with a teachers sense of the authentic  nature of the discipline that the curriculum will represent. It includes a clear  delineation of the essential knowledge students should have and the skills they  should master as the result of a particular segment of learning e.g., a year, a  unit of study. It includes summative assessment mechanisms for determining  student proficiency with designated outcomes that tightly align with those assessments. It includes a carefully planned sequence of lessons or learning experiences  that are designed to engage students with essential content and to ensure student  success with the essential knowledge, understanding, and skills Erickson et al.,  2017; Tomlinson, 2021; Tomlinson et al., 2009; Wiggins  McTighe, 2005. The model of differentiation represented in this book advocates that all students unless an IEP indicates otherwise should do the following:  Work consistently with curriculum that feels meaningful and relevant.  Work to master the essential knowledge, understanding, and skills in each  lesson and unit of study.  Be expected to understand what they are learning versus largely recalling repeating.
Understanding Differentiation in Order to Lead  Be expected to think, and be supported as thinkers, as they engage with  curriculum.  Work with respectful tasks i.e., tasks that are equally interesting and  engaging and that promote understanding of and the ability to apply and  transfer essential content. Assessment A data-gathering and analysis process that identifies the degree to which students have  achieved essential outcomes and informs decisions about and planning for instruction. There are three kinds of assessment, based on purpose: 1 diagnostic assessment or pre-assessment, which is designed to determine a students status  relative to essential learning outcomes as a unit of study begins; 2 ongoing  assessment, which is designed to follow a students progress in attaining essential  outcomes as a unit of study progresses; and 3 summative assessment, which  is designed to measure student outcomes as a unit of study ends or at other key  points in a unit or year of study. Both diagnostic and ongoing assessment are  formativethat is, they are intended primarily to mentor and support student  learning rather than to judge student performance. High-quality assessments, both formative and summative, guide students  in understanding essential learning outcomes, their status relative to those outcomes, and ways in which they can work effectively to maximize their growth  toward and beyond those outcomes Earl, 2013; Tomlinson  Moon, 2013;  Wiliam, 2011. The model of differentiation this book supports emphasizes the  use of  Diagnostic formative assessment pre-assessments to determine individual students entry points into a unit of study in terms of their readiness,  interest, and learning preferences. Diagnostic formative assessment also  enables teachers to discover student misunderstandings about the content.  This process is essential to planning for student variance. Diagnostic assessment, of course, should never be graded.  Ongoing formative assessment to measure a students developing knowledge, understanding, and skills as a unit progresses. This process is essential  to a teachers preparedness to plan for and support students varied learning  strengths and needs. It is also foundational to guiding students in developing  the habits of mind and work that enable them to grow into successful learners. This ongoing formative assessment should rarely, if ever, be graded. Its 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom intent is to generate feedback from the teacher that can focus each student  on the next steps in their individual learning progression.  Summative assessment to offer varied modes of expression and scaffolding based on students needs in terms of language, time allocation, writing,  etc. This process helps students express as fully as possible what they know,  understand, and can do relative to essential outcomes. Summative assessment occurs after students have had considerable time for practice and guidance. Summative assessment is graded. Instruction The process of teachingthat is, engaging students with meaningful content so that  they develop essential foundational knowledge and skills as well as understanding of  how the content works, how it relates to their lives and experiences, and how they can  use what they learn beyond a specific classroom. Instruction is what many people think of when they think about teaching. It  is a complex network of approaches to engaging students with critical content in  ways that will enable them to apply it. The teacher acts as a metaphorical bridge,  helping students connect the knowledge and skills they already possess with content they are currently learning so they can continue developing as learners and  human beings. To plan instruction is to craft a game plan for developing students knowledge, understanding, skills, self-awareness, and agency as learners. The model of differentiation on which this book is based advocates that  instruction will  Align with essential knowledge, understanding, and skills designated as  essential for proficiency.  Call on students to actively make sense of come to own what we ask  them to learn.  Be designed with student differences in mind, including differences in  learning, interests, strengths, culture, language, and gender.  Be flexible in terms of time, materials, support systems, student groupings,  instructional modes, and teaching and learning strategies.  Offer various routes to accomplishing essential learning outcomes.  Help students develop voice, self-efficacy, and independence as learners.  Help students develop proficiency in collaborative learning.  Provide classroom routines that balance student needs for stability and  flexibility Tomlinson, 2014, 2017, 2021, 2022.
Understanding Differentiation in Order to Lead Leading and Managing a Flexible Classroom This element enables teachers, working in tandem with their students, to create  classrooms that place students, with their inevitable variability, at the center of  decisions about learning environment, curriculum, assessment, and instruction.  It supports the elasticity necessary to move away from paradigms rooted in practices and habits that cast all students of a given age as essentially interchangeable  as learners so that the needs of the students do not eclipse the needs of the student. As you continue reading this book, it will become clearer how teachers who  develop competence and confidence in this element of differentiation increase  their capacity to address learning environment, curriculum, assessment, and  instruction in ways that invite more students to see teachers as their advocates, to  see school as a place that values them, to see learning as a human gift, and to see  success as something that belongs to them. The Interdependence of Classroom Elements Its likely that many of us began our teaching careers without a clear vocabulary to  think about the key classroom elements described in this chapter. Its also likely  that we didnt fully grasp how each action we take ripples into all corners of the  classroom. Over time, and as we became thoughtful and mindful professionals,  we gradually developed a general awareness that our mood and energy levels  set in motion weather fronts that permeate through the day and affect our  students. Our weariness settles on students like fog; our joy becomes their excitement. A test that we have made to seem ominous can bring with it a storm cloud  that threatens an otherwise hospitable atmosphere. Our capacity to peacefully  disarm a crisis with one student makes the overall learning environment seem  more secure for all students in it. As we continue to develop as professionals, we become more cognizant of  how the classroom elements interact. For example, we recognize that if a student  feels like an outsider in the classroom, that student is unlikely to commit to class  discussions, group work, or even individual tasks, and that this unfavorable learning environment negatively affects the students experience of both curriculum  and instruction. Likewise, if assigned work is consistently beyond the current  performance of certain students, they will feel unsafe in the classroom and regard  the learning environment as negative. The consequence of such impressions?  Students giving up on school or themselves over time.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom With time and experience, we are able to anticipate such situations and be  proactive with specific and precise strategies to avoid them. For example, if we  provide diagrams, examples, and images to ensure that students understand a difficult process before they read the relevant material in their texts, even students  who typically resist such independent reading will likely feel that they have a  better understanding of what they read. Careful instruction, then, improves the  likelihood of a positive experience with curriculum. Figure 1.2 represents the  Mbius-like interdependence among curriculum, assessment, and instruction surrounded by aspects of the learning environment. Figure 1.2 Interdependence of Key Classroom Elements Owning Student Success Creating a Positive Environment Studying Students Connecting with Students The contents of this chapter represent what teachers in successfully differentiated classrooms must create, monitor, and sculpt in order to support the best  possible learning outcome for each student. These are the raw materials of teaching. The contents of Chapter 2 examine why teachers in effectively differentiated  classrooms think about their classrooms in the ways that they do and focuses on  the philosophical underpinnings of differentiation. Comfort with both the what  and the why is important in a teachers ability to lead for differentiation.
2 Teaching What You Believe A Philosophy to Guide Teachers  Who Lead for Differentiation When the school bell rings on day one and all our students are in their seats, we  will hold the future of this nation and this world in our hands. Whatever we do  will have lasting implications, not only on the lives of those students, but also  on the lives of all those who they come in contact with. So then, the questions  that we should ask ourselves should not be, How can I make this work? The  question must be, How can I afford not to make this work? Wendy Kopp, One Day, All Children Few, if any, teachers enter the profession with a well-developed philosophy of  teaching. Thats something that develops silently, day by day, through crisis  and triumph, for those teachers who are willing to risk reflecting on their work  and their own role in that work. Experts who study change in a wide variety of  fields and over many decades have pondered whether it is more likely for people  to believe their way into new actions or act their way into new beliefs. The 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom consensus is the latter. In terms of teacher change, this means that when a teacher  tries something new in a classroom and finds it beneficial to students, that action  shapes the teachers beliefs about what works and how an effective classroom  proceeds. The action route is more likely to result in both teacher growth as a  practitioner and positive beliefs about the efficacy of the approach than spending  the same amount of time thinking about whether or not to implement it. If teachers were required to enter their first classroom with the philosophical  tenets of differentiation fully in tow, we would have no teachers. Our best hope  for classrooms that work effectively for each student is to cultivate teachers who  care deeply about teaching and the young people they teach; who believe teaching is a calling, not just a job; and whose firm intent is to become self-actualized  professionals who pave the way for their students to also become self-actualized.  It is certainly the case that teachers who lead effectively for differentiation operate from a clear sense that classrooms should model a world in which learning is  rewarding and in which mutual respect, persistent effort, and shared responsibility make everyone stronger. It is possible to make a strong case for differentiation simply based on the  demographics of contemporary classrooms and the needs of an increasingly  diverse student population to function in an increasingly complex world. It is also  possible to make a strong case for differentiation based on research e.g., Tomlinson, 2021, 2022. We believe, however, that the practice of differentiation has its  roots in a student-centered philosophy, or ethic, of teaching. The goal in briefly examining the philosophy behind differentiation in this  chapter is not to suggest that educators wait to try to address student learning needs until they have this belief systemor any othersolidly in place.  Rather, our hope is that reflecting on these ideas will be beneficial to teachers  who want to lead for differentiation, helping them examine their own beliefs and  understand some of the thinking that undergirds a coherent, determined, and  proactive approach to differentiating instruction. This reflection should also help  teachers develop a rationale or vision that will help them talk with their students  about a differentiated classroom and make instructional decisions to benefit their  students. There are numerous ways to order the ideas that follow. The method weve  chosen seems as logical as any, yet we know that for many teachers, these ideas do  not evolve in a logical or even stepwise fashion. We are aware, too, that many 
Teaching What You Believe of these beliefs are interconnecteddifficult to separate from one another. We  also recognize that we include only a sampling of insights in each area and invite  readers to add their thinking to ours. Well begin by taking a look at some core tenets of the philosophy of differentiation. Then, we will consider how those beliefs, or principles, might shape  a teachers affective response to students affective needs. Finally, well examine  some concrete examples of how those principles might guide teachers aspirations to establish, lead, and ultimately manage flexible routines in a differentiated  classroom. Beliefs That Point to Differentiated Instruction Lorna Earl reflects, Differentiation is making sure that the right students get the  right learning tasks at the right time. Once you have a sense of what each student  holds as given or known and what he or she needs in order to learn, differentiation is no longer an option. It is an obvious response 2013, p. 131. This is an immensely practical way to look at differentiation, but it also models a useful cause-and-effect approach to thinking about the philosophical roots  of differentiation. To take some liberties with her words, Earl is in essence saying  that if we care about whether teaching and learning are working for each of our  students, we must continue to monitor their growth in terms of what we deem to  be critical learning goals. Inevitably, well find that students are in different places  with their mastery of those goals. Then, as she suggests, because we want to make  sure each student succeeds, we have no choice but to differentiate instruction  so that each learner can take their own next steps forward each day in our classrooms. Theres simply no good alternative. The belief that sets Earls sequence of thoughts in motion is an affirmation  in the profound worth of every learnernot a vague, generalized, missionstatement sort of belief. A belief in the worth of the individual propels a teacher  to look eyeball to eyeball at the humanity of each student and dictate classroom  practice as a result. The statement asks, If you believe X, what choice do you  have but Y? Following is a set of beliefs leading to classroom practice that doggedly attend to the needs of individual learners because there simply is no other  choice.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Belief 1: Every student has inherent  dignity and is worthy of respect At the center of democracy, and the worlds major religions, resides a conviction that we should hold human life in esteem and regard it with a sense of  awe. From this comes the admonition that each life is unique, irreplaceable, and  innately valuableregardless of race, economic status, language, gender identity,  religion, or exceptionality. In most societies, the mature individual is cast as one  who can move beyond egocentrism to recognize and address the needs of others  and can seek justice not just for oneself but for others. Words affirming human  dignity surround us and are prevalent in government documents, houses of worship, judicial rulings, political conversations, and ethical debates. The danger, of  course, is that although we generally accept the idea of human dignity almost  automatically in much of the free world, we enact this idea with much greater  difficulty. The teacher who both accepts and enacts the principle of human dignity  does not look at a class roster and simply see a list of names. That teacher considers teaching to be a stewardship of young livesa shaping of themand aspires  to act and interact in ways that consistently respect and dignify the worth of each  student. Such teachers accept the premise that teaching is essentially about building lives Tomlinson, 2021. Much of the impetus for differentiated instruction is predicated on the belief  that every young life is of ultimate value and should be treated accordingly by  adults who have responsibility for shaping those lives. Decisions about classroom  rules, curriculum, instruction, student groupings, discipline, grading, and virtually every other aspect of teaching are shaped by the centrality or marginality of  this belief in a teachers thinking. Attempting to enact this belief into classroom  practice certainly does not simplify the teachers role, but it likely does enrich it. A belief in the dignity and worth of each student leads teachers to ask questions like these:  How can I gain an understanding of the particular cultures, talents,  strengths, interests, needs, burdens, and dreams this student brings to the  classroom daily?  In what ways can I show this student that I unconditionally respect and  value them?  How do I help this student recognize and extend their strengths?
Teaching What You Believe  How can I ensure my own cultural proficiency in order to be the most  effective teacher possible for each learner?  In what ways can I help students see and value the contributions and  potential of every other student in the class?  How can I guide development of a sense of classroom community and collaboration characterized by empathy and respect? Belief 2: Diversity is both inevitable and positive A teacher created a poster that hung prominently in the front of her classroom. It read, Our similarities make us human. Our differences make us individuals. Her conversations and actions with students persistently reaffirmed the  words on the wall. She reminded her students that everyone needs kindness and  friends. Everyone makes mistakes. Everyone has good days and bad. These are  human things. However, Joshs sense of humor is uniquely his. Javiers Latino  background means that he knows things others in the class might not, and the  class can therefore learn from him. Andreas perspectives as the oldest child in  a large family help her see things in ways that her classmates might not think of. Through this, the teacher helps her students learn a critical reality: We are a  great deal alike as human beings and, in those ways, we share a common bond,  yet human beings differ as well. Sometimes those differences separate us, but they  dont need to. They should enrich usand they do, when we are open to them. A belief that diversity is both normal and positive leads teachers to ask questions like these:  How do I contribute to my students awareness of their core similarities  and their individuality?  How do I seek diverse perspectives on issues and topics in our class?  How do I help students learn to seek and value multiple perspectives on  issues and topics?  How well do I understand my own culture and how it shapes my perspectives and practices as a person and as a teacher?  How do I ensure that all students backgrounds, cultures, races, languages,  patterns of communication, preferred ways of learning, and traditions are  recognized, honored, and represented in our classrooms operation, curriculum, and materials?  How do I ensure that each student has equity of access to the highestquality learning opportunities this school can offer?
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom  How do I create group work that draws on the particular strengths of each  of the groups members?  How do I ensure that every student can make a significant intellectual contribution to the work of the class? Belief 3: The classroom should mirror the kind of  society we want our students to live in and lead Certainly, we want young people to live in, value, and defend a society that  accords respect and dignity to each of its members. We also live in a time when  the world is rapidly becoming everyones backyard. The United States is an amalgam of languages, cultures, races, economic backgrounds, and possibilities. We  therefore need classrooms in which students not only accept but expect, learn  from, and value diversity. Thus, the first two beliefs that lead to differentiation  are tied to this third belief. Vivian Paley 1993 saw her kindergartners beginning the practice of excluding peers from games and classroom groups. Understanding the long-term  liabilities for both the rejected and the rejecter, she posted a new classroom rule:  You cant say you cant play. Over time, she helped her young students debate  the fairness of exclusion. Though conducted in the language of 5-year-olds, the  conversations initially sounded remarkably like adult rationales for sorting and  separating people. In time, her students came to accept the rule, live by it, appreciate it, and defend it. Even at a young age, they found that it was not possible to  simultaneously value and exclude a person or a group. They ultimately understood that if different meant you had to be somewhere else, then different  wasnt a good thing. They came to see differences as just part of who they were  rather than reasons to suspect or reject one another. Likewise, it is difficult to make a compelling argument that a school or teacher  has deep regard for the value of each individual and accepts diversity as both normal and desirable while designating some students as able and others as less  able for the purpose of sorting them academically. Our long-standing practices  of academic segregation are complex and still advocated and practiced by many.  They are also antithetical to the core beliefs and practices of differentiation. With regard to students with learning challenges, Richard Villa and Jacqueline Thousand remind us, Inclusive education is about . . . making a commitment  to provide each student in the community, each citizen in a democracy, with the  inalienable right to belong. . . . Inclusion is the opposite of segregation and isolation. . . . Segregated education creates a permanent underclass of students and 
Teaching What You Believe conveys to those students that they do not measure up, fit in, or belong 2005,  p. 5. The same could be said of students who live in poverty, students whose first  language is not English, students who live in foster care, those who experience  trauma, those who struggle with gender identity, those who are rightly afraid to  go home at the end of the day, and many other categories of learners who often  find themselves, in one way or another, excluded from robust and challenging  curricula, field trips, access to technology, and other opportunities that both  indicate and accord student status. To value is to include, not exclude. To honor  diversity is to invite it, not shunt it away Tomlinson, 2022. The belief that classrooms should mirror the world we hope our students can  live in and lead prompts teachers to ask questions like these:  How do I come to understand my students diverse backgrounds and  needs so that I can draw on them and ensure that students build on them  effectively?  How do my students and I create an inclusive learning environment in  which the full range of students learn well together, not just occupy the same  space?  How do I help students create a classroom in which they understand that  we all have different entry points into learning yet share a common need to  learn?  How do students come to encourage and support one anothers growth?  How do students learn to affirm and celebrate one anothers growth? Belief 4: Most students can learn most things  that are essential to a given area of study Teacher beliefs about students capacity to succeed are often buried beneath  consciousness. Those beliefs are nonetheless powerful determinants in shaping  both teaching and student attitudes about learning. Carol Dweck, whose research on motivation spans several decades e.g.,  2000, 2006, 2017, tells us that we develop early in life a mindset about what  it means to be smart and how we become successful. Her work suggests two  options, a fixed mindset or a growth fluid mindset. People who develop a fixed  mindset conclude that success comes from inborn abilitythat is, a person is  born smart or they arent. People who develop a growth mindset reach a different  conclusion. They believe that success isnt determined by innate and immutable 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom ability but rather by persistent and informed effort. To put it another way, people  work their way to success. Students with a fixed mindset feel a sense of inevitability when they encounter difficulty in school. For example, students who struggle with school on a  regular basis simply conclude that they cant succeed because they are not smart.  Likewise, students who are highly able might balk at challenges because they  believe smart people shouldnt have to work hard; if they cant handle the challenge with modest effort, then its an indication that they arent smart, and thats  an idea they cant abide. In either case, students with a fixed mindset have minimal motivation to work hard. Students with a growth mindset believe that if a skill or task is difficult, they  can nonetheless achieve mastery because their continuing effort will win the day.  Their motivation to work hard is high because they believe the payoff will be  worth their investment. Teachers with a fixed mindset certainly teach all their students, but they do  so with a sense that some kids will get it, and some wont. In a way, these teachers teach without the expectation that every student will learn. They draw conclusions, often unconsciously and often early in a course or grade, about which  students are smart and which are not. They then proceed to teach accordingly,  remediating some students and enriching or accelerating others. Teachers with a growth mindset work from the premise that virtually any  student can learn anything if the student is willing to work hard and if they  have support in that effort, including support in learning to work in ways that  characterize successful people. Such teachers arent interested in labels or past  performance; they simply set out to establish an ethic of hard work and to teach  students the skills they need to work effectively. Success with essential learning  goals for each student is the only acceptable outcome for these teachers. Not surprisingly, there is an interaction between the mindsets held by both  students and teachers. Figure 2.1 illustrates some of the possible interactions and  implications. It is important to note that Dweck finds people can and do change their  mindsets. Teachers with growth mindsets regularly help students understand  that they have control over their success, thus enabling students with fixed mindsets to begin to operate from a sense of personal agency. The contribution of a growth mindset to student motivation and achievement is considerable Aronson et al., 2002; Good et al., 2003; Ng, 2018; OKeefe 
Teaching What You Believe et al., 2018; Sparks, 2021. Students who come to believe that their hard work  will lead to success earn higher achievement test scores and grades, engage in  academics at a higher level, and enjoy the academic process more than students  who retain a fixed mindset perspective. Figure 2.1 Possible Interactions Between Teacher and Student Mindset STUDENT Growth Mindset Teacher may underestimate student capacity and  willingness to work hard and teach down because of  the students language, culture, economic status, race,  label, etc. Both teacher and student study student growth, set  goals for progress, and look for ways to continue  development. Students at all readiness levels have  maximum opportunity for challenge, growth,  and success. Fixed Mindset Both teacher and student accept the students difficulties as given, and neither exerts the effort needed for  high levels of student achievement. Both also accept  high grades on grade-level work as adequate for  advanced learners. Teacher encourages and insists on student effort and  growth. Over time, the students mindset can change  to a growth orientation with evidence that effort  leads to success. Students at all readiness levels have  maximum opportunity for challenge, growth,  and success. Fixed Mindset Growth Mindset TEACHER Reprinted with permission from Solution Tree. It is unlikely that a fixed mindset teacher exerts enough effort to ensure the  success of a student whom that teacher consciously or unconsciously believes  is incapable of success. Differentiation is a growth mindset endeavorit asks  teachers to find an academic entry point relative to essential learning outcomes,  to make instructional plans designed to move students to mastery of those outcomes from their current points of proficiency, and to adopt a whatever it takes  approach in doing so. Differentiation also calls on teachers to work with students  to show them the direct link between informed effort and achievement, thus  enlisting each students energy in their own success. Dweck 2000, 2017 counsels that we serve our students best not by telling  them they are smart but by being candid about where their skills are at a given  time and where they need to be in order to achieve their life and school aspirations. She continues, The confidence students need is not the confidence that  they have a certain level of smartness, or that they have more of it than other 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom students. The confidence they need is the confidence that they, or anybody for  that matter, can learn if they apply their effort and strategies that support success Dweck, 2000, pp. 5758. A belief in the capacity of virtually all students to learn essential content  causes teachers to ask questions like these:  How do I understand the mindset of each of my students in order to  ensure that they understand their capacity to impact their own success?  How do I help each student develop and extend the attitudes, habits of  mind, and strategies needed to contribute to their success as a learner?  How do I understand and address each students learning development  and needs relative to designated learning outcomes for my gradesubjects?  How do I ensure that I position each learner as a thinker and problem  solver?  How do I ensure the supply of materials and support needed for each students progress?  How do I ensure that classroom working arrangements build on students  cultural preferences for learning?  In what ways can I make clear to my students that I value their effort rather  than their innate abilitythat I am much more interested in their growth  than their starting points?  How do I ensure that competition against oneself, rather than against one  another, is the goal of this class?  How do I ensure that student growth is a key and visible component in  reporting grades? Belief 5: Each student should have equity of  access to excellent learning opportunities A belief in the worth of each student should lead us to conclude that virtually  every young person requires access to the best learning opportunities a school  has to offer. To suggest that some students require less is to retrench on a deeply  important ideal. Here is John Deweys take: What the best and wisest parent wants for his own child, that must the community want for all of its children. Any other ideal for our schools is narrow and  unlovely; acted upon, it destroys our democracy. . . . Only by being true to the  full growth of all the individuals who make it up, can society by any chance be  true to itself. in Schlechty, 1997, p. 77
Teaching What You Believe A belief in the capacity of all students to learn the essential knowledge,  understandings, and skills in a topic or unit of study suggests that schools offer  their very best to everyone. This belief also implies two additional assumptions.  First, learning opportunities should focus on what is essential to learnthat is,  on how the subject makes sense and what makes it authentic, useful, relevant,  transferable, and meaningful. Second, the curriculum and instruction to which all  learners are exposed should provide consistent opportunities to understand the  content so students can retain, apply, and transfer what they learn Tomlinson,  2021, Tomlinson  McTighe, 2006. In other words, if our schools and teachers operated from a growth mindset perspective, we would have little reason to  assume that only a few students could learn conceptually, think critically, debate  ideas, and address real-world issues. Rather than develop curriculum that mirrors  a belief that only a relatively small proportion of students can do complex work,  we would plan high-end curriculum for advanced students and then scaffold  instruction to make certain each student is supported in achieving and, if possible, exceeding those complex goals Tomlinson, 2021, 2022. There is ample evidence spanning many years that the practice of providing  high-quality curriculum and instruction for somebut not allstudents results  in an escalating disadvantage for students who are already at a disadvantage in  terms of their opportunity to achieve e.g., Darling-Hammond, 2001; Domina  et al., 2016; Gorsky, 2018. In addition, indications are increasingly clear that  establishing expectations for a majority of students to become creators rather  than simply consumers of knowledge is imperative if we expect all our young  people to thrive in and contribute to the world they will enter as they leave school   Berger et al., 2014; Fullan et al., 2018. As DuFour and Eaker 1998 put it, In  todays Information Age . . . educators must operate from the premise that it is  the purpose of schools to bring all students to their full potential and to a level of  education that was once reserved for the very few p. 62. A belief in equity of access to excellent learning opportunities leads teachers  to ask questions like these:  To what degree does the curriculum feel relevant and engaging to each  student in my class?  Is the curriculum designed to ensure student understanding of content?  Am I confident that I am teaching up to all of my students, rather than  watering down for some of them?
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom  Are all of the tasks I offer respectfulthat is, are they equally appealing  and focused on essential understandings, do they require students to think  critically andor creatively, and do they ask all students to work with content  in authentic ways?  In what ways can I make certain that my most advanced students are being  consistently challenged?  In what ways can I support each student in achieving and, whenever possible, surpassing established goals?  How do I ensure that each student is an active participant in discussions  designed to help them make meaning of ideas?  How do I schedule our time so students can regularly focus on their own  specific academic needs and still come together around important ideas?  How do I consistently seek student input to shape what I ask them to  learn? Belief 6: A central goal of teaching is to  maximize the capacity of each learner Ensuring that each student experiences the best curriculum and instruction  a school can offer, as well as the support necessary to succeed in such settings,  would move schools much closer to this belief. In practice, however, we generally  fall short of embracing it for at least two reasons. First, we tend to accept a single  performance level as adequate or even desirable for a grade level. While it is obviously important to have clear learning targets for teachers and students, when we  assume that all students reach their maximum respective potential if they achieve  the same goals under the same circumstances on the same day, we operate in  direct contradiction to all that we know about human development. While, for  some students, success is inevitably out of reach on the date designated to judge  their competence, other students are invariably rated as successful without  regard for the fact that they may have passed the performance level measured by  the test much earlier in the year. Students learn incrementally from their various starting points. It is simply  how the process works. We cannot require students to make an impossible leap  over a chasm in knowledge, nor should we ask them to move backward in order  to stay with the class. Theodore Sizer 1985 explains it this way: One cannot succeed at something totally beyond ones experience, beyond  ones grasp. One is interested in that at which one succeeds. Thus, a clever 
Teaching What You Believe teacher sets a students work, and the expectations for it, at a level where some  modicum of legitimate success is possible. However, because experience has  shown that it is worth the effort to provide the growing child with problems  that tempt him into next stages of development, an effective teacher keeps the  subject of study at an arms length from the student, but no further. The joy  of success comes especially sweet when that which was mastered had earlier  seemed unachievable. p. 167 This is the case for students at all entry points into a lesson or unit. Further, when we set a single benchmark for all students, it is inevitably a  middling one. In doing so, we teach students that there is a finish line and that  good enough is good enough. Former U.S. Secretary of Education John Gardner 1961 reminded us that we are in peril if the goal we set for ourselves is one  of amicable mediocrity. All we can ask of students is that they invest maximum  effort in learningand we should not settle for less from our students or from  ourselves. A second reason that our classrooms arent geared to maximize the capacity  of each learner is that we tend to see and think of our students as a group Brighton et al., 2005; Tomlinson, 2021, 2022. We say, The students always love it  when we do this lab, or The students dont understand inverting fractions, or  The students were restless today. No doubt a number of students do like the lab,  dont understand how and when to invert fractions, and were restless today, but  theres also little doubt that some students found the lab pointless or confusing,  could teach a cogent lesson on inverting fractions, and were perfectly calm and  ready to learn today. Its virtually impossible to attend to student differences  when we think of the students as a single entity. Such thinking also reinforces  the sense that a single learning indicator or set of indicators is appropriate for the  students at a given time. As Baruti Kafele 2021 reminds us, Each student has their own individuality, academically, socially, and emotionally. And each student has their own voice, academically, socially, and emotionally. Each student is somebody. Each student is somebody special. Each  student has his or her own set of experiences, realities, challenges, obstacles,  goals, aspirations, and ambitions. Additionally, each student has his or her own  unique way of being motivated and inspired. What sets one student on fire  might not be what sets another student on fire. Most importantly, how each  student learns, thinks, makes sense out of, and processes new information may  be unique. p. 16
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Differentiation asks teachers to look beyond groupthink and study the  evolving profiles of students as individuals. The degree to which a teacher melds  respect for the individual and belief in the capacity of the individual to succeed  with the intent to know each student as an individual determines the likelihood  that the goal of maximizing the capacity of each learner is operationalized. Such  a triumvirate of beliefs also results in many more students exceeding the unitary  standards we now establish. Berger 2003 and Berger and colleagues 2014  commend the idea of inspiring each student to create beautiful work and ensuring that each learner has the support necessary to achieve exemplary status on  every summative assessment and every long-term learning target. The work of  excellence, Berger 2003 argues, is transformational: Once a student sees that he or she is capable of excellence, that student is never  quite the same. There is a new self-image, a new notion of possibility. There is  an appetite for excellence. After students have had a taste of excellence, theyre  never quite satisfied with less; theyre always hungry. p. 8 A belief in the importance of maximizing the capacity of each learner leads  teachers to ask questions like these:  What is this students next step in learning essential content today?  How can I help each student understand and contribute to their next step  in learning?  What task, materials, and working arrangements will push this student a bit  beyond their comfort zone today?  What models and indicators can I use to help this student understand what  high-quality work looks like at their stage of growth?  How can I tap into this students motivation to strive for quality?  What forms of support does this student need from me and from peers to  persist in the face of difficulty and do exemplary work?  How do we support one another in working for quality?  How do we chart growth and quality of work over time?  How do we recognize and celebrate excellence, both individually and as a  community of learners?
Teaching What You Believe A Philosophical Compass  for the Journey Ahead Good teachingthe really good stuffis hard work. Being a good teacher  requires meeting many of the same demands as being a good parent, a good doctor, or a good musician. Humans are largely sustained in our work by a belief that  what we do makes a profound difference in the lives of other people. Differentiation is an individual-focused approach to teaching. It is the manifestation of a  conviction that every student is both unique and of prime importance as a learner  and as a human being. It is an affirmation that human differences are normal and  desirable, and that excellent teachers plan, teach, and reflect with those differences in mind. Heres how Grant Wiggins 1992 put it: We will not successfully restructure schools to be effective until we stop seeing  diversity in students as a problem. Our challenge is not one of getting special  students to better adjust to the usual schoolwork, the usual teacher pace, or the  usual tests. The challenge of schooling remains what it has been since the modern era began two centuries ago: ensuring that all students receive their entitlement. They have the right to thought-provoking and enabling schoolwork so  that they might use their minds well and discover the joy therein to be willing  to push themselves farther. They have the right to instruction that obligates the  teacher, like the doctor, to change tactics when progress fails to occur. They  have the right to assessment that provides students and teachers with insight  into real-world standards. . . . Until such a time, we will have no insight into  human potential. Until the challenge is met, schools will continue to reward the  lucky or the already-equipped and weed out the poor performers. pp. xvxvi Enter the Students A philosophy in the abstract is worthwhile since it grounds our thinking and  reminds us that a life well lived or a career well spent is likely to be more reasoned  and purposeful than random. The test of that philosophy comes in the arena of  daily life rather than in the seclusion of individual minds. In the case of teaching,  a defensible philosophy supports the capacity of teachers to address the needs of  the young people in their care. Abraham Maslow 1943 found that individuals develop along a continuum  of needs, with the more basic human needs demanding attention before higherlevel needs can be satisfied. First in line, he tells us, are physiological needs for  things such as food, clothing, shelter, and sleep. The primacy of these needs is so 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom great that, when there is a deficiency in one or more of them, the body focuses  almost exclusively on attending to that need. In a school setting, students who  enter the classroom hungry, cold, sleepy, or worried about where they will find  shelter at night have no mental energy to learn a new language or complete a  worksheetuntil a teacher or another adult can attend to their needs. Once physiological needs are met, the need for safety and security takes center stage. For these needs to be satisfied, students require a sense that they are not  only physically safe but also safe from teasing, bullying, and hopelessness in terms  of the tasks and challenges ahead. A school and classroom that provide safety and  model and demand respect can help pave the way to effective learning, but when  the end of the day nears and the student again faces potential threats, anticipation  of the dangers ahead will push learning aside. Only when safety and security seem  assured can individuals systematically seek acknowledgment and belonging.  Most students want to be part of a community. A feeling of collegiality or teamwork in the classroom satisfies this need to be a part of rather than apart from  the group. The absence of such a sense of belonging leads to loneliness, isolation,  and low self-esteem. In school, it essentially derails the learning process. When an individuals physiological needs are adequately addressed, attention  can then be spent on esteem needs such as academic learning. When this is the  case, students demonstrate a desire to engage themselves in ways that bring recognition and value. They want to contribute and be valued as contributors to the  group and its work. Through achievement, they develop a sense of self-efficacy. The final two levels of Maslows hierarchy of needs are self-actualization, in  which an individual strives to become all that they can be, and self-transcendence,  in which individuals learn to live at a higher level of insight and on a plane that  takes them beyond themselves. It is highly unusual for young people to achieve  these two stages. It is interesting, then, to realize that academic learning requires students to  work at the highest level of need satisfaction within their grasp as young people. It  certainly reminds us, once again, that a teachers job is not simply to enter a room  and impart knowledge, but rather to attend to each student as a whole human  being in order to open the way for each student to truly become a learner. When we keep Maslows hierarchy in mind, we realize that most learners  come to school not so much to seek mastery of math or literature as to satisfy  more basic needs, such as affirmation and contribution. Once those needs have  been met, they shift their attention to things such as purpose, challenge, and  power Tomlinson, 2004, 2021, 2022. A teacher who honors the individual 
Teaching What You Believe seeks to understand each students particular progression of needs and to address  those needs in a way that leads to both personal and academic growth. The Teacher Responds Students will come to school with the sorts of needsboth cognitive and   affectiveoutlined by Maslow. Teachers will respond to those needsby  addressing them or ignoring them, understanding the similarities and differences  in how students experience them or generalizing across students. At least two elements determine a teachers response to students needs and its quality in terms of  student benefits. One determinant is the philosophy or lack thereof that shapes  the teachers actions. The second determinant is the teachers level of competency  in setting and following a specific course of action. We often think of these two  elements as will and skill. Ultimately, a philosophy of teaching is based first on  a teachers will to teach each learner and then on that teachers will to develop the  skills required to understand every learner and teach them as individuals. We hope this chapter will contribute to the development of beliefs about the  nature and purpose of teaching. We also hope that the following chapters will  contribute to teachers skills in managing and leading a classroom that is attentive to learners particular needs and to the groups common needs. A philosophy  of teaching based on beliefs such as the ones outlined earlier in this chapter  leads teachers to respond to student needs for affirmation, purpose, challenge,  and power with invitation, investment, persistence, opportunity, and reflection  Tomlinson, 2004, 2021, 2022. In a variety of ways and over time, teachers need  to consistently convey the following messages to their students, both individually  and as a whole class:  InvitationI am pleased that you are here, eager to know you better, and  aware that you bring important experiences and characteristics to class with  you. I see you with unconditional positive regardthat is, the belief that you  are valuable and worthy of respect as you are. I want to do whatever I can to  make this a place of learning for you. I encourage you to help me be the best  teacher possible for you.  InvestmentBecause you are important in this class and in the world,  I am going to work hard to help you grow as much and as fast as you can.  Because your effort has much to do with your success, I am going to ask you  to work hard as well. I will help you develop the attitudes and skills that support the hard work of learning.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom  PersistenceYou wont always get things right the first time you try  them. Neither will I. When class is not going well for you, I am going to work  for you and with you to find approaches that will ensure your success. I will  never give up on you.  OpportunityYou are young and just learning about the possibilities  that exist in the world. I want to provide opportunities for you to see yourself  at work in varied settings, in varied roles, and with varied content. This is a  time for you to prepare for the future and get excited by the possibilities that  exist for you.  ReflectionI will listen to you, learn from you, observe you at work in  our class, study your progress, and ask for your guidance. I will think about  my work and how its working for you as often as I possibly can. I expect that  of myself so that I can become a more aware and effective teacher. I will ask  the same of you so you can become a more aware and effective learner. In addition to this sort of affective response to a students needs, a teacher  whose work is rooted in the worth of the individual understands that much  of what they communicate to students will be in the form of curriculum and  instruction. Therefore, the teacher ensures that every students work is engaging,  important, focused, challenging, and scaffolded Tomlinson, 2004, 2021. These  attributes of day-to-day work clearly communicate to students the teachers  belief in their individual worth and potential. In a book that is both disturbing and hopeful, Kirsten Olson 2009 presents  her body of research, which includes interviews with many adults from diverse  backgrounds, virtually all of whom felt profoundly wounded by school. Olson  didnt set out to do research in this area; the work evolved as she discovered  that many adults with whom she spoke about other topics discussed negative  impacts that school had on them. She goes on to clarify that her definition of  wounded by school does not include the inevitable moments of discomfort that  occur when substantial numbers of young people share a classroom or the kinds  of natural bumps and bruises that help us grow. Instead, shes talking about the  hurt that diminishes individuals in their own eyes, doesnt go away even in adulthood, and cannot be dismissed even if the victim achieves success in the eyes of  the world. Common results of such wounding that emerged from the interviews  included the following:
Teaching What You Believe  A loss of pleasure in learning.  A belief that we are not smart or competent in learning.  A belief that our abilities are fixed and cant be improved with effort, coaching, or self-understanding.  A belief that we are just average in a way that feels diminishing.  Anger toward teachers and others in authority because we feel that we are  not seen or acknowledged as worthy.  A generalized feeling of shame that came from school and produces generalized anxiety.  A sense that school diminished us cognitively.  A low appetite for intellectual risk taking; in other words, a desire to get the  right answer and just finish the job. Olson finds that there are some teachers who heal wounds, and as a group,  they exhibit predictable behaviors. These teachers  Welcome and honor diversity in race, language, economic status, learning  exceptionality, gender, and sexual orientation.  Accept many types of students and consciously value diversity of background and experience in the classroom.  Place the student at the center of instruction.  Honor what students already know and feel.  Honor varied ways in which students most comfortably learn.  Emphasize multiple avenues of content presentation, reflection, and  assessment.  Make communities of caring central to learning.  Acknowledge the ambiguity inherent in teaching.  Employ experimentation in instructional design and learn from mistakes. It is not a great leap to suggest that a philosophy of differentiation exists  to avoid wounding learners as much as those wounds are within our power to  avoid and to play a role in healing the wounds that young learners bring with  them into the classroom. Philosophically, differentiation is an approach that  commends planning for human wholeness as a primary goaland that provides  for healing when necessary. Accepting this premise provides teachers with considerable guidance when they plan for instruction, reflect on instruction, and talk  with others about the work they do.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Nora Rose, a graduate student at the University of Virginia, reflected, I have  come to see differentiation not as something revolutionary but as a kind of quiet  radicalism. This is not meant to discount its power but rather to highlight it as a  practice of kindness. Noras statement reflects a core insight about differentiation. A teacher who works from deep and determined respect for the worth of  each learner will, through study and practice, discover differentiationnot all at  once, but step by stepas part of the search for ways to dignify and extend the  capacities of each of those learners. Chapter 3 explores ways in which teachers invite students to share in the  development of a philosophy of differentiation. It also examines how teachers  assume the role as leader of parents, colleagues, and administrators in understanding and supporting differentiation.
Treating students as people comes very close to living the academic, personal,  and social educational goals that are stated in most official policy documents.  But more than that, involving students in constructing their own meaning and  learning is fundamentally pedagogically essentialthey learn more and are  motivated to go even further. Michael Fullan, The New Meaning of Educational Change, 3rd Edition A frequent comment from teachers who are early in their consideration of differentiation is My students would be angry if they saw that someone else had a  different book or a different activity than they did in a lesson. Interestingly, that  is an issue almost never raised by teachers who are practitioners of differentiation. So why the difference? Chances are good that the first teacher is operating from the common belief  system about teaching and learningand that their students are as well. Among  3 The Invitation to the Vision Talking with Students, Parents, and  Other Educators About Differentiation
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom the tenets of that belief system is a common curriculum for everyone and, thus, a  right or standard lesson that all students in the class must complete to ensure  orderly coverage of the content. In that paradigm, a good teacher makes sure  everyone does the same thing in a given lesson and uses a standard set of materials, standard pacing, and a standard support system. Not only is that the correct  way to do school, but its also the fair way. Therefore, a teacher who does  something different for one or a few students is at risk of being seen as unfair. The second teacher is operating from a different belief system. This teacher  believes that there is a common set of critical content that every student should  learn and that their job as a teacher is to ensure that each student has the best  possible opportunity to master and, if possible, move beyond that content. In this  paradigm, the teacher understands that students enter each segment of learning  at varied starting points, bring different experiences to which they can connect  new learning, work at different speeds, process information in a variety of ways,  and require different support systems in order to master the essential content.  Thus, while this teacher is committed to ensuring that each student succeeds  with designated learning outcomes, the teacher also recognizes the need to provide a range of ways for students to access information, a variety of options for  processing or making sense of the information, an array of support systems, and  multiple outlets for students to demonstrate what they learn. In this teachers way  of thinking, treating all students exactly alike is counterproductive. Its necessary  to meet students where they are in terms of readiness, interest, and approaches to  learning in order to maximize their academic growth. The first teacher envisions using a differentiated instructional strategy in an  environment that values samenessone in which treating everyone alike is the  gold standard. It feels as though it would be changing the rules of a game without telling the players, and some level of anarchy is likely to result. The second  teacher is aware that most students come to class with a standard set of rules  firmly ingrained in their thinking unless a prior teacher differentiated instruction  or there is schoolwide attention to differentiation. This teacher has no intention of trying to sneak differentiation into daily routines. Theres no thought  of doing differentiation to students; its about doing differentiation with them.  Therefore, from the first day of school, the second teacher sees students as partners in success. From the first day of school, this teacher works consistently to  build a shared classroom vision and to construct with students the processes and 
The Invitation to the Vision procedures that support the success of that vision. In other words, this teacher  will serve as a leader in establishing an effectively differentiated classroom. This chapter discusses specific goals for teachers who want to lead students  and develop classrooms designed to support student success with critical content, specific ways in which teachers might engage their students in understanding and contributing to a differentiated classroom, and various conversations  that enable teachers and students to develop a common sense of direction in the  classroom. It also briefly discusses the teacher as a leader in helping both parents  and other educators understand and contribute to differentiation. A Framework for Coming Together At the beginning of the year, a teacher who wants to lead students to understand  and contribute to a differentiated classroom will invest some start-up time in  the process. There may be a few class periods or time slots that focus largely on  conversations and activities related to differentiation, and there will be a number  of others in which more abbreviated conversations or decision-making sessions  occur. The idea of diverting time from covering curriculum may be distressing to  some teachers. Research and teacher experience, however, clearly indicate that  students and teachers gain more time than theyve lost when they develop a  shared vision for their work and a common set of routines that function smoothly  for the rest of the year e.g., Lynch, 2015; Marzano et al., 2003; Stronge, 2018. Each teacher will need to decide how much time to invest in the topics suggested below and to the start-up and follow-up conversations. With students  of any age, it is important to introduce ideas and routines and to review initial  conversations briefly throughout the year, helping them refresh their memories  about established goals and procedures, reflect on the efficacy of the goals and  procedures, and refine those goals and procedures, as necessary. Regardless of grade level, there are at least six key questions that teachers  need to explore with students to help develop a shared understanding of and  investment in a differentiated classroom. The wording of these questions may  vary according to grade, but the substance remains the same. 1.  Who are you as learners? Are you all alike or are there important  differences?
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom 2.  Given the differences we see, how should I teach you? How should we  learn together? 3.  If our classroom is going to work for all of us, what will it be like? What  will it look like? How will it need to function? What roles will each of us play? 4.  How can I learn more about your starting points, interests, and best ways  of learning? 5.  If we have a differentiated classroom, can it be fair? What will fair mean  in this room? 6.  What will success in this class mean? How will I know if youre succeeding? How will you know? Will success always mean the same thing for each  learner? Pursuit of these questions is evolutionary. In other words, each new question develops from discussions of the previous questions. For example, the fifth  question about fairness only really makes sense after the first four questions  are discussed. Pursuit of these questions is also recursive; teachers will need to  remind students of earlier discussions with a sort of ifthen logic as the discussions unfold. For example, If we agree on this idea, then what will we need to do  to make it work? Finally, teachers need to revisit these questions with students  at key points during the year to refresh student thinking, provide specific opportunities for students to share successes and concerns, and enable the group to  contribute to a maturing of the ideas as the year progresses. The following sections mirror the logic of these questions to help readers  think about what they want their students to consider and how they might go  about shaping discussions and activities to engage their students with those ideas. Who are you as learners? Arguably, the most important thing that any teacher of any age group in any  kind of classroom does at the beginning of each year is convey, through words,  actions, and tone, a message of pleasure and excitement at the prospect of getting to know their students. The message has to be an honest one, of course,  and when it is, it begins the long journey of building trust between teacher and  learners. The message requires consistent and persistent follow-through. It needs  to ring true in everything the teacher does. If trust is established between teacher  and students, the latter begin to see themselves as acceptable and even valuable.  They see the teacher as worthy of their trust, class content becomes more important, and learning becomes worth the risk it inevitably involves.
The Invitation to the Vision In a differentiated classroom, the teacher takes the message further. The  message is not simply I want to know you as people. It becomes Knowing you  individually will necessarily shape how I teach you. The implication is clear:  How could I really care to know what your strengths, needs, and interests are  without wanting to act upon that knowledge in order to teach you well? The goals of the first conversation are to help students 1 recognize that the  teacher cares about them as people and wants to know them, 2 begin to share  a bit about themselves, 3 consider the similarities and differences among classmates, and 4 think about what it would mean to have a classroom designed to  work for all kinds of learners. Well present three suggestions for developing these  goals with students, and we invite you to borrow one of these approaches or use  them as a foundation to develop your own. Graphing Me. Having students graph their strengths and weaknesses is an  approach that is useful across many grade levels. The format can vary with the age  of the students, but the goal is to have students indicate aspects of content about  which they feel confident and areas in which they are less sure. Younger students  might color in a premade bar graph to indicate their relative strengths and weaknesses in a variety of subject areas such as reading, art, math, writing, science,  and so on. It can be useful to ask students to respond to some areas that are not  directly related to school e.g., being a friend, doing chores on time, making up  games. Figure 3.1 see p. 68 shows a graph completed by a 2nd grade student  along with the students comments on her self-assessment. Older students might follow directions to create a bar or line graph with  relevant skills along the horizontal axis e.g., computation, problem solving, fractions, equations, mathematical writing. It can be helpful to ask students to add  two or three topics to the horizontal axis that do not directly relate to course content such as hobbies or nonacademic skills or that relate to a different course  such as math and sports skills on an English language arts graph. On the vertical  axis, students should place descriptors that indicate a range of performance from  poor to outstanding. Its fun for the class and teacher to create the descriptors  together so that the words reflect the language of the learners. To introduce this activity, its a good idea for the teacher to complete a  graph as students observe. This allows the teacher to model the assignment in a  thoughtful way, enables the teacher to introduce some ideas that may be important as the year goes on, and helps students to get to know the teacher better. For  example, the teacher may have some areas of relative weakness, areas in which  they have not achieved their potential, or an area in which they were once weak 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom and perhaps even afraid but are now competent. As part of this process, we recommend that teachers create overlapping or dual graphs that illustrate growth  from then when the teacher was a student to now. Figure 3.2 provides an example of a graph completed by a 7th grade language  arts teacher for her class. The dark bars represent her proficiency when she was a  young student, and the lighter bars indicate her current profile in the same area.  As she creates her graph, she tells her students that she was an excellent speller  when she was in elementary school, but she is now a weaker speller because she  has read so many papers written by 7th graders who spell words in so many different ways, apparently causing her to absorb some of their spellings. Likewise,  she was a strong math student in elementary school, but she lost both skills and  confidence when she began to fall behind in an 8th grade algebra class and the  Figure 3.1 Mikas Strengths and Weaknesses Bar Graph Excellent Great Good Fair Poor Reading Writing Math Drawing Ballet I am excellent at reading. I am good at writing. I am great at math and drawing. I am excellent at  ballet because Ive been in ballet for five years. I am worse at drawing than ballet. I am worse at writing  than reading. I am better at math than writing. I am worse at writing than math. I am better at ballet  than math and drawing. I am excellent at reading even though I have not done it as long as ballet.
The Invitation to the Vision teacher never noticed. Her experience in that one class negatively impacted her  math performance for the rest of her school years. By contrast, she explains to her  students that she had always loved words and playing with words, and her pleasure and success in that area led to her becoming an English teacher. When students complete their graphs, they should share one or two items  with either the whole class which provides a great opportunity for the teacher  to observe and make notes on each students presenting skills, speech patterns,  and interests or with a small group of peers. They can then post their graphs  around the classroom, and younger students can walk around the room and look  for a graph that is just like their own. It is likely that they wont find a graph that  is very similar to their own, and they will almost certainly not find an exact duplicate. This realization readies the class for the next step in the discussion. After  making a gallery walk to look at all the graphs, older students should complete  Figure 3.2 Example of a Teachers Graphing Me Graph spelling comprehension poetry vocabulary math writing soccer public speaking photography dogs cooking clean room now then swell OK ouch
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom the following phrase accurately in as many ways as possible: In general, its  true that  

. They will likely think of many different ways to complete the  phrase. For example:  In general, its true that students in second period say they are better at  interpreting lab results than students in third period say they are.  In general, its true that more boys than girls say they are good at basketball.  In general, its true that more students like speaking in a world language  than like reading in one. There are two observations that several students in every class nearly  always make, and these are particularly important to the continuing discussion:  1 nobody thought they performed the same in everything, and 2 everybody  said they have stronger points and weaker points. Whenever one of these conclusions is voiced, its time for the next step in the discussion. If no one shares  either of these two conclusions, the teacher can directly prompt students with a  question such as Did anyone notice that everyone said they were better in some  things and worse in others? With these observations out in the open, the teacher  can continue the discussion by saying, You know, I think about that a lot as a  teacher. All of you will be better in some things and less confident in others. Its  that way every year. If some of you are great with computation skills but really  shaky with problem solving, and others of you are just the opposite, what should  I do? How do I decide which one of you to concentrate on? Students typically understand the ideas behind differentiation more rapidly  than teachers do. They never respond with It doesnt matter. Dont pay attention to what we can and cant do. Just cover the material. It is likely that they will  readily conclude that you should help them develop their various strengths and  shore up their areas of weakness. Arriving at this sort of conclusion is the goal of  this activity and its associated discussion. There are, of course, many other ways to engage students and help them  think about ways in which they differ as learners. In both of the following activities, the ultimate goal is the same as with this Graphing Me exercise: to draw  the conclusion that student differences matter and the class will be a better one  for them if the teacher teaches with those differences in mind. Regardless of  which route the teacher selects to help students consider why their differences as  learners are important, this is a good time to make a point that should become a  classroom refrain for the remainder of the year:
The Invitation to the Vision I teach because I believe every student can be successful in learning what matters most. When you learn, you are stronger people. Every one of you has the  potential to learn something new each and every day. The path you follow may  or may not be the same as the one followed by the person sitting next to you.  Thats not important. What is important is that you take your own next step and  continue to follow your own path. My job is to work with you and make sure  you continue to learn and move along that path. What I want us to figure out  together during the next few daysand throughout the yearis how we can  work together to create a classroom that supports every single person on their  individual paths as well as become stronger as a whole class. This is the central premise of differentiation, and its important for students  to begin to understand this core assumption. A Trip to the Doctor. In this role-play, students work with partners. In each  pair, one student will play the part of a parent and the other will play the role of  the parents child who is the same age as your students. The teacher will play  the role of a physician. Directions on the cards should specify a particular medical problem that the child is experiencing such as an itchy rash, a stomachache,  an arm that was injured in a basketball game, or a headache that comes and goes.  Each child should act in a way thats appropriate for the malady e.g., scratching  a rash, holding their stomach, cradling their arm, rubbing their forehead while  the parent describes the problem to the physician. For the last two pairs, the  role-play cards should indicate that the parent introduces the problem to the doctor and then says, My child will tell you about it. The students playing the sick  children then speak for themselves. Figure 3.3 see p. 72 shows examples of two  role-play cards. In all cases regardless of the actual illness, the physician should listen attentively and then say, Im so sorry youre not feeling well. Heres some cold medicine. Take it and see if it helps. The last pair of students to participate should  role-play a common cold, with the child explaining the symptoms experienced  in some detail. By the time the last pair gets to the doctor, the students are generally relieved  to find that someone actually has symptoms that match the remedy. The teacher  might want to ask, How many times would you or your parents visit that doctor before you or they decided they werent very good and you didnt want to go  back? At some point, its also good to ask, Why do you think the adults always  talked for their children? At the end, when the students finally spoke up for 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom themselves rather than relying on their parents to speak for them, did they  explain the problem well enough for you to get what was wrong? This sidebar  can help introduce the idea that students often know what they need as well as,  or better than, adults do and that they should freely say whenever they see a way  to make the class better for them. Figure 3.3 Sample Role-Play Cards ROLE-PLAY INSTRUCTIONS Scenario:  You will play the role of a parent or guardian. Your partner  will play the role of your child. The teacher will play the role  of a physician.  Your child is not feeling well because of an itchy and painful rash, so youre at the doctors office to see if you can get  some help for the rash. Heres what you should do:  Greet the doctor and explain that your child has a really  bad rash on their arms. Tell the doctor that it started over  the weekend, after you returned from your parents house.  Explain that you think the rash may be poison ivy because  your child and their grandfather worked outside a lot, but  mention that youre not sure because your child is often in  the outdoors and has never had poison ivy. Ask for a prescription to help with the itching and pain. Heres what your partner will do:  They will act like they are very uncomfortable and scratch  their arms every once in a while. After the doctor says to not  scratch the rash, they will just hold or rub their arms a little. Heres what both of you should do:  When the doctor gives the diagnosis and prescription,  react appropriately and leave the doctors office go back to  your seats. ROLE-PLAY INSTRUCTIONS Scenario:  Your partner will play the role of your parent or guardian.  You will play the role of their child. The teacher will play the  role of a physician.  You are not feeling well because of a possible broken arm,  so youre at the doctors office to see if you can get some  help. Heres what you should do:  Act like you feel really uncomfortable. Hold your arm like  youre trying to protect it. Heres what your partner will do:  They will greet the doctor and explain that you hurt your  arm in a basketball game last night. They thought it was just  a sprain, but the pain got worse all night long and now you  cant move your arm. They are worried that your arm might  be broken and needs the doctors help. Heres what both of you should do:  When the doctor gives the diagnosis and prescription,  react appropriately and leave the doctors office go back to  your seats. All thats necessary for students to get the point of this role-play is for the  teacher to ask, Why did we just do that? Whats it got to do with school? Students usually respond that its no more effective in school for a teacher to do the  same thing with everyone, no matter their need, than for the doctor to prescribe  the same thing to every patient, no matter the symptom. This, again, positions 
The Invitation to the Vision the teacher to say, I think teachers are like doctors because they should listen  to their students, understand their various needs, and work with each student to  figure out what is necessary to help that particular student function well. Do you  agree? One Size Fits All? A third activity that helps students begin to think about  classrooms that attend to students varying needs starts with the teacher asking two students to put on jackets that are clearly the wrong size for them. The  teacher selects two students who are very different in height and stature, making  sure both of them are comfortable in front of the class or being the center of  attention. The smaller student should put on a jacket that is several sizes too  large. After students have had a few moments to giggle, the larger student should  attempt to put on a jacket that is several sizes too small. The two students then describe how they feel in the clothes. Answers are  often lighthearted and a little silly. The teacher should allow for a slight pause  to consider the answers before asking the two students to describe how they  think theyd feel at the end of the day if they had to wear the jackets all day long.  Students typically begin to see potential problems that are a little more serious  e.g., Id have trouble eating lunch because the sleeves would get in my food  or I dont think I could write very well because its hard to move my arms.  Finally, the teacher should ask them to describe what they think would happen  if they had to wear clothes of this size all year. Generally, students easily see that  what initially seemed silly, unimportant, or slightly inconvenient could become  a serious impediment to doing what they like to do e.g., I think Id begin to  see myself as a slob or I dont know if kids would want me to work with them  in school because I couldnt do much to help with projects since I can hardly  move. Once again, its generally only necessary to ask the class, Why do you think  we just did this? Whats it got to do with school or with this class? Students will  often talk about how uncomfortable it is when class activities or assignments are  the wrong size and it becomes difficult to do the work. They sometimes share  examples from their own school experiences when work seemed to always be  too big or too small for them, and they are generally quite able to explain both  short-term and long-term fallout from those experiences. As is the case with the previous two examples, this activity easily leads to  the conclusion When you look around the room, its clear that not everyone  wears the same size clothes. My experience as a teacher has shown me just as  clearly that identical assignments wont always be a good fit for everyone in the 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom classroom either. What do you think a teacher should do about the fact that not  all students are exactly alike in their needs at a particular time? With this question in mind, students should be ready to move to the next step in the discussion. Given the differences we see, how should I teach you? Whether the teacher elects to use one of the three activities explained above  or develop another approach, it is important for students to consider the reality that people dont come in matched sets like luggage. Human differences are  not only normalthey are valuable. If we were all clones of one another, the  world would be much less interesting and people would be much less prepared  to address the issues and problems that are inevitable in life. Wed exhibit very  limited creativity. In this portion of the conversation, the teacher should pose some grade-level  or subject-specific questions for students to consider. Here are some examples:  Lets say there are some students in our physics class who are very strong  in science but havent had chemistry yet. Would you expect any important  learner needs to arise that are specific to this group of students? What should  I do about them?  What if we have some students in our class who have no trouble memorizing spelling words and we have some other students who always find spelling to be the hardest thing they do? Does it make sense that both groups of  students should always have exactly the same spelling words? Would they all  learn equally well if they always had the same words?  What if we have some students in our class who are often happiest and  most productive when they work in groups and we have others who generally  prefer to learn alone? Whose preference should I honor when Im trying to  decide how to set up the class for work we need to accomplish?  Suppose we have some students in our Spanish class who have a great ear  for language. They can repeat almost everything they hear me say, and they  do it accurately. On the other hand, writing in Spanish is a chore for them.  No matter how hard they work, they cant seem to write as quickly, or as  accurately, as some other students. Likewise, suppose we have some students  who write in Spanish easily, but they get knots in their stomach when they  have to speak in class. Does any of that matter? Is there a way I could be a  better teacher for all students? Is there a way that we could set up the class to  work better for everyones unique needs?
The Invitation to the Vision As the class discusses particular scenarios, students should work together to  name specific ways in which they could be more flexible so more of their classmates get what they need to succeed. Here are some examples:  It might be better if students could choose books to read that interested  them rather than always having to read the same assigned books.  Some students might already know a lot about what were getting ready to  study, and it would be better for them to do work that is new and challenging  for them.  It might be better if we had a choice of ways to show what we are learning.  Some students might want to write about it, but others might do a better job  of making a chart or doing a video demonstration.  It might help if we could work with friends to learn something or get help  when we dont understand something. Some students might do better trying  to figure out an idea alone, or they could work with the teacher to get unstuck.  Some of us might need longer to work on something in order to get it done  right.  Some of us might want to work longer on something because we like it a lot  and want to learn more about it.  Some of us might learn better if the teacher used demonstrations and  examples instead of only lecturing.  Some of us might learn better if we get to try out an idea instead of just  hearing about it. The point of this segment of the shared conversation is for students to begin  to imagine and articulate some ways in which they might learn better if the classroom provided more options. Its good for as many ideas as possible to come  from the students, but its also effective for the teacher to offer some ideas for  consideration. Pause every so often to ask questions such as How do these ideas  sound to you? What sounds positive about them, and what are some concerns  you have? Its not necessary to address particular concerns at this point, but it  might be wise to list them for future discussions as the conversation moves ahead. If our classroom is going to work for  all of us, what will it be like? At this stage, students need to begin to work with the teacher to move from  an idea to a practical reality. In other words, its now important to talk about 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom 1 what the classroom might look like and 2 what role each person will need  to play, as well as what they shouldnt do, in order to contribute to the success of  everyone in the classroom. Again, appropriate language and length of time spent  on any segment of the conversation will vary with students ages, the teachers  goals for the conversation, and the context of the class. In all cases, however,  the goal is to set early expectations for classroom operation and establish shared  responsibility for its success. A number of these elements will be discussed in greater detail in Part II of  this book. Here, however, well propose some of the big ideas or principles that  make a flexible classroom work. The goal is to help students think about what will  help everyone learn as much and as efficiently as possible. This includes, but is  not limited to, opportunities for each student to  Use materials that are a good fit for their personal learning needs and  interests.  Connect important ideas to personal experiences and interests.  Work with knowledge and skills that are at their next step in growth.  Work at a pace that supports learning.  Receive help from the teacher and peers that supports their growth and  success.  Explore ideas and skills in ways that are effective and efficient.  Express learning in ways that best show what they have learned.  Learn with and from a variety of classmates.  Teach a variety of classmates.  Learn how to be a more independent learner, to develop agency as a  learner.  Learn how to be a better group member and partner. A classroom in which these opportunities are available when appropriate  suggests a setting with the following characteristics:  Students sometimes work alone and sometimes work in small groups of  peers.  Working groups are sometimes homogeneous and sometimes heterogeneous, based sometimes on student readiness, sometimes on student interests, sometimes on approach, and may be formed around student choice,  formed around teacher choice, or random.
The Invitation to the Vision  Students work sometimes with the teacher as a whole class and sometimes  individually or in small groups.  Students have access to many kinds of materials that support learning,  including multiple sets of reading materials, digital resources, and video and  audio resources.  Room arrangements are flexiblefurniture and working spaces can be  rearranged depending on need.  Students are sometimes able to finish their work at different times.  Students sometimes have different in-class assignments.  Students sometimes have different homework assignments.  The teacher sometimes works with individuals or small groups while the  rest of the class works independently or in small groups. If there are particular elements that the teacher feels should be implemented  early in the school year, those elements should be part of the discussion. If students raise possibilities that seem to suggest more than the teacher feels is manageable early in the year, then its a good idea to keep a running list perhaps on  chart paper so students can see their ideas recorded and return to them when  needed; that list will grow throughout the year as students continue to think of  and add new ideas and routines. Expect to fine-tune ideas as everyone begins to  work with them. Once students and the teacher have proposed a fundamental set of ideas or  procedures that are essential to a differentiated, flexible, or responsive classroom,  its time to consider the implications of those elements for everyone involved.  The teacher might begin this consideration by saying, Lets take a closer look at  a few of the ideas we have raised and talk about what each person in the class will  need to do, or avoid doing, so the ideas can work well for everyone. This should  help us get started smoothly as we begin our work this year. In the beginning, present the elements that are critical to implementing differentiation and fundamental to operating a flexible classroom. Raise the points  with which you will need the greatest amount of student understanding and  cooperation. Figure 3.4 see p. 78 suggests some of these elements and some of  the implications for both the teacher and students. While the particulars will vary among classrooms, the discussion this activity  sparks should help students begin to understand why they will be asked to make  certain choices, do certain things, not do others, and work in specific ways. More 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom students will work more effectively from a shared rationale or vision than from a  static set of abstract rules posted on the wall. Figure 3.4 Critical Elements in a Differentiated Classroom and Their Implications GoalElement in a  Flexible Classroom Implications for the Teacher Implications for Students Students need to The teacher Students Work in small groups with classmates.  Will ensure that all groups have assignments  that work for the group so everyone learns what  they need to learn.  Will ensure that each group has clear directions.  Will ensure that students know how to work  together effectively.  Will provide directions for moving furniture to  allow for a variety of groupings.  Will focus on what their group should do rather  than focusing on what others are doing.  Will ensure that they understand the directions  given to their group and will follow them.  Will contribute to the effectiveness of their  group and ask for help when there is a problem  the group cant solve.  Will monitor their conversations so noise  doesnt detract from learning.  Will move furniture smoothly so groups have  appropriate spaces to work.  Work individually  with the teacher or  in small groups.  Will know what each student requires in order  to learn at a given time so the groups support  learning.  Will ensure that student directions are clear  and that students have ways to get help when  the teacher is busy with a small group or   individual.  Will keep track of student needs, work, and  growth and help students do the same for themselves.  Will be able to start and stop individual and  small-group work efficiently to meet with the  teacher when necessary.  Will not interrupt when the teacher is working  with individuals or groups.   Will know how to get help when the teacher is  busy with groups or individuals.  Will keep track of their own learning goals and  work toward those goals. Spend different  amounts of time on  a task in order to  learn well.  Will provide a place for students to turn in  completed work and get it checked if necessary.  Will provide options for important student work  when a task is finished i.e., anchor activities.  Will follow directions about turning in work or  getting it checked when its finished.  Will work with anchor activities smoothly and  effectively when an assignment is completed to  show the students best work. Work with different  materials in order to  learn well.  Will provide a variety of materials that work for  students different entry points, including language needs, interests, and formats.  Will help develop a way to make sure students  know which materials to use at a particular time  and where materials will be stored.  Will help make sure materials are cared for  and returned to the place they belong after an  activity is completed.  Will help the teacher know which materials  or kinds of materials work best for them as  individuals.
The Invitation to the Vision How can I learn more about your starting points,  interests, and best ways of learning? Clearly, differentiation is based on acceptance of the reality that learning is  shaped by a variety of factors, including prior experiences, culture, economics,  language, interests, learning preferences, and support systems. To teach a student  well, a teacher must know that student well. That is a formidable charge, and  the truth is that no teacher will ever know any of their students fully. However,  this should not suggest that it is impossible for a teacher to learn systematically  about students at a level that supports differentiated, personalized, or responsive  teaching. Over time, a teacher should aspire to know some general things, such as  how well the students read, what they like to do with their spare time, what their  dreams are, how they relate to their peers, how they see themselves as learners,  what helps them learn best, and how their culture shapes them as learners. As  various aspects of the curriculum unfold, the teacher needs to know whether  students bring with them prerequisite knowledge and skills, what they understand and misunderstand, the degree to which they have mastered or surpassed  expectations at a given time, which instructional approaches work well for them  and which do not, and whether they can connect key ideas to their personal lives  and experiences. When students come to class with varied stresses, anxieties, and  challenges that consume much of their energy, its important for the teacher to  work consistently to understand those challenges. This is the best way to ensure  both the teacher and student peers can provide effective support for members of  the class who carry heavy weights, rather than contributing to those weights. In an effectively differentiated classroom, ongoing assessment informs every  important instructional decision a teacher makes. Early in the year, students need  to know that their teacher is also a student who diligently studies two things: the  content thats the focus of instruction and the students themselves. This message  needs to be clear from the first day of school and evident every day that follows.  At some point in the early conversations about creating a classroom that supports  each students success, it is important for students to hear the following:  I want to know you as a person because youre interesting to me.  I need to know you as a student so that I can understand what sorts of  learning experiences will be relevant and challenging for you. I will watch you  as you work in class as closely as I can because what I learn will help me plan  better for you individually and for the class as a whole.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom  Youll see me take notes while you work and while we discuss things in  class. This helps me learn more about how learning works for you.  During the first few days of school, Ill ask you to do some things that will  give me a reasonable sense of your starting points this year and about who  you are as a learner.  Throughout the year, Ill often ask you to share what youre learning so  that I can help you take your next step as a learner.  Much of the time, Ill be less interested in grading your work and more  interested in giving you feedback that will help you learn more robustly and  increase your chances of success when I do grade your work.  Ill often invite you to tell me how youre feeling about your work and what  is going well or poorly for you in class. I hope youll always feel free to honestly tell me those things, even if I forget to ask. Depending on the students age and the nature of the class, they might be  prompted to express what they wish their teachers knew about them, how they  think teachers could use what they learn about students in order to teach better,  or how teachers might get to know them better and faster. Remember that the  goal here is to clarify for students that they have a role to play in articulating how  their teacher will continually learn about them in order to be more effective for  each of them. It also lets students know that an assessment of their strengths,  needs, and interests will begin almost immediately. Students, too, need to begin  to understand that teaching and learning work better when everyone knows what  the learning targets are, when the teacher and a particular student know where  that student is in relation to the target at a given time, and when both use that  information to move ahead. If we have a differentiated classroom, can it be fair? While the four questions posed prior to this one should generally be pursued with students during the first few days of school, the question of fairness  is probably best introduced after the class has begun to work in a differentiated  setting and after routines to support differentiation are largely in place. In other  words, the first significant conversation about fairness should take place after  students have enough experience in a differentiated classroom to understand its  rationale and to have experienced how it works for them as individuals and as a  group. Depending on the particular setting, that might mean at the end of the first  month of school or perhaps a little later or a little earlier.
The Invitation to the Vision The teacher might begin the conversation by reviewing some of the goals,  procedures, and routines the group previously discussed that are now in place.  Then the teacher might say something like, Its been useful to me to hear your  ideas about these things as weve begun to create our classroom. I have an additional question Id like to get your thinking on today. Its often the case that  people say a classroom is fair when everyone does everything alikeor when a  teacher makes sure everyone gets exactly the same work and materials and time  allotments for work. As weve agreed, however, its not always the most effective  approach for everyone to do everything alike. Does that make our classroom  unfair? What do you think fair means in this classroom? Student responses will vary for a range of reasons. Often, however, early in  the year, students in differentiated classroom will suggest that the class is fair if  the teacher seems to like everyone alike or doesnt seem to have favorites. Sometimes, students will say the class is fair if the teacher pays attention to everyone. Over time, if a differentiated classroom is working as it should, students  will generally conclude that the class is fair if everyone gets what they need in  order to succeed. The shift from fair  identical treatment to fair  equity of  opportunity to grow and succeed is an important one because it embodies the  nature and intent of differentiation. In addition, if students have difficulty shifting from more traditional definitions of fairness to a perspective supported by  differentiation, its important for the teacher to be aware of that and understand  what obstacles stand in the way of the class feeling fair to its members. This part  of the conversation is worth exploring relatively early in the year and revisiting as  the year evolves. What will success in this class mean? One of the seemingly immutable artifacts of how we do school is that success is typically defined in terms of a grade on a report card. Not only is that a  limited view of successits a limiting one. There are students who make steady  As on report cards with little effort or evidence of growth, and there are students  who make low grades but have every right to cheer because they have demonstrated heroic commitment to learning and have grown remarkably despite falling short of a specified goal. Well discuss grading in differentiated classrooms in more detail later in this  book. However, at some point relatively early in the year, its important for the  teacher to involve students in thinking about what it means to be successful in  lifeand in the classroom. This might be done by presenting students with brief 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom biographies of two famous figures, one of whom gets lots of attention but makes  little substantial contribution to anything worthwhile and one of whom devotes  more attention to making a difference than to being in the spotlight. It might  be done by having students compare two characters in a book or movie, one of  whom has a harder life than the other but continues to work toward a goal in  spite of the difficulties. It might be done through an example of two unidentifiable studentsone in whom the teacher feels great pride despite the fact that  the other student receives more accolades. It might be accomplished by sharing  personal stories about times when students felt genuinely proud of themselves  and other times when they knew they had little to be proud of in spite of praise  from others. The point of this discussion is to raise the possibility that rewards grades includeddont often reveal the whole story. This is also a time to let students know that they are encouraged to think  about success as having several parts. One is how hard and wisely a person works  in order to grow. A second is how much a person grows. The third is whether  a person reaches or exceeds a goal that required growth. Teachers should help  students begin to develop and consider language that reflects these three markers  of success. Students should also be assured that the teacher will be looking for a  number of attributes and will ask them to look for these attributes in themselves,  as well. Those attributes might include  Hard work.  Work habits that contribute directly to student success.  Personal goals that require sustained work and attention.  Willingness to take intellectual risks i.e., to take a chance when something  seems hard to do.  Willingness to revise work to make it better.  Willingness to seek help in order to grow and succeed with difficult tasks.  Significant progress and substantial growth.  Persistence in reaching or surpassing class goals. Two principles that benefit learners and learning are that 1 working  diligently and intelligently leads to growth, and 2 growth ultimately enables  individuals to achieve and exceed most goals. This is the essence of a growth  mindseta fundamental underpinning of differentiationand it is essential for  genuine success. We fare best in the long term when we compete against ourselves rather than against other people.
The Invitation to the Vision Let students know that they will often hear you ask, Is this the best you  can dothe most you can give to this task? Let them know that you hope they  will join you in celebrating growth whenever it occurs for any student in the  classroom. None of the six questions explored in this chapter should be seen as handled during a single conversation or a single year, for that matter. Teachers  who lead students to develop a shared classroom vision that seeks to maximize  growth for every student will help them continue to explore the questions and  their relevance throughout the year and across years. Subsequent conversations  may be short or long, individual or in a group, but they will be necessary for ideas  about the classroom to grow up as the year progresses. Teachers as Leaders of Parents  in Understanding Differentiation There are at least three important points to make about teachers who work  effectively with parents to help them understand and contribute to a class that is  focused on the success of each individual learner. First, it is important to realize  the central role parents can play in helping a teacher know students better. Parents should always have greater depth of knowledge about their children than a  teacher could ever hope to attain. On the other hand, teachers at least after a few  years in the classroom have much greater breadth of knowledge about students  of a particular age and in a particular subject than most parents. A wise teacher  invites parents to contribute their depth of knowledge and, in turn, offers those  parents a perspective on their children that is derived from a broad awareness of  child development. It is a much better idea to proactively forge a mutually beneficial partnership than to allow an adversarial relationship to develop with parents.  A teacher in a differentiated classroom simply needs help to know each student  better, and most parents are a fantastic source of that information. Second, it is critical for teachers to understand the role that culture plays in  shaping parental response to school. This is particularly critical if parents are not  from the majority culture. For example, parents from some cultural groups may  feel uncomfortable if they think that they are being asked to tell the teacher how  to teach; they consider it disrespectful of the teachers competence. Parents from  cultures that operate from a collectivistic as opposed to an individualistic perspective may be uncomfortable if their child seems singled out for praise, because  their culture emphasizes the group over the individual. For the same reason, 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom parents from collectivistic cultures may initially be more interested in hearing  about their childs behavior in and contribution to the group than about grades  and test scores Rothstein-Fisch  Trumbull, 2008; Tomlinson, 2022. It is also  extremely important to know that parents from all backgrounds care about and  want to support the success of their children. Absence from parent meetings may  have much more to do with a lack of transportation, childcare, or confidence with  English than with personal attitudes about the importance of school. Teachers  who are culturally competent invest in understanding the diverse cultures of their  students, and they use that knowledge to build successful partnerships with both  children and their parents. Third, few parents argue with the baseline intent of differentiation if it is  articulated clearly and in a way that is relevant to their desires and concerns. The  fundamental message about differentiation from a teacher to a parent should be  as follows:  I am pleased that I will be teaching your child this year, and I want to do  everything I can to help your child succeed.  I have learned over the years that I am a better teacher when I understand  students particular strengths and needs as individual learners.  I want to know what you value in terms of growth for your child this year  so I can support development in those areas.  I hope you will help me understand what some of your childs strengths  and needs are as the year continues.  My intent in class is to use what I can learn to help your child grow as much  and as fast as possible to achieve and, in some cases, exceed the goals that are  established for our class. There are few parents who would respond, I dont want you to know my  kid, and I dont want you to help my kid learn as much as possible. What the  philosophy and practice of differentiation aim to do is precisely what most  parents want for their childrencreate a class in which a student is known and  valued as an individual and where there is a reliable support system to build on  the students strengths, help shore up or circumvent weaknesses, and maximize  academic growth for the time that the student is a member of the class. Teachers can do the same activity with parents at a back-to-school night  that they used to introduce differentiation to their students. As the year progresses, they should take every opportunity to communicate clearly and without 
The Invitation to the Vision education jargon that they are 1 working diligently to set clear and important  goals for the class, 2 persistently following the progress of their students with  regard to the goals, 3 providing clear feedback to the students to help them  grow, and 4 using what they learn about students and their development to  help them grow as far and as fast as possible. At every opportunity, teachers  should also invite parents to share insights that will help them do their job better. Be sure, however, that the emperor is wearing clothes. In other words, deliver  what you promise. If a student is having difficulty reading or writing in 10th  grade, do whats necessary to support the students growth in that areaeven if  you are a math or science teacher. If you have a 3rd grader who has mastered 6th  grade math, do whats necessary to help the student grow mathematicallyeven  if that means you have to find new collaborators or learn more math. If we want  parents to trust us, we have to earn their trust. Teachers as Leaders of Colleagues  in Understanding Differentiation Teachers who lead for differentiation have an opportunity to lead colleagues,  including other teachers and principals, as well as students and their parents.  Accepting this opportunity can benefit both the teacher leader and their colleagues. Teachers have been criticized for engaging in private practicefor  staying to ourselves, for not sharing our practice with other teachers, and for  failing to learn from other teachers. Teacher leaders who share their work with  differentiation take care not to convey the message that they are resident experts  or that they have completed their learning about differentiation. Rather, the message is that the teacher is interested in sharing ideas with colleagues who will help  them grow in their work. When you lead peers to an understanding of and contribution to differentiation, the potential opportunities and benefits are limitless.  Here are some important points to consider:  Coplanning or coteaching with colleagues who are language learning specialists, special education teachers, reading teachers, gifted education teachers, and media and technology specialists enriches the teachers repertoire,  extends learning support for students, integrates specialties into the regular  classroom, and helps to forge teams that work across specialties on behalf of  a wide range of students.  Inviting colleagues who are or can be available to be a second pair of hands  on occasions when you need another adult in your classroom can provide 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom necessary images of flexible teaching and learning for teachers who may want  to address student variance but dont know how to begin.  Working with colleagues to develop and share relevant knowledge about  students cultures and using that knowledge in instructional planning can  help incorporate more cultural awareness into all classrooms.  Planning differentiated lessons with grade-level or subject-matter peers is  much more efficient than planning in a silo. It also allows teachers to contribute in their areas of greatest strength while they learn from others who have  different strengths.  Sharing pertinent insights about students with their teachers for the following year can give those teachers a more informed start and help them  maintain a link with the previous teachers.  Debating the merits of differentiation with other teachers can sharpen  understanding and practice on both sides.  Sharing ideas for differentiation with peers who want to address learner  needs is both a gift and a relevant form of professional development.  Providing staff development for peers can mute the voices that say, Not in  this school, not with these students. It can also show teachers how to begin  addressing student variance, explain how to avoid pitfalls, and send the clear  message that even teachers who seem ahead of the game still have room to  grow. If schools reflected a perfect world, every principal would be an informed  advocate and supporter of classrooms that address the range of needs for every  learner. Unfortunately, schools do not reflect and are not in themselves a perfect world. Principals work from the same limited understandings and conceptions of differentiation that virtually all other educators do, and many principals  and other administrative leaders find it difficult to stay abreast of contemporary  pedagogy. Even principals who have a fundamental understanding of differentiation and a sense that its important to attend to students varied learning needs  may lack the appropriate depth of understanding and experience necessary to  provide effective guidance and support for teachers to become confident and  competent in implementing differentiation. A teacher who is willing to be a leader of principals, specialists, supervisors,  and other instructional leaders has the opportunity to benefit not only those  individuals but also those colleagues who are affected by their practice. Consider 
The Invitation to the Vision the following insights that might result from conversations with or visits to the  classroom of a teacher who is effectively differentiating instructioninsights  that correct common misconceptions some administrators and supervisors have  about differentiation:  Students in a flexible classroom are focused on their work. Movement and  conversation are purposeful. The classroom is orderly.  Students who are disengaged in other settings often work with concentration in this class.  Students have a greater level of independence and awareness about their  work than in many other settings. When work is a good fit for students, discipline improves.  Differentiation doesnt happen all day, every day; it occurs when a teacher  applies whats been learned through observation and assessment about particular student needs.  Student groups in a differentiated classroom are flexible, changing many  times each day or week.  In a differentiated class, students often use different paths to achieve common goals. By inviting principals and other instructional leaders to observe and discuss  differentiation, a teacher leader is likely to gain more support for their work while  extending the administrators capacity to support the work of other teachers in a  more knowledgeable manner. In addition, of course, the questions and insights  of an educator whose view of the classroom is somewhat different from the  teachers can stretch the teachers thinking about differentiation as well. Numerous educational experts e.g., Fullan, 2001a; Marzano, 2009 remind  us that strong leaders inspire their colleagues to look for solutions to challenges  that have no easy answers and to realize that the degree of change needed to  make our schools work as they ought to comes not from incremental adjustment  but from bold new approaches. It is certainly the case that preparing an increasingly diverse student population to function with confidence at a high level in  an increasingly complex world is just such a challenge. A teacher who leads for  differentiation lives daily with that challenge; engages students, colleagues, and  superordinates in confronting that challenge; asks the uncomfortable questions  that necessarily surround it; and joins perspectives to find better solutions. When  we meet the challenge, everyone benefits.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom

Part II of this book will address the more practical aspects of leading and  managing for differentiation. It will examine some key aspects of what teachers in  effectively differentiated classrooms do in order to enact what they believe.
Part II
Contrary to common misperceptions, classroom management is not simply  the process of arranging desks, rewarding good behavior, and choosing consequences for misconduct. Classroom management encompasses many practices  integral to teaching, such as developing relationships; structuring classroom  communities where students can work productively; organizing productive work around meaningful curriculum; teaching moral development and  citizenship; making decisions about timing and other aspects of instructional  planning; successfully motivating students to learn; and encouraging parent  involvement. Pamela LePage, Linda Darling-Hammond,  Hanife Akar,  Preparing Teachers for a Changing World The year begins and the students are in place. The teacher has the desire to know  and teach them as individuals, along with a solid understanding of what highquality differentiation is and why implementing differentiation improves the  Managing a Differentiated Classroom
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom prospects of every student. The teacher is developing or fine-tuning meaningful  learning targets, devising assessments that align with those targets, and creating  relevant and engaging learning opportunities designed to connect students with  important ideas and skills and to help them progress systematically to proficiency  with the essential learning targets or goals Erickson et al., 2017; Tomlinson,  2021; Tomlinson  McTighe, 2006; Wiggins  McTighe, 2005. A central element in the teachers thinking and planning is integrating differentiation into the fabric of the classroom Sousa  Tomlinson, 2018; Tomlinson, 2014, 2017. The teacher has begun to issue an invitation to students to help  create a classroom that is designed to work for each of them. This sounds like a great start, and it is. However, its only a starta compass  to chart a learning journey, not the journey itself. Even with these elements in reasonable working order and guided by a productively evolving philosophy, theres  at least one more piece to the puzzle. A teacher who has the best intentions, dynamic curriculum, and plans for  differentiation cannotand will notmove from compass to journey unless  that teacher has the confidence to translate their ideas and plans into classroom  practice. In other words, teachers who are uncomfortable with flexible classroom  management will not differentiate instruction, even if they understand it, accept  the need for it, and know how to plan for it. It is frightening for many teachers to  risk trying new practices when they are uncertain of their readiness to do so, and  fear prevents us from acting on knowledge. Strong leaders ensure that teachers  are prepared to move from thought to practice, and that teachers understand  their leaders believe that mistakes are both inevitable in making change and a sign  of forward momentum Fullan, 2008; Tomlinson  Murphy, 2015. The chapters in Part II are intended to support teachers as they develop and  extend their comfort level in this area. Part II, then, deals with the nuts and bolts  of managing a learner-centered classroom, which, by its nature, requires flexible  use of virtually every classroom element. This is a good place to distinguish again  between classroom management and classroom leadership. A teacher can manage a flexible schedule, earmark places to keep supplies,  create designations that help students know which materials to access, craft a  schedule for small-group instruction, develop ways to curb the noise that is a  part of collaborative student work, and so on. However, that teacher must also  lead students to understand and contribute to a differentiated classroom, overcome their fear of failure or challenge, invest in their own success, and cooperate  with the routines that constitute classroom management. A teacher can manage 
Managing a Differentiated Classroom these details without much of a philosophy. Real leadership requires an ethical  compass regarding the responsibility of leadership, the value of those whom  the leader asks to trust him or her, and the worthiness of the destination toward  which the leader guides the group. In Chapters 47, well describe many ways to proactively plan for potential  hot spots in differentiated classrooms in order to develop a setting in which the  teacher and students can work together to the benefit of each learner. Remember,  too, that enlisting the trust of young people to be full participants in a differentiated classroom is a matter of leadership. Some students come to school with  trust that school will work for them. Some come without that trust, generally  because school has too often not worked for them. The teacher in a differentiated classroom understands the need to establish trust with individuals from both  groups and aims to enlist the partnership of students from both groups in creating a classroom that will be a good fit for each of its members. The trust-building  process does not follow a single timeline with every student. Some students fully  intend not to trust teachers because of scars from the past. Still, a teacher who  works from a philosophy that affirms the worth and capacity of every student  moves forward in that process respectfully and patiently but persistently, taking  care to be trustworthy all along the way. As you read Part II of this book, ask yourself often how the concrete ideas  presented will be shaped by your understanding of differentiation, your philosophy of teaching, and the degree to which you are able to share those underpinnings with your students. In other words, continue to think about the ways in  which effective leadership and effective management in a differentiated classroom are interdependent.
4 Learning Environment Setting the Stage for Academic Success Learning occurs best in a positive environmentone that contains positive  interpersonal relationships and interactions, that contains comfort and order,  and in which the learner feels appreciated, acknowledged, respected, and  validated. Barbara McCombs and Jo Sue Whisler,  The Learner-Centered Classroom and School Few teachers argue with the following propositions:  Some students require more time than others to achieve particular understandings or master particular skills.  Some students bring with them to the classroom great reservoirs of knowledge that other students do not bring.  Some students need to move around more than others.
Learning Environment  Some students speak a home language other than the language of the  classroom.  Some students seem to have given up on schoolor on themselves or  adultsand are angry or lethargic much of the time.  Some students have difficulty concentrating during whole-class discussions and perform much better in small-group instruction.  Some students have difficulty managing emotions or feelings.  Some students are poor test takers but understand the content of the  curriculum.  Some students will not engage with learning if they fail to see the point of  it. The question is not whether teachers recognize that such differences exist  in virtually every classroom, or even whether they impact student success. The  question that plagues teachers is how to understand and address the differences  they know exist. The purpose of developing a differentiated classroom is to make sure that  theres opportunity and support for each student to master critical knowledge,  understanding, and skills as effectively and efficiently as possible. In other words,  differentiation exists to make room for all kinds of learners to succeed academically. It also makes room for the teacher to support that academic success,  which means they have the freedom to tailor instruction for individual students  and small groups of students. Central to this process of making room for responsive teaching and student-focused learning is the creation of a learning environment that invites flexibilityin other words, a classroom where variability is the  norm. In fact, a flexible classroom is important to learning in general, not just to differentiation. Experts tell us that there are three categories of classrooms in terms  of classroom management: dysfunctional, adequate, and orderly.  Dysfunctional classroom environments are, of course, often chaotic. The  teacher consistently struggles to maintain control. Little sustained learning  can take place.  Adequate classroom environments exhibit a basic level of order, but the  teacher still sometimes struggles to maintain it. Some sustained learning  takes place.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom  Orderly classroom environments fall into two further categories restrictive  and enabling environments. Orderly, restrictive learning environments are  tight-ship classrooms. The teacher maintains a high degree of structure,  manages routines tightly, and uses few instructional strategies. Orderly,  enabling learning environments are found in smoothly running classrooms  that manifest a looser but not loose structure. In these classrooms, teachers  use a wide range of routines and instructional strategies, and the emphasis  is on students making meaning of content Educational Research Service,  1993. In fact, researchers tell us, there is a direct relationship between a teachers  ability to manage a complex set of activities in a classroom and that teachers  ability to teach intellectually challenging material LePage et al., 2005. This is  because tasks that involve comprehension and problem solving require more  flexibility than rote learning. When teachers are afraid of what might happen  when students work independently, in small groups, with inquiry-oriented tasks,  or at varied paces, they often opt to use more passive approaches to learning that  effectually dumb down the curriculum. In those instances, teachers lower their  expectations for students by using simpler modes of presentation and evaluation  as a trade-off for classroom order. In other words, in those circumstances, teachers teach defensively. There are some sad and predictable cycles perpetuated by educators perceptions that most students function best in tight-ship classrooms. One of those  cycles stems from the reality that students often misbehave when the work they  are asked to do is consistently too hard or too easy for them. Teachers in dysfunctional and adequate classrooms, as well as many who believe in the tight-ship  model, necessarily persist in giving students tasks that are a poor fit for some of  them because differentiating requires flexibility, which threatens order. In turn,  some students continue to be frustrated and show it, which further reinforces  the teachers perception that to loosen the reins would be catastrophic. This conclusion, of course, simply feeds the frustration of many young people and, more  to the point, serves them poorly. A second regrettable cycle is an artifact from tracking practices in many of  our schools. It is easy for educators to associate student behavior with student  ability. Unfortunately, students who misbehave are rarely seen as very bright  even though many of them are. There are certainly teachers who have grown  comfortable with separating out students by ability and then teaching them in 
Learning Environment various tracks according to what they can handle. Students who are frustrated  by this mismatch, and who predictably act out as a result, are often placed in lowtrack classes typified by low-level curriculum that are run as tight ships or are  either dysfunctional or adequate in terms of management. Conversely, students  who comply with teacher directives are more likely to be seen as bright, and they  are generally taught in orderly, flexible settingsthat is, in classrooms where  the emphasis is on understanding content and where teachers readily use a wide  variety of instructional strategies to engage students with important ideas and  skills Cummings, 2020; Haberman, 1991; Hodges, 2001; Rosen, 2016; Spiegel,  2012. Differentiation advocates teaching each student as an individual worthy and  capable of handling a meaning-rich curriculum. It also advocates an environment in which each student comes to understand, own, and value their capacity  as a learner. Doing so requires an orderly, flexible classroom environment. This  chapter will focus on some key elements, guidelines, and strategies that enable  teachers to create just such an environment. Staging a Successful Drama Think for a bit about a stage performance and the role of a good director. Successful directors dont simply buy scripts, put them in the hands of actors, give a  few directions, and expect compelling results. In fact, much of the action behind  a play that works happens around the script rather than in it. Along the way, a successful director must create affective and physical environments where the actors  are supported in doing their best work so the play can evolve as it should. En route to creating a play that works for an audience, the director must  make it work for the actors. This happens on at least two levels. First, the director must come to know and understand each actor as an individualthe actors  strengths and vulnerabilities, preferred ways of working, and life experiences. It is  upon these individual aspects that the director will draw as rehearsals progress.  Not knowing these things would limit the potential impact of not only the actor  but the director as well. To prepare, the director will likely do some background  research on the actor before rehearsals begin. This will be followed by individual  conversations throughout the rehearsal cycle and careful observation and reflection to understand what makes the actor shine as a character in some instances  and what makes it difficult for the actor to bring a character to life in others.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom In addition to learning to know and understand the actors as individuals, the  director needs to help the actors move from being a collection of individuals to  a cast, a troupe, an ensemble, a companya team. They need to unify around  a shared and commonly understood endeavor, without losing their distinctiveness. In other words, the director has to help build a sense of community among  the actors so that the group works cohesively to benefit both individual and  shared development. If the director is successful, the actors will develop valuable  bonds during the production cycle. They will learn to pull together, support one  another, cover for one anothers shortcomings, and ultimately leave one another  with both gratitude and sadness. Each individual will be stronger because of the  group. The group will be stronger because of the individuals. Therefore, the  director begins building an ensemble from disparate individuals when the actors  arrive on day oneif not before. This work continues until the final curtain  comes down. Finally, in building an environment in which the actors can evolve, the director must create a physical context for the play. In the theater, of course, this is  called a set. It is a miniature world designed on a small piece of real estate called  a stage. It will contain whatever is necessary to make the play come to life and  enhance the work of the actors. Nothing on the set is without purpose. From flats  to props, everything contributes to the viability of the little universe. Shape, color,  design, texture, and location are elements that sculpt the play and enliven the  acting. When the set is ready, it is almost never final. Changes are nearly always  made right up until opening night, and they will often continue throughout the  life of the play. The role of the teacher in developing an effective classroom environment is  much like the role of the director. The drama, of course, is a compelling onethe  interaction of individuals with ideas and skills that will change the individuals for  better or worse. It requires risk, extreme effort, failure, self-awareness, honesty,  small victories, and major triumphs. To make the drama work, the teacher must  work quickly to get to know the actors and persistently to understand them. This  means beginning early to build a team from a group of disparate individuals and  continuing the team-building process for as long as the drama runs. In the small  piece of real estate called a classroom, the teacher must offer a set in which the  actors can work to make the play compelling. The remainder of this chapter will  examine these three elements: getting to know students, building a community,  and designing the physical environment of the classroom.
Learning Environment Getting to Know Students An early and persistent quest for knowledge about students has at least four  benefits. 1.  It sends a message to each student that the teacher sees them as an individual, and it also suggests that they are interesting enough for an adult to  want to know better. In this way, students begin to trust the teacherto  believe that the teacher will be an advocate and support system in the  classroomand start to shed the anonymity and alienation they might  feel in the classroom. 2.  It contributes to a students willingness to do the difficult work of learning. Students work for people they value i.e., people who value them. 3.  It helps the teacher accept responsibility for the students success. We  invest most deeply in the people we really knowthose with whom we  have a relationship, those who are three-dimensional to us. Its difficult  to let those individuals down. 4.  It provides an open and continually expanding window into each student  as an individual and a learner. Understanding a students culture, likes and  dislikes, personal sense of possibility as a learner, relationships with peers,  home support, dreams, strengths and vulnerabilities, and preferred ways  of learning makes it possible for a teacher to plan approaches to curriculum and instruction that have a higher likelihood of facilitating success for  individual learners and for the class as a whole. Teachers use an incredibly wide array of strategies to get to know their  students as the year begins and to continue to learn about them as the year progresses. Lets consider a few examples. Employing continual assessment Continual assessment is central to the process of getting to know students in  a differentiated classroom. There are several important points to keep in mind:  Early in the year, develop ways to informally check students mastery of  essential skills and knowledge in your gradesubject. These essential skills  include aural comprehension, visual comprehension, reading fluency, writing  fluency, spelling, oral communication, and key academic vocabulary. These  measures need not be exhaustive or time-consuming; for instance, you might 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom generally assess spelling and writing fluency in a students written response  to an aural comprehension passage, or you might assess oral fluency while a  student shares in a morning class meeting younger students or summarizes  what they recall from yesterdays class older students. Your perception  of the students proficiencies will progress over time, but it is nonetheless  important to have a sense of where each student begins the year in terms of  expected competenciesand to intervene as necessary to promote growth  from the outset. Be alert to the likelihood that some students will appear to  lack knowledge, skills, or understanding when the real problem is actually a  barrier to revealing what they know. Some of these barriers include lagging  language proficiency, attention challenges, anxiety, and difficulty with test  taking and timed settings.  Start fresh but keep history in mind. Do not be overly swayed by a students record from previous school years, comments from other teachers  about the student, or standardized test data. The reason for this caution is to  ensure that each student starts the year in your mind with all the possibilities  necessary to move ahead and succeed. When a student becomes that kid  who causes teachers to roll their eyes, who has failed the standardized  test three years in a row, or who does poorly in science, its difficult for the  students new teacher to have a growth mindset about that student. Its also  difficult for that student not to be aware of doubts the teacher has about their  prospects. Likewise, if you latch on to an image of a student as the one who  is always on the honor roll or who is always at the top of the class on achievement tests, your mindset is likely to be fixed in regard to that student, and  you will be less likely to challenge the student to see how far they can grow.  Clarify the purpose of your information gathering and sharing. Students  should understand that when you learn useful things about their interests,  preferred ways of learning, and academic strengths and needs, you can use  that information as you plan instruction. When you have insights about a  students work, be sure to share them with the student in a way that helps  that individual work smarter and learn better. The goal is not for the teacher  to become a keeper of knowledge about students, but to reflect that knowledge to students in ways and at times that give them more dominion over  their own success. Consistently identify and celebrate what students can do  rather than dwelling on their difficulties. Building on student strengths is a  direct route to student motivation, buy-in, engagement, and achievement.
Learning Environment  Expect students to grow and change. Resist the inclination to assume that  a student who is interested in insects in September will still be passionate  about that topic in March. Some will; some will not. Also resist the inclination to categorize a student according to a particular approach to learning.  Most people learn differently in different subjects, when content is new versus when it is familiar, and even at different times of day. Use the information  you gain through observation to provide students with options, not to lock  them into a predetermined kind of assignment. Check back with them often  to see how they change and develop, and to help them understand and effectively use their options for learning and to express learning.  Remember that students are your best source of information. Let them  know you want to hear when things are going welland when they arent.  Occasionally, use exit cards, checklists, digital surveys, end-of-unit evaluations, or other simple mechanisms to invite students to share their sense  of how theyre doing. Be sure to use what you learn. And bear in mind that  students from some cultural groups may be more reticent to advise you  for fear that doing so would be disrespectful. In those cases, dont push, but  remind students that when they share ideas about how the class works best  for everyone, it is helpful to you, and you appreciate their input. A fundamental tenet of differentiation is that excellent teachers dont see  themselves simply as teachers of content. Yes, they are fully committed to teaching content to young people, but learner-centered teachers understand that  they must also be dedicated students themselvesof the content and of their  students. They believe that teaching isnt complete until learning occurs, and that  learning is predicated on a teachers thorough understanding of both content and  students. Engaging in ongoing observation An elementary teacher had her 4th graders play a getting to know you game  in which they searched for classmates who had particular attributes see Figure  4.1, p. 102. After the game, the teacher asked students to look at patterns in their  classroom. She said, Everyone who has an unusual pet, please come stand by me  at the front of the room and tell us about your pet. She then said, If you said you  like helping out at school or home, raise your hand. To those students, she said,  Tomorrow, well begin to assign some important jobs in our classroom. I hope  youll consider signing up for one of those roles.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Figure 4.1 Getting to Know You Game Name:  See if you can find at least one classmate who matches each category. When you find someone, write his or her name in  the box for that category. See how many matches you can find before time is up. I have three or more  siblings. I have been to more  than two schools  since 1st grade. I can say a poem  from memory. I have a very  unusual pet. I have read at least  one Harry Potter  book. I was born far away  from here. My birthday is on a  holiday. I am a good  swimmer. I like helping out at  home and at school. I can play a musical  instrument. I can make a basket  from the free-throw  line. I have ridden a  horse. I enjoy drawing and  painting. I like to use a  computer. I can speak a language other than  English. I can whistle a song. Someone in my  family is a twin. I can count backwards from  100 really fast. I have won an  award. I am good at Double  Dutch. During the game and ensuing activity, the teacher took notes on her tablet  and later alphabetized and accompanied her notes with photos of her students  shed taken with her tablet on the first day of school. She systematically added  to the notes throughout the year as she observed students, talked with them, and  generated pre-assessment and formative assessment information. She sometimes  used these notes in conversations with students, and she sometimes used them in  parent conferencesshowing parents what she was learning and inviting them  to contribute their own insights. She also regularly used them to plan lessons that  were designed in response to her students varied interests and needs. By the end  of the school year, each student was represented by multiple data points and a  learner biography. Going on home visits A middle school science teacher in an urban area visited the homes of each  of his students during the summer and early fall of the school year. If someone was home, he introduced himself, asked to say hello to his student, and  explained that he was preparing to help students understand the ecology of their 
Learning Environment neighborhoods. He told parents that he was excited about getting to know their  children and asked them to tell him a few things about the student that they  thought were important for him to know. If no one was home, he left a printed  note with much of the same information and told the parents that he wanted to  personally invite them to visit him at school. Mentally placing his students in a context helped him understand some  important things about them even before they were in his classroom. Taking  the time to visit their homes sent a clear message to parents and students that he  wanted to know his students. It also indicated his understanding of the value of  family in the lives of his students and in their learning. He continued to call and  visit parentsmost often with good news, but occasionally to talk with them  about specific learning needsthroughout the year. Creating unstructured and conversation spaces A high school science teacher invited her students to use the classroom during a shared lunch period as a place to study, ask questions about their work, or  just eat lunches they brought from home. The room almost always had 1520  students in it during this period, which provided the teacher with an opportunity  to see her students in a more relaxed atmosphere, to observe them with one  another, and to provide assistance for them with reading, labs, and projects. An English teacher colleague of this science teacher held monthly book  club discussions at her home and encouraged students to come and share their  ideas. Sometimes they discussed issues related to class assignments, but other  times they reflected on topics of special interest to students or the teacher. The  teacher always made a point of issuing special, private invitations to students she  felt might be reluctant to come, and she always made sure they had safe, reliable  transportation. Attending extracurricular activities The high school English teacher in the previous example also made it a point  to attend at least one extracurricular event every other week so that she could see  her students in voluntary settings. She tried to select events that would enable her  to see the broadest possible swath of her students, but when two or more groups  met simultaneously, she nearly always chose to attend the event in which her less  academically engaged students participated. Figure 4.2 see p. 104 presents some additional ways of getting to know students. As noted, the purpose of each of these strategies is to help teachers teach 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Figure 4.2 Strategies for Getting to Know Students Strategy Explanation Greetings at the Door In all grades and subjects, teachers can learn a great deal about students and greatly enhance communication by being at the door each day to speak briefly with each student as they enter the room.  It is difficult to overstate the significance of asking specific questions How did the homework go  last night? , making personal comments You have new shoes on today, and paying compliments I  know the work was hard yesterday, so I appreciate that you stuck with it despite the difficulty. The  accumulation of information and interpersonal connections that result are immeasurable. All About Me Bags Students bring to school five objects that help the teacher and their classmates know them better.  For very young students, its a good idea to send a letter home so someone there can help them  choose the objects and assemble the bag. Students can decorate their bags to show more about  themselves if theyd like. Each day, the teacher asks three or four students to share their bags and  the objects inside. Continue until everyone has had an opportunity to share. Communication  Journals These are journals in which students write to teachers in a conversational way. There should be a  secure place on the teachers desk for students to place their journals when they write an entry they  want the teacher to read. Students often write about what they do over the weekend, music they like,  or suggestions they have for class. Occasionally, a student will write about a serious problem they  want the teacher to know about. The teacher writes entries in response and then returns the journals. Communication journals provide the human-to-human exchanges that often are sadly lacking in  class. Note Taking There is much to be learned from careful and systematic observation of students as they work in  class. It is therefore useful for a teacher to carry a checklist of required skills, for example, and to  spot check each students work for evidence of those skills. Its also helpful to jot down general  observations about individual students along with the date that can then be filed and arranged by  subject area or class period. These observations form a growing archive of information on each students learning development and needs. Surveys Its simple to develop surveys that ask students to share their sense of themselves as learners in  a particular subject, their interests, and their methods for learning effectively. These surveys can  be administered at the beginning of the year to jump-start teacher knowledge and as the year progresses to help teachers follow their students development. One to Ten On a bulletin board, create a number line and label it 1 to 10. For younger students, draw an  unhappy face over the 1 and a happy face over the 10. Title the board How do you feel about   ?  The topic can change often; for example, one day students might be asked how they feel about a  book they read yesterday in class, and another day they might be asked how they feel about starting  a new math unit. Students then place paper dolls or name tags beneath the appropriate number to  represent their feelings about that days topic. This activity quickly illustrates the variety of feelings in  the class on a particular topic, and it can also help determine the next steps in instruction. Over time,  patterns will develop in individual students responses.
Learning Environment more responsively through a deeper understanding of the individuals they teach.  Teachers who are intent on knowing their students well use a variety of strategies  throughout the year in service of that goal. It is useful, for example, to use student  interests in forming expert groups, generating options for students to express  learning, creating writing prompts or developing word problems that center on  student interest, creating or selecting anchor activities see pp. 154155, generating analogies or examples to connect new learning with student interests,  developing inquiries or individual explorations, seeking websites and gathering  classroom materials for student use, creating exploratory learning centers, engaging in conversations with students, and so on. Building a Community in the Classroom A community is an outgrowth of people coming together around an opportunity  to discover, recognize, appreciate, and reach toward some shared world. In differentiated classrooms, a teacher leads students to craft a common vision of a  class in which there is room for everyone and individuals make a commitment to  support one another in learning. Being part of a community meets a fundamental human need for acceptance,  belonging, affinity, respect, and caring. It reassures us that we can be part of  something bigger than ourselves. For students from cultures with a collectivistic  orientation, being part of a community is fundamental to how the world operates,  and feeling a strong sense of family in the classroom provides normalcy and  security Rothstein-Fisch  Trumbull, 2008; Tomlinson, 2022. Of course, not all communities are positive. Gangs and cults are examples of  negative communities, but they still illustrate the basic need to be part of an identifiable circle of like-minded people who share a mission and provide one another  with both an identity and a support system. Teachers who lead students to craft a mutual vision of a differentiated classroom envision something like the democratic classroom described by James  Beane 2005. In such places, student differences are not problems to be overcome, students are not separated according to their differences, and uniformity  is not mandatory. Teachers in these classrooms send the signal that diversity is a  strength that leads to a genuinely democratic community in which young people  learn to live and work together. The teacher models, teaches, and expects all  students to be respectful, empathetic, and inclusive with their classmates. While  it is not reasonable to expect that every student will become the best friend of 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom every other student, it is absolutely a precondition to learning that each student  feel welcomed, seen, appreciated, and contributing Boykin  Noguera, 2011;  Kafele, 2021; Tomlinson, 2022. Beane 2005 reminds us also that at the core of democracy are the related  principles that people 1 have a fundamental right to human dignity; 2 have  a responsibility to care about the common good, dignity, and welfare of others;  3 can see their own personal fate tied to the good of the group as a whole; and  4 have the intellectual and social capacity to work together to resolve issues as  they arise. This is a high-minded visionone on which the United States has  based its aspirations as a nation. Enacting it is not easy, but it is important. In  the classroom, as in the nation, this vision challenges and inspires us to continual  self-improvement. For students, these aspirations generally speak to a teachers high expectations. Grappling with these goals prepares students for the world outside their  classroom and requires them to take responsibility for their thoughts, actions,  and reactionsboth in their own work and as part of a team. Thus, being part  of a sound community in a differentiated classroom addresses a fundamental  human need for affinity with a group, which, in turn, leads to the higher goals of  self-realization and contribution to a common good. These attributes are also  nonnegotiables for achieving equity of access to genuinely excellent learning  opportunities for students who are often marginalized in schools and society  Boykin  Noguera, 2011; Kafele, 2021; Tomlinson, 2022. For the teacher, leading to develop a strong classroom community adds  depth to teaching. It also increases learner motivation, self-awareness, and  acceptance of responsibility. Ultimately, it provides a support system of learners  that helps the teacher guide and maintain the effective operation of a classroom  designed to operate flexibly and maximize the growth of each student. Developing community Leading students to form a positive sense of community, of course, is tightly  linked to getting to know students. As a teacher shows interest in knowing individual students and treats them with respect, others notice. It becomes evident  that, in that teachers classroom, people matter, and there are opportunities for all  students to learn about one another and work together. The class is also engaged  in a conversation about creating an environment in which each person is seen  as valuable and in which the growth of each person is of ultimate importance.  As the conversation unfolds, the teacher continues to bring students back to the 
Learning Environment original reason for creating a classroom that is responsive to each studenteach  student matters. Often implicit but occasionally explicit in this conversation  is the idea that, in this classroom, this is who we are; this is what we do. As a  result, the group becomes more defined, and students eventually develop a better  understanding of one another, see their ideas enacted, and work together with  increased effectiveness. Over time, a community coalesces. As is the case with getting to know students, there are many ways to contribute to the formation of a classroom community in which individuals share common interests and goals. Consider the following classroom examples. A high school English teacher came to the honest but difficult conclusion  that by the time students reached her class, few had a burning desire to read more  poems, complete more grammar exercises, or write additional formulaic essays.  She understood that she would have to create a classroom in which students felt  connected in a way that made her content seem important to them. She began by  creating a classroom space in which students could carry on a conversation. She  told students small stories from her life, and she invited them to tell their own. I  love a good story, she often said. Ill even delay a test for five minutes if someone has a good story to tell . . . but it better be good! In time, she began to tell  stories from her life that had more meaning. By then, her students were listening  to one another with positive regard, and they trusted that they could share meaningful stories from their own lives. She helped them recognize how their stories  were like those of the authors they read. She also helped them believe that their  stories were worth preserving in written form. Throughout the year, she purposefully and simultaneously led students to bond around storytelling and related the  material she taught to the people she taught. The class was life-shaping for her  students; many of them developed into devoted readers and writers Tomlinson   Doubet, 2005. A primary teacher reserved a classroom wall to post 10 calendar pagesone  for each month the students were in school. The pages were large and offered  ample room to write. On the first day of school, she told her students that they  would be writing a class history as the year went on. When something important  happens, she said, well put it on our calendar with words and drawings and  pictures. That way, we can all go back and read our history as a class. Each day,  as school was about to end, shed ask students to say what had been most important that day. Early in the year, shed sometimes prompt students with Here are  three things that seem to be important today. Is there something else you can add  to that list? She made sure to include special moments in individual students 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom lives that were shared that day and whole-class items, including both positive  reinforcement e.g., Everyone worked extra-hard with math today and room  for improvement e.g., We have to figure out how to talk more quietly when we  work. Students predictably followed her modeling as they made their own suggestions for the class history. Sometimes, the teacher added photos or students  provided illustrations to go with their words. As the year progressed, students  began to do more of the writing on the calendar. When adults came into the  room, the teacher would ask volunteers to explain the calendar and several items  they felt clearly showed what the class was like. Students nearly always showed  their parents the calendar when they visited the classroom. Increasingly, the calendar became a shared story of who we are, what we do, and why our work  is important. A middle school math teacher saw that her students were sometimes frustrated by the challenging math they were studying. One day, she offered a jeer  for the groupa cheer with a grumpy personality. She invited students to chant  the jeer with her three times in succession, with each rendition louder than the  one before. When they finished, she said, Heres our new slogan: We gripe and  conquer! She was surprised how the moment changed the tone in the classroom.  Students vented, laughed, and worked with much less tension and hesitation than  in days past. A few days later, when she noticed frustration building again, she  said, Who remembers the jeer? I think we need to practice it again. On another  day, she said, OK, time for a jeer, but Im getting tired of that old one. Anyone  have a fresh idea? Students began to bring in anti-math jeers for the class, and  she used them when needed. Each time, she followed the class chants with the  question Whats our class motto? The students responded in unison, We gripe  and conquer, and they did. The jeers were one of many techniques the teacher  used to bring her students together as conquerors of math, rather than victims of  it. Students routinely came back to visit the teacher after they graduated, and they  inevitably told her that they remembered the lesson she taught them: Its OK to  get frustrated, but its not OK to give up. A high school French teacher put a cupcake on a students desk on his birthday. She stood by the students desk as class began, wished the student a happy  birthday, and acknowledged two or three things about him that she particularly  valued. The rest of the students applauded and class went on. The importance  of this small gesture might be easy to overlook. However, it was evidenced by  a quiet student in the class who had an opportunity to travel abroad with her  parents later that year. This student was very excited about the trip because she 
Learning Environment would have a chance to speak French and bring some things back for the class.  Shortly before the trip, though, she told her mother she couldnt go and asked her  to get a refund for her ticket. The mother, puzzled and not very pleased, asked  her daughter why she suddenly felt she couldnt go on the trip. Her daughter  replied, I didnt realize the trip was during the week of my birthday. Id miss my  cupcake in French. I have to be there for that! It wasnt the cupcake that the  student would miss, of course; it was the teachers public acknowledgment of her  value and what it communicated to the class that made the day more important  than the trip. The cupcake ritual modeled an ethic of respect and appreciation  that pervaded everything in the classroom. It was one of many ways the teacher  led the students to conclude, This is who we are, and this is how we treat one  another in here. Teachers develop their own strategies to identify and clarify the specific goals  to which they aspire as a class. In doing so, they not only clarify what matters  most in the classroom, but they also help students come together around those  significant ideas. They emphasize community not in lieu of content but rather as a  means of opening students to the learning process. Figure 4.3 features more examples of methods teachers can use to build a more positive classroom community. Figure 4.3 Strategies for Building a Classroom Community Strategy Explanation Purposeful Talk Teachers in many elementary classrooms use morning meetings to provide time for students to  greet one another, set a tone, plan ahead, reflect, model behaviors, and so on. These meetings  allow teachers to spotlight things that matter to individuals and to the group. They also allow students to hear and respond to one another, thus defining what matters most in the classroom and  what will come to define the community. Teachers in middle and high school classrooms make similar use of very brief segments of time at  the beginning or end of class to share anecdotes, reflect on what recently transpired in class, plan  for whats ahead, and be reminded of the ideas they are working to implement in their classroom. Keeper of the Book Students take turns keeping notes in a notebook or on the computer to log what is taking place  during a particular class, directions for projects, assignment deadlines, and so on. If a student is  absent or just uncertain about the reason for a task, task requirements, or criteria for success, the  logbook will provide support and guidance. Students support one anothers success in this way  and also learn to take pride in the quality of their entries when its their turn to be keeper of the  book. continued
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Figure 4.3continued Strategies for Building a Classroom Community Strategy Explanation Integrating New Students Current students in a class make plans to welcome and integrate new studentsthey decide  what is necessary to make sure new students feel welcomed and are ready to join the class in the  work they are doing. Students accept various roles in this process, and the class debriefs throughout the year to continue to enhance their plans. Welcoming Guests to the  Classroom Students play an active role when parents, other teachers, administrators, or community members come to their classroom. Depending on the nature of the guest and visit, students make  sure guests are welcomed, have a place to sit, have copies of student assignments, observe or  participate in student conversations, and receive explanations about the nature of the classroom  community. Students can play different roles in the process, and roles can change over time. In  a differentiated classroom, students should quickly be able to explain and illustrate the classroom  philosophy and practice for guests. Working on a Sustained  and Meaningful Product Students in elementary school can build a model of their community throughout the year, or they  can establish communication with or raise funds for other students of their age in a part of the  world they are learning about. Middle school students can study the developmental needs of young children while they examine  award-winning childrens books as a way to understand the elements of literature. Ultimately, they  can write and illustrate a library of books for primary students in a feeder school, read their books  to those students, and lead discussions on the books. High school students can develop and publish a science magazine for elementary or middle school  students that relates important science concepts to the personal interests of those students. This  kind of meaningful, sustained product brings students together around a common purpose. Modeling What Matters Its essential for all teachers to model classroom behaviors they want their students to exhibit. This  means listening respectfully to each students ideas and questions, demonstrating positive regard  for student differences, complimenting legitimate student accomplishments, politely but firmly  rejecting behaviors that undermine the efforts of anyone in the group, and so on. Students need  to see their teachers also use these principles as they work with colleagues and associates in the  school. Teaching the Skills  of Collaboration Young people learn most important skills through a combination of teaching and doing. Thinking  about the agedevelopment of their students and the nature of the work those students will do  collaboratively, the teacher can determine which skills to teach prior to given assignments, which  to teach as students are working, and which will need ongoing focus for much or all of a school  year. Skills that support collaboration include empathy, listening carefully, respect, appreciation of  diverse perspectives, organization, goal clarity, communicating clearly, adaptability, asking fruitful  questions, giving actionable feedback, evaluating progress, supporting group members in learning  versus doing the work for them, contributing to group success, acknowledging the contributions  of others, and apologizing when necessary.
Learning Environment Using student groups and classroom community In differentiated classrooms, the use of student groups is integral to building a productive, positive community, but its not the only requirement. In fact,  effectively differentiated classrooms will inevitably also require students to work  independently and in whole-class sessions. Theoretically, at least, it might be possible to differentiate without ever having students work in small groups. Except  for concerns about classroom control, however, its difficult to understand why  a teacher would want to do that. When student groups function effectively, they are highly motivating to  students. They provide an opportunity for students to share ideas, get input,  encounter alternative ways of approaching problems or tasks, and get support.  For many students, this is a precursor to successful learning. Groups also make  the classroom more efficient for teachers, who can, for example, more effectively  focus on five or six groups than on 30 individuals. In Chapter 6, well look at  procedures for helping students work effectively in groups. Here, though, well  spotlight some principles of effective grouping that support the beliefs and practices of differentiation. Use flexible grouping. A nonnegotiable aspect of effective differentiation  is that teachers plan a consistent flow of varied student groupings within a unit  of study based on the nature of the work and the individual needs of students.  This allows students to see themselves and one another in a variety of learning  contexts, and it provides the teacher with regular opportunities to observe each  student in multiple contexts. For example, Benjamin may be scheduled to work  four days this week with peers who have similar readiness levels and skill needs.  However, the teachers plan for literacy groups during the week should also,  for instance, include opportunities for Benjamin to share some reading with  students who have similar interests regardless of their readiness needs, to work  with another group of students who choose to express what they learn in a particular format, to work independently at a center, and to work with a student of  his choice to discuss class material. At other times in the day, Benjamin is likely  to work with turn-and-talk groups, think-pair-share partners, an inquiry group, a  brainstorming group, and so on. Students perform and learn differently in different circumstances; they deserve the opportunity to work with varied peer groupings on a regular and consistent basis so they can see themselves, and be seen by  others, as multidimensional learners. Flexible grouping is an indispensable tool  for ensuring equity of access to powerful learning opportunities for each learner 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom in a class, as it supports student awareness, appreciation, and contribution of the  full spectrum of peers in their class Doubet, 2022. Teach up. Design group tasks to ensure that each student works with a rich  curriculum to think about and apply essential ideas and skills. All students will  need time to practice a discrete skill or work with a knowledge set, but there  should not be student groups that consistently practice skills out of context while  other group tasks cast students as thinkers, problem solvers, and creators. Begin  by planning tasks that challenge advanced learners, and then scaffold as needed  for learners who are not yet as advanced. Teaching in this way is an indicator  of a growth mindset teacher, and it will increase the prospects, self-image, and  achievement of virtually all learners. Well look at teaching up in greater detail  later in the book. Use multiple-ability tasks. Such tasks have more than one right answer or  way to solve a problem, are intrinsically interesting and rewarding to a variety of  students, allow different students to make different contributions to the successful completion of a task, and require a variety of skills and strengths for successful  completion Cohen  Lotan, 2014. Multiple-ability tasks often draw on a variety of media because of their high relevance to students, the access they provide  to important content, and the opportunities they allow for students to express  learning. These tasks also emphasize the critical importance of reading and writing to student success while they extend to students a greater range of learning  modes and expression modalities. Assign or let students select essential roles within groups. Individual  roles indicate that each student has a genuinely important academic or intellectual contribution to make to the task. For example, if one student in a group is  designated as the reader and another as the timekeeper, its evident to students  that the reader has a more valuable role than the timekeeper. On the other  hand, if one student is expected to diagram the steps necessary to solve a math  problem, another is expected to write prose directions for solving it, and a third  student is responsible for using manipulatives or other objects to explain the  thinking behind the solution, each student contributes equally to the task of  demonstrating what a student who has been absent this week would have to  know, understand, and be able to do in order to feel competent with the kind of  math problem weve been focusing on this week. Groups in which only some  members demonstrate competencies critical to success create a sort of caste  system of winners and losers rather than contributing to a sense of community  in the classroom.
Learning Environment Make content accessible to everyone. When students work together in  groups just as should be the case when they work independently, ensure that  the important content is accessible to everyone in the group. English language  learners, for example, should have a feasible method for bridging their two languages. It can be useful, for instance, to place a student who is new or relatively  new to the language of the classroom in a group with a student who speaks the  same home language as the new English learner but who is further along in reading and speaking in English and who therefore can serve as a bridge for the newer  learner. To address a wide range of reading proficiencies in a mixed-readiness  group, one student can be designated as the groups reader. Text or directions  can be recorded, or students can read materials at different levels of complexity or  in students varied languages, and then the group members can work together on  a common task. Offering video and audio sources of content can also be a gamechanger for students with a range of reading challenges. Assign competence. Observe students carefully, noting the particular  strengths, skills, and insights they bring to group work. When you see a worthy  and honest contribution, remark on what you saw. For example, you might say,  I think the question Sherisa just asked was a significant one. It caused you to  rethink the line of logic you were using as a group. The ability to ask a challenging question at the right time is a very useful skill. Its important for all students  to receive this sort of affirmation, but its particularly important for students who  may be seen as having lower status among their peers to hearand for their  peers to hearsuch comments from a teacher when they are genuinely warranted Cohen  Lotan, 2014. Effective use of instructional groups benefits individual students in terms  of their academic development. It also contributes to a sense of classroom community as students consistently have opportunities to work with a broad range of  classmates on a variety of tasks designed to ensure that everyone is a meaningful  contributor to the shared assignment. Designing a Physical Environment  to Support Learning As is the case with all other classroom elements, the goal of planning the physical  environment of a classroom is to maximize equitable and high-quality opportunities for teaching and learning. To that end, the physical environment in a differentiated classroom should provide the structure and predictability young people 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom need in order to feel secure. In addition, it should allow flexibility to attend  to both group and individual needs in the context of a rich, meaning-focused  curriculum. In very much the same way that a person is represented by their choice of  clothing, hairstyle, or music, a classrooms environment communicates a good bit  about what that classroom is about. It speaks subtly, or not so subtly, about the  nature and philosophy of the teacher, the degree of organization thats likely to  characterize the classroom, and the teachers concern for students, their comfort,  and their success. Well briefly examine three elements that teachers should consider carefully  as they contemplate classroom arrangements. Decisions regarding each element  will contribute to or detract from a focus on learning. A classroom does not have  to be upscale to be thoughtful, organized, and flexible; nor does it have to be  upscale to communicate the seriousness with which the teacher considers the  success of each learner. As we have suggested, a differentiated classroom is student focused. It therefore carries the expectation that students will meet the following objectives:  Increase their proficiency and comfort while working independently, in  small groups, and as a whole class.  Think at high levelsthey will comprehend and apply what they learn.  Support the learning of their peers actively and effectively.  Help the teacher make the classroom work for each member of the class  and the class as a whole. Further, a differentiated classroom carries the expectation that the teacher  will do the following:  Study students consistently in order to teach them more effectively.  Build a community in the classroom intentionally and explicitly.  Work with individuals, small groups, and the whole class on a regular basis.  Use flexible student groupings.  Address the readiness, interest, and learning preference of each individual  learner. Furniture arrangement and floor plan We can make some decisions about a classrooms furniture arrangement and  floor plan that directly support the student and teacher expectations noted above. 
Learning Environment Two useful questions that teachers should ask when they think about furniture  arrangement and floor plan are What are all of my options? and Which of my  options best align with the goals I have for myself and my students? Here are  some guidelines to consider as you think about your classrooms furniture and  floor plan:  Choose options that support collaboration. When possible, opt to use  tablesor tables and individual desksinstead of individual desks only.  Straight rows of desks do little to invite or facilitate meaningful collaboration.  If new furniture is not an option, many schools and districts have storage  areas full of furniture that is no longer used. Discarded tables can be covered  easily with poster board or heavy construction paper then decorated with  contact paper or painted in bright colors to make the best-looking furniture  in the school.  Provide space for individual learning. Consider arranging four to eight  individual seats or desks in one area of the room. Despite the general desirability of tables over individual desks, this sort of independent study area  can be useful for students who need to work alone on a particular assignment,  who are having a bad day, who have been absent and need to make up work,  or who struggle with emotions and need to have some time away from peers.  Arrange the room so that you can easily walk among students. This is  essential for students to feel your presence and for you to observe students  while they work. It also allows you to reach each student easily when they  require assistance.  Consider your students needs and preferences. As much as possible,  arrange student seating areas including carpet seating for young learners  in a way that accounts for individuals responses to private space. When  students are seated too close to one another, some begin to feel threatened.  Others simply take advantage of the opportunity to reach out and touch  someone, which can create unnecessary problems. On the other hand, some  students benefit from physical proximity to peers as they work. As with most  other elements, planning for flexibility to address a variety of needs is essential.  Position your desk in an out-of-the-way place instead of front and center.  The latter option takes up much valuable real estate and puts the emphasis  in the wrong place. In an effectively differentiated classroom, a teachers desk  will be used very little!
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom  Plan multiple furniture arrangements. The ideal classroom arrangement is  one that supports varied tasks and is beneficial for whole-class discussions,  small-group work pairs, triads, and quads, and individual work. Post the  floor plans and teach students how to move the furniture into the various  arrangements in an orderly way. See page 153 for additional details.  Plan one arrangement that encourages student-to-student discussion.  This would likely be in the shape of a U, a circle, or two semicircles that  face each other. Straight and orderly rows of desks that face the teacher are  better suited to an adult talking at students rather than students talking and  listening to one another. With younger students, this need is often met with a  designated space where everyone sits on a rug to listen to directions or share  ideas.  Dont forget about accessible storage. Try to line a significant portion of  the room with shelving, cabinets, cubbyholes, mailboxes, or other structures  that allow you to house a variety of materials, supplies, and artifacts. Look for  discarded shelves if necessary, and get students to help paint them. Shelves  made from bricks, cinder blocks, and board planks also work just fine!  Think about the location of specialty areas, such as science lab space,  listening stations, computer centers, and learninginterest centers. If these  areas will be set up most or all of the time, and if students will need to use  them independently or in small groups, they should be clearly visible to you  at all times but out of sight for students who are not using them.  Include a Peace Corner or a Zen Zone. Set up a space that any student  can go to work, reflect, or regroup, alone and away from conversations or  tensions. A quiet zone is often tremendously helpful for students who need  itand for the classmates around them too! Wall space and bulletin boards These environmental elements serve a dual purpose. They can humanize a  classroom, and they can also contribute considerably to learner independence  and success. The stereotypical classroom image tends to be of blank walls and  bulletin boards filled with cutout images from teacher storeswhich, of course,  do little to facilitate student success or make the class seem more learner oriented. Consider the following suggestions when you think about wall space and  bulletin boards in the classroom:
Learning Environment  If using student group or assignment charts, be sure to reserve a large and  prominent place to post them. Make certain they are large enough for students to see from anywhere in the room.  Designate some wall or bulletin board space that will predictably contain  information about key assignmentsfor example, criteria for success, suggested resources, due dates, and reminders.  Consider creating a hint board, hint cards, or an intranet site to collect reminders of how to do things that students need to know but may have  forgotten. For example, if students learned about haiku poetry last month  and will now write a haiku to express their feelings about something they  are studying in science, the hint boardcards might contain the elements of  haiku in addition to a few illustrations. Hint boards and cards help students  work more independently and thus preserve teacher time to work with  individuals and small groups. Figure 4.4 illustrates examples of material that  might be included on hint cards: formulas, procedural steps, examples, maps,  and so on. Figure 4.4 Examples of Hint Cards
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom  Designate space for a few exemplars of high-quality student work from past  years for assignments this years students are currently doing. In a differentiated classroom, there may need to be exemplars at varied levels of complexity  for a single assignmentdifferentiated by readiness or by options for different modes of expression through which students can express their learning.  All exemplars, however, should meet the criteria for success. This area should  also contain rubrics and annotations or other means of helping students see  why posted exemplars are, in fact, exemplary.  Designate space that will feature attractively posted, frequently changing  examples of high-quality student work both individual and group work  that this years students have recently completed. Take care to point out  instances in which student work exhibits significant growth as well. Guide  students in using exemplars as tools for understanding and developing their  own work.  Designate some wall space that can intentionally remain blank. Use this  area to create a working space for students who may be distracted by visual  stimulation and who will concentrate better if they look at plain walls.  Try to find wall space, bulletin board space, or shelf space where you and  your students can place objects or materials that are personally interesting,  or where students and student achievements can be featured. Figure 4.5  provides one teacher-developed example of a space that features students  throughout the year. The middle school teacher who developed this idea  uses one bulletin board to spotlight five students each week. She teaches  approximately 150 students, and every month she asks approximately 20  students to complete a Heres Somebody Who template about themselves  along with a few relevant photos. Preparing the board takes very little time  since students do most of the work. She asks students to mount their templates and photos on bright cardboard, and when it is time to change the  displays, she returns the previous ones and encourages students to give their  displays to a parent, grandparent, or someone else important to them. She  adds, Please tell them that Im grateful for the opportunity to teach you.  The board has been very popular with all of her students, and most students  enjoy reading about their peers who are featured. Materials, supplies, and organizers Just as the appropriate use of furniture, floor space, and wall space is critical to facilitate learner success and support flexibility in the classroom, careful 
Learning Environment Figure 4.5 Heres Somebody Who Bulletin Board Heres somebody who . . . Likes   Really likes   Really, really likes   Doesnt like   Really doesnt like   Really, really doesnt like   Has changed from  to   Is proud of   Wishes people knew   Is willing to work hard for   Dreams about   Will someday be   Is already   Whose name is   planning for placement of materials, supplies, and organizing elements can also  help achieve these goals. The idea is to give students access to what they will  need as they work in a way that maximizes efficiency and minimizes disruption.  By preplanning these elements with student success in mind, teachers contribute  to each students sense of both individual and group competence. Consider the  following suggestions when you think about materials, supplies, and organizers  in the classroom:  Store materials and supplies that will be used often e.g., books, paper,  markerscrayons, rulers, lab supplies, learning games, manipulatives, headphones in places where students can access them easilywithout having to  walk through work areasand in view of the teacher. If necessary, use more  remote areas of the room for materials or supplies that students will use less  often or that fewer students will use.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom  Store materials and supplies that should be unavailable to students in  places that are difficult for students to see or accessfor example, high  shelves or cabinets, file cabinets, or a storage area behind the teachers desk.  Be sure to designate these areas as off-limits to students. These materials  might include equipment the teacher will need, supplies for upcoming units,  or materials that will be used by a few students with specific needs at some  time during the year.  Use bins, tubs, or boxes where possible to keep supplies organized and  neat rather than having them spread out on tables or shelves.  Designate and label places in the room where students will turn in classwork and homework as they complete it. In elementary classrooms, where  teachers teach multiple subjects, it makes sense to have different boxes or  trays for each subject. Use icons and color-coding to help students know  where to place their work if they are just learning how to read, have a learning  disorder, or are English language learners.  Have students use file folders to organize work that is in process e.g.,  checklists of completed work, mastered skills, books read. Its helpful to  color-code these folders for secondary classes where teachers have multiple  classes. For example, write students names on the folders in blue for first  period, green for second period, and so on note that its even more helpful  to use folders of five different colors. Its also useful to have color-coded  boxes or crates for each class from which folders can be retrieved and to  which they can be returned. For classrooms in which students use a shared  digital platform, some of these organizational practices will take place online.  It is still helpful, however, for the classroom to have an organizational system  that enables students to work directly and tangibly with varied materials,  examples, and supports.  Designate a place in the room where students will go to find anchor  activities.  Have more than one pencil sharpener and trash can in the classroom, and  make sure they are in locations that are easily accessed with minimal distraction for other students, or provide sharpened pencils in a cup or box so  students dont need to use the pencil sharpener. Used pencils work just fine! Decisions about the use of furniture, floor space, wall areas, bulletin boards,  materials, supplies, and classroomdigital organizers will vary somewhat among  grades, subjects, and schools and with the confidence of the teacher. It is not 
Learning Environment the case, however, that these issues are relevant only to the lower grades. From  preschool through high school, the most effective teachers make judicious use of  every resource at their disposal to maximize their ownand their students efficiency and effectiveness. In Chapters 5 and 6, well look at ways in which classroom routines allow  flexibility and extend academic growth. Chapter 5 examines routines that prepare  students to work in a differentiated classroom, and Chapter 6 examines routines  that are important once students begin to work in a differentiated classroom.
5 Classroom Routines Preparing for the Work Ahead As with all other human characteristics, learning is diverse and different for  each learner. It is a function of heredity, experience, perspectives, backgrounds,  talents, interests, capacities, needs, and the unpredictable flow of any particular  life. . . . It is exactly this diversity that provides innumerable opportunities for  expanding learningfirst, by acknowledging differences in physiological, personal, linguistic, cultural, and social backgrounds, and second by focusing on  the common features that make all of us human. But the differences must be  taken into account as well to provide all learners with the necessary opportunities for learning and self-development. Lorna Earl, Assessment as Learning Classroom procedures and routines are prescribed ways of doing things that  allow teaching and learning to proceed in a structured, predictable, and efficient  manner. Their purpose should be clear to both teacher and students: they exist to  help students learn as effectively as possible. They are methods to build student 
Classroom Routines competence with content and as learners, not mechanisms to control students.  Paradoxically, the presence of stable, predictable routines is what creates the flexibility individual students need to keep growing at the pace thats right for them. The Basics Regardless of the procedure or routine, there are important steps that teachers  must follow. Determine them. What routines need to be established in the classroom for  things to run smoothly and for everyone to learn and grow? The number of routines will vary with students age, the nature of the class, and your comfort level as  a leader of students. Dont try to prescribe a routine for everything students do.  Micromanaging is tedious for everyone and quickly sends the message that you  dont trust students and are trying to manage them rather than help them manage  the details of learning. On the other hand, there should be clear routines for processes that are fundamental to the operation of the class and essential for student  success, such as starting class, getting and replacing materials and supplies, and  monitoring classroom noise level. Clarify the rationale for them. Be sure to help students understand both  the general rationale for a routine e.g., so the classroom can work for everyone,  so everyone can succeed as a learner, so everyone can concentrate on their work  and the specific rationale for a particular routine e.g., a neat, orderly, and organized classroom helps all students easily find the things they need to get their  work done, and I spend less time cleaning and more time helping students. Develop them. Sometimes, it makes good sense for a teacher to say, Heres  how we need to do this . . . . This is certainly true with very young students, with  students who lack structure in their lives, and when there is really only one acceptable way to proceed e.g., when working with potentially hazardous materials in  a science lab. On the other hand, when students can reasonably help a teacher  develop a procedure, it builds student ownership of the ideas, student investment  in making the procedures work, and studentteacher partnerships in making the  entire classroom work. In either case, be sure the individual steps in the procedure  are clearly delineated and understandable to everyone. In some instances, this  may mean posting the procedure for a time or giving it to students in a handout. Teach them. Teachers know the importance of methodically teaching content, but we sometimes assume we can just tell students what a procedure is and  theyll get it. Whatever we want students to learn, we need to teach unless we 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom have evidence that they already know it. Teaching a routine might mean that  students literally practice the routine. For younger students, it might mean that  you need to model the routine so they can see what it looks like when done correctly. It might mean students review the steps aloud and from memory. Whatever it takes for students to know, understand, and be able to smoothly carry out  the routine is what you need to do. Teach routines as carefully and explicitly as  you would teach a mathematical operation, a comprehension strategy, or the  steps to write a five-paragraph essay. Apply them. Have students begin using the routine in their work. Ask them  to recall the reasons for the routine, its steps, and how it should look and sound  as it is implemented. Automatize them. In truth, a routine is a procedure that has become   automaticin other words, its a procedure that is routine! To help students  automatize a routine, use that routine repeatedly in a relatively short period of  time. Reflect on, revise, and review them. Its always important to observe  students as they use a routine, take notes about the process, and reflect on the  degree to which the routine is contributing to effective and efficient teaching  and learning. Again, it sometimes makes sense to say, Yesterday, I noticed that  several students were having difficulty getting the help they needed while I was  working with a small group. Today, Im going to have two experts of the day  available instead of just one. Lets see if that makes things smoother for you.  On the other hand, it can be very powerful for a teacher to work with students  to reflect on how well a procedure worked. They can then engage the students  to revise the procedures as needed. Students often understand a problem before  the teacher does, and they nearly always have insightful suggestions about how  to make things operate more smoothly. Its important to review routines from  time to time to maintain clarity of understanding and consistency in application.  This can be particularly useful after vacations or when students have not used a  particular routine for a while. It makes sense to let the routines evolve in a way that feels comfortable to  both teacher and students. Some teachers will introduce most or all of their  standard routines during the first week of school, and their students will follow  the routines comfortably and proficiently within a few days. Others will practice  one routine for several days before introducing another. The unique nature of  both the teacher and students will set the pace. In general, however, it is a good  idea to invest time in teaching and implementing routines as early in the year as 
Classroom Routines possible. This prevents students from learning one way of doing business early  in the year only to have to unlearn it as the year continues. Successfully enacting  the routines fundamental to a classroom is necessary to create an orderly, flexible  classroom that supports both complex thinking and differentiation. Students will  benefit from working in this sort of environment as soon as its feasible for them  to do so. Classroom Rules to Live By Working with students at the beginning of the year to establish classroom rules,  guidelines, or agreements is useful for several reasons. First, developing the rules  can either lead to or reinforce the fundamental tenets of differentiation. Second,  when a teacher asks the class to reach a consensus about the rules by which the  group will live, it sends a distinct message that the teacher trusts the students to  have good judgment. Third, as students discuss and listen to one anothers ideas,  a general tone and specific procedures begin to emerge for what it means to think  and solve problems as a group. The evolution of community begins. Some educators, however, make a reasonable argument for not establishing  classroom rules. Generally, their sense is that a list of rules is unnecessary when  curriculum, instruction, and learning environment work as they shouldand that  when they dont work as they should, a list of rules cant fix whats wrong. While  theres truth in this perspective, its also the case that crafting a set of guidelines for  living and working well together is fundamental to a democracy and establishes a  baseline for everything that will follow. Our persuasion is that a brief set of guidelines, operating principles, or rules can provide a sense of direction for the class  and a touchstone for later discussions about the nature of the class and its goals.  Such a set of guidelines can also provide the rationale for basic classroom procedures and routines. They should also, in our opinion, point to an intrinsic and  positive rather than extrinsic and punitive way of operating in the classroom. The following examples of classroom rules or guidelines have several things  in common. They are brief. They are positive in tone. They challenge students.  And they transfer into the world beyond the classroom door.  Be nice.  Work hard.  No shortcuts.  No excuses.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom A middle school teacher asks her students to think about, add to, or revise  two contracts she asked them to make with themselves:  I will be the student I need to be in order to become the person I ought to  be.  I will practice the Platinum Rule. The Golden Rule asks that we treat  others the way wed like to be treated; the Platinum Rule asks that we treat  others the way theyd like to be treated. A 4th grade class crafts a set of agreements to live by. The teacher writes  them on a poster and makes them available for several days so students can  review them. Ultimately, each student who agrees to abide by the rules signs the  posteralong with the teacherand it is hung in the classroom so everyone can  see it and refer to it for the remainder of the year.  We agree to give respect to people, feelings, space, property, and ideas.  We agree to be responsible for our actions, words, and choices.  We agree to show appreciation for others and be inclusive and friendly.  We agree to be X-factor learners and positive role modelsmodeling excellence, can-do attitudes, and our personal best! A high school teacher uses three rules or guidelines with her students. They  are terse and point to a way of life in the classroom that is enriching and empowering for all students.  Take care of yourself.  Take care of each other.  Take care of this place. Carrie Rothstein-Fisch and Elise Trumbull 2008 suggest the following  straightforward and powerful rules or agreements:  I am the best I can be.  I follow directions the first time I hear them.  I respect others as I wish to be respected.  I am serious about learning.  I am respectful.
Classroom Routines When working with high school students who had generally lost trust in  school and in their own ability to succeed in school and in life, high school history teacher Chad Prather in Tomlinson, 2021 invited a respected community  member to lead students in creating classroom guidelines they felt were respectful of them and supportive of their growth. The agreements they crafted together  were spare but acknowledged the shared experiences of Chads students, who  had too often been subjected to rules imposed upon them. The process took a  couple of class periods, but students participated honestly and, in the end, felt  they had been heard and honored by the process. See pages 173174 for more  detail. Rather than sounding distrustful of students or overburdening them with  long lists of dos and donts, all of the student-created classroom rules weve  shared set a tone of high expectations. They establish whats necessary and move  learning to the foreground. Sometimes, of course, students will test or violate the  rules they helped to create. Even adults sometimes find it difficult to adhere to  principles that ask much of them. Certainly, young people may find it challenging  to do what they know they should do. In Chapter 7, well propose some additional ideas for responding to students who push back and challenge classroom  rules. The remainder of this chapter focuses on procedures and routines that are  common in differentiated classrooms and prepare students for working in such  an environment. To help students learn and enact these routines, teachers should  be sure to lead students to frequently consider the importance of the routines in  creating a classroom that is effective for everyone, the role that classroom rules or  agreements play, and how to make the routines function as they should. Routines for Starting the Day or the Class Students in the elementary grades typically enter a classroom in the morning  and remain there for much of the day. As students progress through the grades,  they tend to move from classroom to classroom. Although these two patterns  present different opportunities and challenges for teachers, an effective beginning to the day or to the class period will likely address two needs regardless of  age or grade. First, the beginning of the day or class should establish an affective  tone that supports teaching and learning. Second, it should focus the students  on learning. Whether they enter an elementary or secondary classroom, students will be switching environments and need to focus their attention on the 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom expectations inherent to the new environment. To help students begin the day  or class in a way that supports learning, think about incorporating the following  steps into your start-up routine. Consider using assigned or home base seats. When students have a  specific place to sit as class begins, its far more efficient for the teacher to take  attendance, have materials and supplies positioned efficiently, and return student  work. Most elementary students do have assigned or home base seats, at least  in part because they store their own materials where they sit. There is a greater  debate among middle and high school teachers about whether to assign seats,  with some feeling that older students should have the privilege of choosing where  to sit or that its more respectful of students to let them make that choice. Our  sense is that, in a differentiated classroom, students will move often and need to  understand that. Assigning seats should not be a control mechanism but rather a  way to begin the day or class efficiently and predictably. This same efficiency and  predictability also come into play at the end of the day or class, when students  return to their seats. This makes it easier to be sure materials and supplies are  returned to appropriate places and that desks are clean and clear. It also facilitates  common closure to class when students have been working on differentiated  assignments. In addition, using assigned seats as class begins and ends, and on  days when whole-class instruction is central, allows the teacher to avoid some  common classroom seating hazards such as students opting out of participation  by sitting in the back of the room, students arranging themselves by race or culture, ending up with the haves in one part of the room and the have nots in  another, or cliques or clots of best buddies sitting together while not yet having  the maturity to focus on learning when compelling distractions are nearby. Be sure students know start-up expectations. Is there a particular place  students should put their backpacks? What norms will govern when, if at all, students may use their mobile phones? Is there a board or other space in the classroom or online that they should check as they enter the room to get directions for  picking up materials, beginning a task, or reviewing yesterdays work? Is there a  place students should turn in homework as they enter the room, or someone who  will check in their homework? Will there be a sponge task that students should  begin as they get seated? If so, how long will they have to do the task? What purpose will it serve e.g., review, thinking ahead, warming up? Should they turn  it in or keep the work when they finish? If you formally begin class before they  finish the task, will you draw on what they have done as you begin conversation  with the class? Must students be in their seats before a tardy bell begins to ring 
Classroom Routines or before announcements begin? Should their desks be cleared, or should books,  tablets, or notebooks be on their desks and ready for the start of class? What  will signal the formal start of classthe teachers voice, a bell, announcements?  How should students respond to this signal? When students are clear about all of  these sorts of expectations, the importance of the work of the class is highlighted.  Order and predictability also contribute to a sense of safety for many students. Use a checking in routine. For young students, morning meeting is a  time when they can share things that are important to them and reconnect with  the group. For older learners, teachers should take a bit of time to share a story,  compliment the class or individual students on an achievement, or elicit some  input about the way the class is workingand invite students to do the same.  Effective teaching and learning are as much social and human endeavors as they  are cognitive processes. Investing time in building a growing web of human connections will yield significant dividends in terms of trust, understanding, appreciation, community, and motivation to learn. Review work plans. Be sure students know what they need to do, what highquality work will look like, when and how to help one another and when not to  do so, how to access materials and supplies, and what to do when they finish a  task. After students are comfortable with classroom routines, only a quick review  or reminder will be necessary, but its better to orient students for success than to  handle the inevitable glitches that arise if students arent clear about expectations. Routines for Ending the Day or the Class Just like the beginning of the day or class, its important to end with clarity,  purpose, and connections. Predictable routines for closure continue to provide  parameters for an orderly, flexible classroom. They are also a key component in  developing a sense of community in a differentiated classroom. Think about the  following ideas as you develop your own routines for ending the day or class. Give students advance notice. If students are working in small groups, give  them a threeto five-minute signal to conclude their work and return materials  and supplies to the appropriate places. Consider assigning only one or two students in each group to return materials and supplies and turn in the groups work.  These roles should be assigned by you or determined by the group before work  begins. Make sure students understand the need to keep the space in which they  have been working clean, clear, and organized so everything is ready for the next  day or class.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Signal a return to home base. Give students a one-minute signal when it  is time to begin moving back to their assigned seats. This may be achieved most  efficiently by moving quietly among the groups to provide a verbal signal to conclude their work, return materials, make sure the workspace is ready for the next  subject or class, and return to assigned seats. It can also be done with a quick flick  of the light switch or with an electronic timer on a whiteboard. Students should  understand that they are expected to be in their seats by the end of the time you  have indicated. Make sure students also know whether they will need to get  supplies ready to take home for an assignment or ensure a clear desk upon their  return to home base. Remember to save time for closure. Its important to leave enough time  at the end of the day or class to give a quick formative assessment, review how  procedures and routines worked, look ahead to tomorrow, or review homework  assignments. Most classes or days should end with two elements that are particularly important. First, there should be a brief closure discussion in which you  review andor students share common learning for the day or class. This not only  solidifies for students the intended outcomes of their work, but it also reminds  them of the important reality that, even though students in a differentiated classroom may sometimes work in different ways, they all work toward common goals  and shared understandings. Second, there should once again be time to recognize  the humanity of those who share the classroom. You might simply say, When I  go home today, Im looking forward to playing with my new puppyonce I clean  up after him! What are some of you looking forward to? Alternatively, you might  say, I felt good that each of you was able to make a dent in the assignments you  were doing today. I think two things contributed to that. The first is that youre  getting really good at listening to directions in a way that helps you get right into  your work. The second is that youve gotten quite skilled at helping one another  get unstuck when you have a problem. Tell me how youre feeling about those  things. It doesnt take long to renew each students awareness of their interest in  and commitment to the other individuals in the class and to the group as a whole. Be sure students recognize their dismissal signal. This signal should  nearly always come from you, not a bell or announcement. Make every effort to  be ready to dismiss students as soon as the bell sounds or the announcements are  complete, but in the few instances where its useful for students to stay in place  for a moment or two longer in order for the class to end smoothly, the teacher  needs to mark the end of the day or class.
Classroom Routines Routines for Assigning Students to Groups Teachers need to address two questions when they assign students to flexible  groupings in a differentiated classroom. First, how will students know whom they  are working with on a particular day and at a particular time? Second, how will  groups and individuals know where to work in the classroom? The ideas below  provide guidance as you think about procedures to indicate and clarify answers  to these questions for students. Create standing groups. Standing groups are a foundational configuration  that might last for a week, a month, or a unit before their membership changes,  resulting in groupings that become familiar to students in membership, purpose,  and perhaps even location in the classroom. Figure 5.1 see p. 132 suggests some ways teachers can assign standing  groups in elementary classrooms. The upper two quadrants of the figure focus on  a strategy called grouping by the clock, with the upper left quadrant illustrating  possible group sizes and purposes the teacher might have in mind during planning. Note that the name of the group e.g., 11:00 does not indicate the time  of day it will meet. An 11:00 group may meet at 2:15 on one day and at 9:00  on another. The time designation is simply the name of the group. The teacher  moves the hands of a cardboard clock or a clock face projected on a flat surface to  signal which of the groupings students will work with at a given point in a lesson. The clock in the upper right quadrant of Figure 5.1 is an example of group  assignments sheet students might keep with their materials so they can quickly  remind themselves of their 11:00 partners those in their mixed-readiness quad,  for example. The two lower quadrants of Figure 5.1 illustrate two other graphic  formats a teacher could use to create and share student groupings to make transitions to standing groups easy and smooth. Figure 5.2 see p. 132 provides one  example of standing groups in a middle school class. There are many possibilities. Standing groups are typically an augmentation or extension of a second kind  of instructional groupthose with which a teacher works daily or almost daily on  foundational skills. Foundational skill groups, too, should change quite frequently,  with students coming and going based on formative assessment information.  If foundational skill groups begins to seem permanent or even semipermanent  to the teacher or students, the teacher should think carefully about why thats  the case. Why are students not progressing more rapidly, or why are students  who have specific strengths or challenges in an area not moving to groups that 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Figure 5.1 Standing Groups in an Elementary Classroom 12 6 3 2 5 4 10 7 8 1 11 9 12 6 3 2 5 4 10 7 8 1 11 9 Lane Leo Maria Devonte Grouping by the Clock Example Mixed   readiness  quads Student-selected  triads Similar readiness  triads or quads Similar   interest  or  strengthbased   pairs 11:00 Groups 2:00 Groups 1:00 Groups 10:00 Groups Grouping by the Clock Assignment Sheet Example Grouping by a Clover Example Grouping by a Baseball Diamond Example Lane Leo Maria Devonte 1st 3rd 2nd Home Lane Leo Maria Devonte Figure 5.2 Standing Groups in a Middle School Classroom Text Teams Reading pairs composed of students with similar reading levels Think Tanks Mixed-readiness writing idea generator groups of four or five Synthesis Squads Groups of four with varied learning strengths   e.g., visual, performance, writing, metaphorical, analytical Samplers Groups of six with varied learning strengths and needs, used  by the teacher to do quick sampler checks for progress and  understanding Teacher Talkers Groups of five to seven with similar learning needs and with  whom the teacher will meet to extend and support growth Peer Partners Student-selected groups of three or four used for a variety   of purposes
Classroom Routines are better suited to address those needs? Differentiation should never result in  tracking or ability grouping within a classroom. A third kind of instructional group that increases student engagement and  understanding is the spontaneous group. For example, you may ask students to  turn to their neighbors to summarize an idea, count off by sixes and then form  groups of students with the same numbers, or work in triads to demonstrate what  they understand about the science concept illustrated in a diagram, or to explain  the main idea in a passage of prose or a model or a set of storyboards. Code different areas of the room. When developing student groups other  than standing groups, create a system to designate or code areas of the room  in a sort of shorthand that lets students readily know where they should move.  This process allows you to attend to group composition and working location  simultaneously. For example, a high school teacher refers to four quadrants of  the room as the cardinal directions north, south, east, and west. If the teacher  says, Id like these students to meet in the south, everyone knows instantly what  that means. Sometimes, the teacher uses additional regions such as northwest or  southeast, but once students understand the layout, they can move quickly to the  correct area. Other teachers might label table areas with numbers. For example,  a round table in the corner is Area 1, a nest of tables by the window is Area 2,  and so on. Another option is to project a floor plan or seating chart on a screen  or wall with students names written in the places where they should work on  the upcoming task. The teacher simply says, Please find your name on the chart  and move quickly and quietly to the place where youll be working today. Some  names might appear in pairs, some in triads, some in quads, and some alone. The  teacher might then say, Find your name and the names of people youll work  with today if youre going to be part of a group. When I ask you to move, those  of you who will be working independently, please go to the desks in the independent study area of the room. Those who will be working in pairs, please go to the  front right corner of the room. Those working in groups of three should go to the  front left corner of the room. Groups of four will be working in the back half of  the room. Regardless of how you code the room, the goal is to give students a  quick and clear indicator of where they will move for a particular task and whom,  if anyone, theyll be working with. Use pocket charts or assignment boards. Teachers of younger students  often use pocket charts to let students know which tasks theyll be working on at  a given time and who else may be working with them on the task see Figure 5.3,  p. 134.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Figure 5.3 Pocket Charts for Elementary School Classrooms
Classroom Routines Teachers of older students can use assignment boards for the same purpose  see Figure 5.4. In both cases, students learn early in the year that certain activities are always located in the same areas of the roomfor example, they go to  a long table by the chalkboard when its their turn to meet with the teacher, sit  on the carpet in the front of the room to work with math flash cards, or go to  the independent study area when they revise their writing. Pocket charts, task  boards, and similar mechanisms for designating tasks and groups allow tremendous flexibility in groups and assignments targeted to the needs of members of a  particular group. They also allow for control over the duration of both groupings  and assignments while minimizing the amount of time necessary to organize  students. Figure 5.4 Assignment Board for Secondary School Classrooms I am working with my oral dialogue. I am working with vocabulary. I am working on my culture project. Nick Tony Roya Susan Jessie Juan Mason Jen Mandy Jos Kevin Shante Liz Tim Josh Andy Emma Kori Matt Kelsey Kyle Kate Steven Paige I am working with my teacher choice assignment.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Routines for Giving Directions  for Multiple Tasks In a differentiated classroom, it is often the case that students will work on varied  versions of the same task or even on different tasks during the same segment of  time. Once students know who their working partners will be if any and where  they should work in the classroom, they will then need clear directions for their  assignment. There are many ways to be sure students know what to do as they  begin working. The purpose of giving directions is, of course, student clarity  about what to do and how to do it as efficiently as possible. Keeping these goals  in mind can help the teacher decide which approaches make sense and which are  likely to be counterproductive. Here are some suggestions for giving directions  when students will work on varied tasks, versions of the same task, or in varied  grouping arrangements. Give directions only to those students who need to hear them. It generally creates confusion and wastes time if you give oral directions to the whole  class for several tasks or versions of tasks. Inevitably, students hear directions  other than their own, or they pay attention to whose work seems better than  theirs. There may be some occasions when it seems important to explain to the  whole class how or why varied tasks are alike and different. This is sometimes  reassuring to students. For example, you may explain that today, some students  will use books as a resource and others will use the computer, but tomorrow,  theyll switch, and students who used the books today will use online resources  tomorrow. Typically, however, its not helpful to go over directions for tasks that  certain students will not do. Use task cards. Task cards are an effective means of giving directions to  individuals or groups with varied work. In these instances, you might say, When  you move to the area of the room where youll be working, youll find a task card  that will tell you what you need to do. Depending on the age and needs of the  group, it may be wise to designate one student to read the task card to the group  and then have one or two students summarize the directions before they move  ahead. Task cards should clearly describe the tasks goals e.g., As a result of  this work, you should be able to . . ., the steps involved, the materials needed  to complete the task, and what high-quality work will look like. The latter can  be addressed through class rubrics, work samples, or a statement that provides  indicators of quality such as Your work must show that you can use fractions to 
Classroom Routines solve a measurement problem. It must also show that you can accurately explain  how you arrived at your solution. Provide directions in alternative formats. Recorded directions are particularly useful for young students, students who have difficulty reading, students who have difficulty following multistep oral directions, students learning  English, or tasks that are multifaceted and complex. Small recording devices in  appropriate settings allow students to hear directions, listen to directions given  in a couple of ways, or replay directions as needed while they move through their  work. For students who have difficulty completing multistep tasks, recorded  directions might explain each step in a task and conclude each explanation with,  Do this step now. Check it with your teacher when you finish. When the teacher  says youre ready for the next step, turn on the recording again and listen to the  next part of the directions. Now turn off the recording. Alternatively, of course,  you can use an intranet site to share videos that explain the assignment, provide  criteria for success, or even review background information. Making this kind of  information available on video means students who need additional or expanded  opportunities to understand an assignment can access those opportunities readily and repeatedly. The caveat is that all students must have access to a computer  and the internet. Assuming that access exists when, in fact, it does not further  disadvantages students who already bring numerous limiting burdens to school  with them daily. Ask students to give directions. In every class, there are students who are  good listeners, who remember what they hear, and who explain well to others.  You can give directions to such students early in a class or the day before. When  its time for the larger group to work on the assignments, say, When you get to  the place in the room where youll be working, someone in your group will give  you directions. Meet with students who have difficulty understanding directions. Students can have difficulty because they are learning English, because they have  attention or reading disorders, because they find it confusing to follow multipart  directions, or because they need to be close to the teacher to stay focused. Say,  Id like to meet very briefly with the students whose names Im going call out.  Youll be joining your groups in just a minute or two. Then give directions  to these students, have them paraphrase or summarize the directions, and ask  them to say what steps theyll follow as they work. Students can then join their  groups or work independently and be much more successful because they have  increased clarity about what they need to do.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Differentiate the assignment. Its also possible, of course, to assign different tasks to students or ask them to pick up the correct assignment from a designated place in the room. For example, say, The list of names on the board is  in alphabetical order. Please find your name and notice the color that underlines  your name. As you move to your work area for today, please pick up an assignment sheet that matches this color. For example, if your name is underlined in  blue, pick up a blue assignment sheet. There are stacks of assignment sheets on  the table in the front of the room and also on the bookshelves in the back of the  room so we can avoid a traffic jam. Likewise, it works well to designate one student from the blue group to pick up five copies of the appropriate assignment to  take back to the group. Again, when students have computer and internet access,  you can give them links that will lead them to specifics about their particular  assignment as well as links to resources that align with their reading proficiency,  language needs, or preferred mode of accessing information for example, a  student with limited vision or a student with a specific reading disorder might  do better accessing information via a podcast rather than a print article. A high  school English teacher in a detracked honors class regularly directs all of her  students to a website that contains common directions, goals, timelines, criteria  for quality work, and in-common questions and resources for longer-term assignments. She also directs students to differentiated links, where they will find supports and additional resources targeted for their needs, strengths, and interests. As students become competent and confident with these routines, they  become increasingly aware of the role they play in their own learning, and they  develop increasing ownership in the successful operation of the entire classroom.  Chapter 6 will introduce additional routines that facilitate student and teacher  success in a differentiated classroom. These routines are ones that are particularly  valuable as students work in a flexible classroom setting.
We saw beginning teachers in urban settings who had a deep understanding  of how children learn and how to structure tasks so that students could successfully undertake challenging intellectual work. They knew how to develop  lessons that would add up to a curriculum that could achieve central academic  goals, and they knew how to use assessments that would give them diagnostic  information about each child so they could target students individual needs.  They built well-functioning communities among the students and a sense of  responsibility for each others welfare. Linda Darling-Hammond, The Flat World and Education Classroom environment describes how a learning space looks, feels, and functions. Its an underrated factor in student success. As she discusses urban settings in which teachers often have fixed mindsets  about students; use scripted, low-level, and mechanized curricula; and aspire  6 Routines in a Differentiated Classroom Once the Work Begins
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom to run tight-ship classrooms, Linda Darling-Hammond 2009 points out that  Maria, a young teacher in such an environment, and other teachers like her were  able to see beyond stereotypes and low expectations to teach a complex curriculum that typifies the work of much older students in much more affluent settings.  Darling-Hammond explains how this was possible: Maria created an environment in which each of her students was respected and  enabled to participate actively and effectively. She avoided needing to chastise  students by anticipating what normal busy children are likely to do and having a  plan to keep them focused, well-behaved, and engaged in learning. Her careful  planning allowed students to succeed at a complex task without punishment,  discouragement, conflict, or failure. p. 213 This observation highlights several factors that are at work in learnercentered, responsive, or differentiated classrooms regardless of school context.  First and most significantly, Maria did not subscribe to often-prevailing narratives about students who dont care about school and are persistently disruptive in class. Instead, she respected the capacity of each learner to do complex,  collaborative, and relevant work. She translated this conviction into lessons that  signaled to her students her belief in them and her high expectations of them. In  other words, she envisioned classroom management as an orchestration of rich,  meaningful learning opportunitiesnot a tool for controlling student behavior.  The care Maria took to plan engaging work for her students and to develop with  her students routines that both supported their success and minimized catalysts  for commotion, frustration, and counterproductive behavior was key to providing equitable access to excellent learning opportunities for the full range of students in her classroom. This is the power of mindfully and proactively planning details in the classroom. Paradoxically, teachers who give meticulous care to establishing routines  ultimately free their students to work. The routines spotlighted in this chapter are  enacted as the work of a differentiated class is enacted. The routines anticipate  what might go wrong in a room full of students and are designed to prevent those  problems from arising. In the end, routines should make teaching and learning  more effective and efficient because they support both endeavors. The routines  and procedures that follow are primarily for students, but some are for teachers.  For all of them, however, its important that both students and teachers understand the goals of a differentiated classroom and how a particular routine or procedure helps achieve those goals.
Routines in a Differentiated Classroom Routines for Calling on Students Its remarkably easy for teachers to get into the habit of calling on students who  volunteer to answer questions and allowing those who are shy, detached, or lacking in confidence to opt out of active participation in classroom discourse. This  practice allows mental dropouts to evolve, and it no doubt contributes to physically dropping out as well. In a differentiated classroom, the value placed on the  success of each student necessitates practices that are inclusive and engage each  learner. One teacher signals this idea to her students by saying, In here, nobody  gets to be invisible. There are two key goals to developing routines for calling on students:  Make sure everyone in the class has both the opportunity and responsibility to speak.  Develop a system that helps students make meaningful contributions to  class discussions, conversations, or deliberations. A high school history teacher explains to her students that she feels her role  in discussions is to prepare intriguing and important questions for the class to  consider. Your role, she says to her students, is to be prepared to share your  perspectives on the questions. Every one of you has something valuable to contribute to our thinking. I will call on you in ways that ensure each of you has a  voice here. She uses three methods to call on students during whole-class discussions. In Bag of Names, she writes the names of all her students on small slips  of paper and collects them in a small lunch bag. She draws names from the bag  and calls students randomly. She also uses a Volunteers approach in which she  encourages students who want to make a contribution or a point to do soan  important time for students with advanced knowledge, strong opinions, or an itch  to be heard. Finally, she calls for New Voicesstudents who have not spoken  during Bag of Names or Volunteers. She reminds students of their responsibility  to share their perspectives with the class, and students respond appropriately. To ensure that all students participateincluding those who are learning  the language of the classroom, those who have not seen themselves and who  have not been seen as smart, those who are reticent, and those who feel unprepared because of a lack of background experiencethe teacher uses a variety of  approaches that students come to understand and appreciate. Sometimes, she  might prime a student for a question by saying, In a minute, Josh, Im going to 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom ask your opinion about the benefits of the amendment for the development of  the United States, but first, I want to hear from one more person about why it  may have taken so long for the amendment to pass. She then calls on someone  from the bag of names for the latter question, giving Josh, who responds more  confidently with some thinking time, the opportunity to mentally prepare an  answer for the question the teacher will ask him. At another point, she calls on a student who does not know an answer or  who does not have the vocabulary to express it. Seeing the students hesitancy,  she says, Give me a word or phrase that comes to your mind when you think  about the question. She then draws another name from the bag and says, Please  build on Annanjis idea. The second student then expands on the initial idea,  and the teacher repeats this process with another student or two before returning  to Annanji to say, Let me repeat the question now, Annanji, and you tell us what  you think is important to consider as we try to answer it. Inevitably, the hesitant  student can provide an expanded response. Students become accustomed to  building on one anothers ideas and sometimes say, Ill say what Im thinking  now, but maybe some other people in the class could build on my idea. Figure  6.1 provides some additional ways to call on students to ensure that everyone in  the class has both the opportunity and responsibility to be a contributor to class  discussions. Remember, however, that for some students, the fear of being called on in  class can trigger significant anxiety. These students may have speech disorders,  be extremely shy, be victims of bullying, or carry emotional burdens that make it  difficult for them to get through a school day. Whatever the cause of their fears,  teachers should take care not to add to the discomfort they feel. The burden  already makes it difficult, if not impossible, for the brain to attend to learning  Sousa  Tomlinson, 2018. Be sure to demonstrate understanding and empathy for these students feelings and stress to them that you value their ideas and  want to find a way to hear from them without calling on them in class. Then work  with them to find that way. Consider, for example, privately saying to the student that you have observed  their discomfort with speaking in class and ask if your observation is accurate.  Tell the student that you will certainly honor their preference not to speak in  class unless the student raises a hand or tells you at some point in the future that  it is OK to call on them. Tell the student that you still want to hear their ideas  about discussions in some way and suggest possibilities such as the student keeping a journal of ideas and questions that occur to them during discussions and 
Routines in a Differentiated Classroom Figure 6.1 Methods to Call on Students Equitably Strategy Explanation Name Sticks For younger students, draw student names written on tongue depressors or craft sticks from a  cup to have them answer questions or share ideas in the classroom. Ask the questions first so  that all students must think of a response before they know who will be asked to answer. When a  question has a student stumped, they are allowed to ask for help from a classmate. Spinner System Use a system of assigning stud ents to table groups usually with four students to a group,  classify the groups by color, and give each group member a number. Use spinners to determine  the color and number for a variety of tasks. For example, student 3 from the orange group might  be asked to respond. If spinners are not available as part of your instructional tools, homemade  versions are easy to construct. They are also readily available in childrens board games  and in online versions. Baseball Cards Ask students from upper elementary and middle school classrooms to create a baseball card  that has their picture on the front these can be school pictures or photos taken in class and  statistics that reveal something about the student e.g., family information, hobbies, goals  on the back. Use the cards to learn more about each student and to randomly call on students  to respond. This can be done in a variety of exciting ways, such as how a professional card  player would draw a card. Computer-Generated Names A random, computer-generated list of student names is quite easy to use and motivating for  students. This can be used at any grade level, but it is especially helpful for secondary teachers  who often teach many students and for whom computer-generated lists can be a time-saver. submitting it every few days, responding to discussions via daily or weekly emails  to you, or recording thoughts and questions briefly in the evening after a discussion and emailing them to you as voice memos. Clarify for the student how youll  respondperhaps briefly on most days, or every three or four days, or once a  week. Invite the student to share other ideas about ways to help you hear their  voice. Routines for Working in Groups As anyone who has ever watched school boards, city councils, state or national  legislatures, or teacher committees in action can tell you, working in groups  is complicated. On many levels, its easier to be a soloist than a member of an  ensemble. Nevertheless, most experts tell us that collaboration and the use of collective intelligence to solve problems are skills our students must develop if they  are to be prepared for life in the world beyond school e.g., Brookhart  Rasooli, 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom 2021; Cohen  Lotan, 2014; Fullan et al., 2018; Zhao, 2009, 2022. Students can  learn to work effectively in groups in the same ways that they learn mathematical operations, the skills of a sport, or proficiency in singingwith instruction,  guidance, and practice. In other words, teachers need to teach students how to  work in groups effectively. They also need to establish opportunities for students  to work together in meaningful and productive ways on assignments that are  important and engaging. Its in this context that students can develop and polish  their skills of collaboration. As you develop procedures, guidelines, and routines for group work, and  as you design the work groups will do, consider and make sure your students  understand the following skills for effective group work:  Being prepared for the work of the group by completing preparatory  assignments and by entering the group with the intent to contribute to its  success.  Understanding the parameters of the work, including its goals, success criteria, timelines, and possible resources to support understanding.  Making a plan to accomplish the work of the group, including creating an  effective division of labor that matches individual strengths with key goals.  Evaluating the groups progress toward achieving goals throughout the  span of the group work and adjusting plans as needed to ensure quality work.  Listening to one another carefully.  Speaking to one another respectfully.  Asking questions that clarify goals, understandings, and processes for all  members of the group.  Working together as supportive members of a team.  Understanding that mistakes not only are inevitable but also can be a  source of important learning.  Being empathetic when group members have difficulty.  Helping one another solve problems.  Making and responding to suggestions. Design group tasks that support both meaningful collaboration and student  achievement of desired outcomes. You want to make sure that  Students understand the task goals.  The task tightly aligns with learning goals i.e., it leads students directly to  what they should know, understand, and be able to do.
Routines in a Differentiated Classroom  Most students will find the task interesting.  Students understand whats expected of them as individuals in support of  the groups work.  Students have access to materials that are a match for their language proficiencies and that offer varied media or formats to support understanding of  a wide range of learners.  The task requires genuine collaboration in order to achieve shared understanding i.e., it cannot be done more effectively by an individual or subset of  students in the group than by the group as a whole.  The task requires an important contribution from each group member by  drawing on the strengths of the individuals in the group.  The task is challenging for the group and its members.  The pace of the work is brisk but not rigid, and students feel the need to  remain focused on the work.  The group is responsible for a shared understanding of the content of the  work and group processes.  There are opportunities for teacher or peer coaching during the task.  The task incorporates in-process quality checks that will support productive use of student time and strong outcomes.  Students understand what to do after they complete their work at a high  level of quality. Two early researchers in the dynamics of effective group work, Elizabeth  Cohen and Rachel Lotan 2014, commend group work that uses heterogeneous  groups in terms of both current student achievement and areas of strength in  which students collaborate to solve complex, open-ended, and uncertain problems built around concepts and principles of a discipline. Such work provides a  path to equity of opportunity for a very broad range of students to access excellent learning opportunities and to learn the skills of productive collaboration.  In that context, Cohen and Lotan describe what they call groupworthy tasks  p. 85 with the following hallmarks:  They are open-ended, uncertain in ways that challenge students to do productive thinking, and require complex problem solving.  They provide opportunities to use multiple strengths and intellectual abilities to access the tasks and to demonstrate intellectual competence.  They address discipline-based, intellectually important content.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom  They require positive interdependence among group members as well as  individual accountability.  They include clear criteria for evaluating both the groups product and the  individuals report. p. 85 More recently, Michael Toth and David Sousa 2019, whose work in both  psychology and neuroscience has expanded our understanding of teaching and  learning, have advocated using a process called student-led academic teaming to  prepare students to be responsible for the learning of their team members and  to not only learn academic content but also grow in decision making, social and  emotional skills, appreciation of cultural diversity, and sustaining attention. As is  the case with the Cohen and Lotan model, the Toth and Sousa model incorporates productive struggle, individual accountability, and group interdependence.  While the intent of group work generally is to involve every student in a class  in effectively guided collaboration with peers, there are sometimes students  who, for a variety of reasons, cannot meaningfully contribute to or benefit from  group collaboration. Perhaps they have ongoing struggles with paying attention,  social skills, or emotional volatility. Perhaps they are hindered by the challenge  of learning and communicating in a language that is new to them. Perhaps they  are just having a bad day. Arranging groups so that students who are struggling  with collaboration challenges can work alongside students who are willing and  able to serve as mentors can be bridge to success. Of course, it is important for  the teacher to coach the mentor student in understanding the kinds of help that  might be useful for the mentee in specific assignments and in generaland for  the teacher to be attuned to both successes and ongoing needs of the mentor  student and the student receiving support. When a student cannot succeed in a group at a particular time because of  restlessness, behaviors that negatively impact the work of the group, or emotional challenges, it is wise for a teacher to provide a way out for that student so  that neither the student who is struggling nor the other students have to suffer.  If mentor students and other group members work responsibly to support one  another, and a struggling student continues to have or create difficulty working  in the group, talk with that student privately and ask them to work independently  in a predetermined quiet zone in the room on a meaningful task for the remainder of the group work time. This should not be done punitively or with anger;  simply explain that working with the group is not productive at the moment, 
Routines in a Differentiated Classroom and an alternative seems like a better idea. Later, talk with the student again to  see if they can identify the cause of friction with the group, and determine some  ways to address the issue. Work with the student to help them reenter the group  successfully when the time is right. This may mean talking with the group about  its processes, closely monitoring the group to suggest adjustments, or making it  possible for the student to work with the group for shorter periods of time long  enough to experience success with the group but not so long that problems  arise. Some students who grapple with emotional disorders, trauma, or other  major disruptors to learning may need to work independently while teachers and  specialists continue to work with them to understand and manage their counterproductive behaviors Tomlinson, 2022. If necessary, its fine to say to the class which, no doubt, is keenly aware  of any problems one of its members may have with group or individual interactions, You know, some of us find it very challenging to spell words correctly.  Some of us have a hard time writing. Some of us find it really tough to memorize  things. Some of us find it difficult to work in group settings. Thats OK, because  we all have the ability to get better at the things we find to be difficult. Ill ask you  to work hard on the things that are difficult for you, and I hope youll try to help  one another with challenges as well. Im confident every one of us can succeed  with challenging things. Routines for Managing Noise Its important for students to talk with one another at appropriate times in order  to learn together. Its also easy for conversations among students even those  who are completely focused on their work to escalate, simply because 25 to 40  voices in a relatively small space can be overwhelming. The goal in an orderly,  flexible classroom is not no noise but rather productive noise. Making noise  work in favor of learningrather than against itis a maintenance issue in  classes where students work collaboratively. However, it need not be a problem  so much as a detail to which the teacher and students attend, such as keeping  pencils sharpened or making sure materials are straight and stored properly. Think about the following ideas as you develop routines for handling noise  in the classroom. Clarify student expectations. Be sure students understand that you want  them to work with you to monitor their conversations. This helps them work  together effectively and successfully.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Place a value on silent work. Teach students what it means to work silently,  and enforce this rule by routinely asking them to do so for specific, generally limited, periods of time. Its helpful to introduce activities that require silence very  early in the year so students develop a point of comparison and know how to  transition to silence when needed. If the whole class struggles to maintain silence,  ask students to work silently for brief periods that are slightly shorter than the  length of time they can remain silent. This ensures success from the outset. You  can then gradually extend the lengths of silent work expected of them. A vibrant class includes the sounds of students talking together, being excited  about their work, and finding joy in the work they do. Silence is not the predominant feature of an effectively differentiated classroom. However, it can be a useful  element in supporting students who need quiet, providing periods of calm that  enable students to recalibrate, supporting student focus on complex tasks, and  doing person-specific work students need to take their next steps in learning. Define acceptable noise limits. Develop indicators of or terms for various  noise levels that you and the students can use with mutual understanding. Then  translate them into a routine that establishes and monitors classroom noise. Consider the following examples. Remind young students to reduce their voice levels by saying, Scholars, give  me five. Students then stop what they were doing, open their hands, and bend  their fingers toward their palms as you count down from fivepinkie first, ring  finger second, middle finger third, and thumb fourth. With their index fingers  extended, say one as students put their fingers in front of their closed lips. The  few seconds of silence, along with the established quiet signal, remind students to  begin working again very quietly. Alternatively, you might say, Folks, VW. Students stop their conversations and follow suit as you alternately hold up two and  three fingers, switching between a V and a W. The students should understand  that VW means voices, whisper. Again, the reminder has the desired effect. In an elementary classroom, you might post a construction-paper stoplight.  Green represents noise at a conversational level, yellow is a whisper, and red  is complete silence. An arrow beside the appropriate level for a particular task  helps students get ready to transition into a new task. If the noise rises above  the appropriate level, say, Eyes up front, everyone. Stoplight check. Likewise,  a noiseometer, made to look like a thermometer, can also indicate noise levels  from acceptable to uncomfortable to unacceptable. When voices rise beyond a comfortable level, say in a slightly raised voice,  If you can hear me, clap once. A few students will likely respond, but the sound 
Routines in a Differentiated Classroom of their clapping will get the attention of others. In a softer voice, say, If you can  hear me, clap twice. Continue this pattern, increasing the number of claps and  reducing voice volume, until the count of four or five. By two or three, most  students will be listening and clapping along. After five claps, remind students to  monitor their conversation level to be sure its not distracting to others. Delineate four categories of voice levels: mute button i.e., no sound, sixinch voices i.e., someone standing or sitting more than six inches away from  you cannot hear what you are saying, work voices i.e., appropriate, conversational levels, and playgroundhall voices i.e., unacceptably loud levels for  the classroom. Students should learn to shift to six-inch voices or to push the  mute button when reminded to do so. Designate one student in each group whose role is to monitor the voice level  of the group. Remind students of appropriate voice levels as you walk around the  classroom, and compliment groups when they talk at the designated level. Allow students to block out distracting noise and visual overload. Sometimes, there are students in a class who are very sensitive to noise and are distracted even when classmates are talking at acceptable levels. It can be beneficial  for those students to use headsets with cuffs that sit around the ears and help  mute noise. Inexpensive earplugs available in drugstores, airports, and online  can also help students who need to reduce or eliminate surrounding noise. In the  latter instance, keep sets of assigned earplugs in a designated place in the room.  For students who are distracted by visual noise, consider using portable carrels  made of heavy cardboard that can be easily set up and stored. It may also be possible to have some desks facing away from bulletin boards and other visual stimuli  that are troubling for some learners. Routines for Getting Help Students often learn to see the teacher as their primary, if not exclusive, source  of help in the classroom when they work independently or in small groups.  Although teachers will always need to be key players in a classroom support  system, when they are the predominant source of help, theres no time to teach  individual students or small groups of students, no time to conduct systematic  observations of students, no time to observe patterns in the work habits of  individuals or groups. As a result, the teacher performs functions that someone  else could handle and gives up roles only the teacher can play. However, when  students learn routines for getting help while they work independently and in 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom small groups, the teacher is free to do targeted teaching and strategic observation.  Consider the following ideas. Develop clear directions. Invest time in developing directionswritten,  oral, or boththat you will ask students to follow. They should be brief, use  accessible vocabulary, proceed in a step-by-step manner, and not skip any steps.  To avoid as much confusion as possible, formulate your direction to anticipate  ways in which students might misinterpret them. For students who struggle with  reading, using icons and recordings as substitutes for or additions to written  directions can be quite helpful. Teach students to be active listeners. Make a game out of seeing who can  summarize directions or repeat the last thing you said. As they become conscious  listeners, students are better able to help themselves proceed with a task. Many  questions come from students who dont listen well in the first place, because  they know you will repeat the directions if they didnt hear them the first time. Make sure students know when to ask you for help. Teach students when  its all right to come to you for help and when its not. An emergency is always  the right time for a student to come to you! In a differentiated classroom, there  will be times when the teacher is off-limits, such as when you are working with  individuals or small groups or when students are making transitions from one  task or position to another. In the former instance, its important to have uninterrupted time to work with individuals and small groups. In the latter instance, its  useful to be unencumbered to monitor student movement around the room and  to make sure students settle into their new workspaces smoothly. In general, it  contributes to clutter in the classroom if students can get up and approach you  at any time for questions, for supplies, or to turn in papers. For this reason, alternative routines for getting help are valuable. Make sure students know when and how to ask their peers for help.  In general, classmates are excellent sources of help, and when students learn to  pull together and help one another, both collegiality and community develop.  When there is a reason for students not to ask peersor certain peersfor help  because of the nature of an assignment or because a student has requested not to  provide help, be sure the class is aware of who or what is off-limits. Use question chips. Give each student one or two poker chips, or other  small plastic disks, at the beginning of the day. When they ask you for help, they  must pay one chip questions to classmates are free. Once their chips are  gone, they have no choice but to rely on their peers for help. Its important to  not be too rigid with the chips. Continue to move among students as they work, 
Routines in a Differentiated Classroom asking if they need help questions that you pose to students are also free.  The goal is not to deprive students of the assistance they need but to expand the  sources of help they feel comfortable drawing upon. Administer first aid. In elementary classrooms, it can be helpful to have  a first aid area on the classroom wall. Beneath the area, students names are  printed on large pieces of cardboard made to look like bandages. Students who  try to get assistance from two classmates but still need your help should post their  bandages on the first aid board. Check the board often as you move from group  to group so you know who needs help quickly. Some teachers use green or red. Figure 6.2 provides additional examples of routines to ensure that students  get timely assistance. Figure 6.2 Methods to Ensure Students Receive Help When Needed Strategy Explanation Expert of the Day One of many jobs students might have in a classroom is to play the role of Expert of the Day. Students  in this role are the designated go to person on a particular topic, assignment, or procedure. Every student  knows that they will have a turn in this role, so they all understand they are capable of helping others.  Teachers of young children sometimes use visors with Ask Me written on the bill. Teachers of older students generally designate Experts of the Day orally or on the board. Colored Cups Colored drinking cups are placed on student tables when groups are working together. Students use the  cups to indicate the status of their work. A green cup on top of the stack means Our group is working  well and doesnt need help. A yellow cup means We think were OK, but were not absolutely sure.  A red cup means Were stuck and cant go on. The cups indicate where immediate help is most  important. Its also useful to note patterns in the cups. When groups never need help, it may mean the  work is too easy for the group. When one group often has a red cup on top of the stack, it might be that  the work is too difficult for them and more differentiation is necessary. This method can be adapted to  signal individual students need for help. Question Cards Question cards are an individual signal students use to indicate a need for assistance. Students fold a large  index card in the middle and draw a large question mark on both sides of the card. They then stand the  sign on their desk like a placard if they have used other sources of help but are still uncertain of how to  move ahead with their work. The cards efficiently signal where help is needed. Mini-Workshops Mini-workshops are typically teacher initiated and result from observations made while moving around  the room, such as noticing that several students have difficulty with the same skill or have a similar  misunderstanding. You might say, As Im looking at your work, I see that several of you are a bit fuzzy  on how to reduce a fraction. If youre not really confident of how to do that, meet with me on the floor  in the front of the room. Students who need help benefit from a quick review and an opportunity to ask  questions before returning to their work. You can also use mini-workshops to help individual students as  necessary. Its possible for students to request a mini-workshop independently if they realize several of  them are struggling with a particular skill or idea.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Routines for Transitioning Between  Tasks and Workspaces In a differentiated classroom, students regularly move among whole-class, smallgroup, and independent work. These shifts often include different student groupings, the need for different materials, and the necessity to move to various parts of  the room. Although any student of any age is capable of making these transitions  smoothly, they also have the capacity to generate a good deal of disruption and  distraction as they move between tasks and places. The following suggestions  should be useful as you plan routines for classroom transitions. Clarify expectations. Discuss with students what will be necessary to  enable a large number of them to move from place to place in the classroom,  get supplies, and settle in to do work effectively. They should be able to identify  elements such as walking quietly, moving quickly from place to place in the most  direct way, limiting talking during transitions, paying attention to where they  need to be and what they need to take with them rather than being concerned  about where classmates are going, and getting seated as soon as possible. Create a time challenge. Time students as they shift locations early in the  year. Challenge them to make transitions as quickly as they can without running  or getting in one anothers way. Students quickly learn that they are expected to  move efficiently, and they retain that pattern throughout the year. Post the best  time or a timer on the board to motivate students to make transitions quickly and quietly. Organize materials logically. Store materials and supplies in locations  around the perimeter of the room so students can retrieve and return items with  minimal movement through the center of the room where peers are working.  Students quickly learn to walk around the perimeter rather than across the room  to get what they need. Designate supply couriers. When students will be using a common set  of materials in a group, it is generally more efficient for one student to get the  materials for the entire group during a transition or work time rather than have  each student get the materials. This same student could be responsible for asking questions at the appropriate time or having work checked. This reduces  the amount of traffic and potential chaos caused by multiple students from each  group moving around the room or vying for your attention. Finally, it often  makes sense for one student per group to return materials, supplies, and student  folders as work ends and students transition again. Also consider assigning one or 
Routines in a Differentiated Classroom two students from the class to do a quick tour of the classroom to make sure that  seating areas are clear and clean and that all materials and supplies are in the right  places at the end of transitions. Post alternative seating plans. Create multiple room arrangement charts  and post them on a bulletin board. For example, they might be labeled Discussion Format, Current Events Format, Seminar Format, and Team Format.  All charts should include all of the rooms furniture in varied arrangements. With  guidance, students practice moving the furniture into the different arrangements  several times quickly and quietly, and they learn where to move their home  base seats to accommodate each of the arrangements. Within a very short time,  students will be able to change the entire room configuration with precision and  speed. This provides tremendous flexibility in using classroom space, and students become proud of their drill team moves. Routines for Managing Time Its never the case in any classroom that students all finish an assignment at  exactly the same momentor that all students need exactly the same amount  of time to achieve mastery in a particular area. A differentiated classroom differs  from others in that it recognizes and accommodates ragged time. Such accommodations exist on two levelsone focuses on the need for flexibility in the short  term, the other in the longer term. In the short term, student routines are needed  for what students should do when they complete a task before the teacher calls  time or when a student needs a bit more time to complete an assignment. In  the longer term, the teacher must have routines that allow forward and backward  teaching at the same time. Think about the following strategies as you develop  student and teacher routines for managing time. Plan instructional time in terms of highways and exit ramps. Highway time is largely whole-class time and should focus all students on the essential knowledge, understanding, and skills that are core to a unit or inquiry. It  includes elements like minilessons or minilectures, reading often differentiated  for access by all students followed by whole-class or small-group conversations,  small-group processing and applying ideas and skills, watching or participating in  demonstrations related to the essential learning targets, planning for upcoming  products or performances, and other instructional elements that make learning active, collaborative, and compelling. Exit ramp time includes working in  small groups with the teacher, practicing students next steps in terms of skills or 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom knowledge mastery, or pursuing their own interests perhaps related to current  content or perhaps as an opportunity to apply foundational skills such as reading,  writing, research, planning, evaluating, and so on. Exit ramp time enables each  learner to regularly take their own next steps in growth in dimensions of learning  that are pivotal for that student. Consistent use of both highways and exit ramps  in instructional planning enables all learners to work with compelling content  that opens the way to learning success in the classroom and beyond while actively  supporting each learner in what John Hattie 2012 calls plus-one learning,  noting that teachers should plan for each learner to move forward every day at  least one step one chunk, one skill, one idea, one insight . . . beyond a students  entry point on that day Tomlinson, 2022, p. 143. Introduce anchor activities very early in the year. An anchor activity is  a task or a set of tasks to which students move when they complete an assignment. Figure 6.3 lists characteristics of quality anchor activities. Create a routine  for moving from an assignment to an anchor activity. Should students check the  quality of their completed assignment with you? With a peer? Where should the  completed work go? Where are anchor options located in the room? May any  student choose any anchor task? Do students sit where they were previously  seated to work on the anchor activity? How should they work with the anchor  task so that they are not distracting peers? Is there any time limit or expectation  with any of the anchor options? Is there a procedure for getting help with an  anchor task? What should they do with completed work when the teacher needs  to see the workturn it in, put it in a work folder, or something else? Figure 6.3 Characteristics of High-Quality Anchor Activities  Activities are focused on essential learning goals not tangential or trivial.  Activities are engaging not rote practice.   Activities address a broad range of student interests and help make content relevant for students from a variety of backgrounds.   Activities address a broad range of readiness needs and vary from concrete to abstract, structured to open-ended, and  simple to complex.   Activities allow for a variety of ways of taking in and expressing ideas that address a broad range of learning profile needs.   Activities are presented with clear directions so students know what to do, what the final product should be, how they will  know when they are finished, and what to do with the work they generate.   Activities incorporate a monitoring system so the teacher and students can recognize the level of quality produced and any  need for adjustment.
Routines in a Differentiated Classroom Add to the list of anchor options gradually. Start the year with a small set  of anchor activity options and add new ones as students become familiar with  them and as the curriculum expands. Students will be able to suggest or create  their own anchor activities as the year progresses. Do not grade anchor activities. Look at the work students are doing to  provide brief feedback and encouragement. The clear and persistently reinforced  ethic of a differentiated classroom simply needs to be there are so many interesting things to learn, its never acceptable to just stop working. When finished  with an assignment, a student should automatically start an anchor activity as the  next assignment. All students should understand that youve designed anchor  activities to be interesting, be accessible, and increase their sense of competence.  Invite students to suggest their own ideas for anchor activities. You may want to  give students a mark not a grade for how well they work with these tasks as a  mechanism for discussing their work habits and habits of mind. Explain the ground rules for extra time. Determine and share with students conditions under which its likely for them to get additional time to work  on an assignment after you call time for the class on an assignment. For example, if you observe that a student worked very diligently on the task but simply  needs a bit more time, it makes sense to provide that time. It may also be important to give a student extra time to work on a task if they seem eager to pursue  the topic in greater depth. On the other hand, it may not be wise to give a student  additional time to complete a piece of work if they wasted time or didnt focus on  the task. Still, its necessary to look beyond the surface. It may be that the student  has enduring attention problems or that they didnt focus on the work because it  was much too difficult or much too easy. You want to provide time for students  to finish the work if it seems beneficial to do so without fostering a sense that if  they lollygag, theyll get a reprieve. On extended assignments, such as projects or  performance assessments, a petition for extended time may be useful with older  learners. The petition should make the case for an extension, and this process  tends to signal to students the difference between needing more time to achieve  high-quality work and wanting more time because of procrastination. Figure 6.4  see p. 156 provides an example of a petition created for secondary students. Teachers in differentiated classrooms need their own routines for handling  the inevitability that some students will be ready to move ahead in content before  others, that some students will need to linger on a topic in order to develop key  competencies and understandings, and that some students will need to revisit  content from earlier years to move ahead effectively with the current years 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom content goals. In other words, teachers in effectively differentiated classrooms  learn to teach forward and backward at the same time. Consider the following  strategies as you think about these scenarios. Figure 6.4 Petition for an Extension of Time on a Project Students Name:  Date:  Project:  In the space below, please make your case for requesting an extension of time on this piece of work. Remember that extensions will only be granted in cases where 1 there is good evidence that you used your time on the project effectively, 2 you  made sure the teacher was aware of your progress throughout the assignment period, and 3 there is solid evidence that  extended time will allow you to develop a product of very high quality. Length of the extension you are requesting:  Decision of the teacher:  Teacher comments: Develop procedures for providing meaningful challenge for advanced  learners. Figure 6.5 indicates some strategies teachers can use to challenge  advanced learners who have mastered the content that most of the class still  needs to study.
Routines in a Differentiated Classroom Figure 6.5 Methods to Challenge Advanced Learners Strategy Explanation Complex Applications  of Content An advanced learner may be challenged by using current knowledge, understanding, and skills in  applications that are unfamiliar, abstract, or multifaceted. Asking these students to use multiple sets  of skills simultaneously to address problems that dont have a ready solution can also be challenging. For  example, Treys 3rd grade teacher worked with his schools resource teacher for advanced learners to  find a real-world math problem for him to pursue. Trey had to use addition, subtraction, and multiplication, in addition to basic geometry, to solve the problem. Although he had studied those concepts in  class, he seldom had to use multiple operations at once. Ultimately, Trey became excited about thinking his way through an approach to math that was new to him. Advanced and  Extended Resources Challenge can result from a students use of advanced resources such as books, websites, or contacts  with experts to gain a deeper understanding of a topic. For example, employees at a local fish hatchery suggested some internet and print resources that 7th grader Luis could use to learn about endangered fish species in his area. Because Luis had an advanced level of knowledge about several topics  in his science unit, his teacher encouraged him to develop a project examining potential  ways to protect the species and to offer his solutions and suggestions to an environmental agency.  The project lasted for several months, and Luis worked on it in lieu of two differentiated unit projects  completed by most of his classmates. Focus on Interest Some students may be advanced in one content area but not be particularly intrigued by that area. In  such instances, students can learn about an area of personal interest with time that they can buy  because of early mastery of the required content. For example, Matt learned math very quickly in 5th  grade and often needed much less time than his peers to master a topic. Although he didnt find math  particularly interesting, he was very eager to learn about anthropology. Matt and his teacher developed  a long-term anthropology investigation that he would work on when he finished a math  unit early. Making Connections Students often study subjects in school in a disconnected way. Therefore, it can be exciting and  challenging for them to discover connections across content areas. For example, Jana was a very  strong reader and also knew a lot about social studies. Her teacher worked with her to develop an  ongoing anchor activity for her in which she read novels and biographies about the time periods  and people she and her classmates were studying in school. Jana kept a journal about connections  she saw across her readings in response to questions posed by her teacher and based on her own  insights. She worked on the anchor activity when she mastered social studies content rapidly, when  she finished any class task early, and when there was a social studies or language arts homework  assignment her teacher felt she didnt need to complete. Moving On Advanced learners sometimes have great talent in one content area and a hunger to learn more  about it. In such instances, it may be that the only meaningful challenge is for students to move ahead  at their own pace. This can be accomplished by providing appropriately leveled text materials and support with those materials. Sometimes, a learner may need to work with students in a more advanced  grade level in a particular subject, and the school will need to work with the student and their parents  to examine the pros and cons of advancing the students grade level. The goal should be to find the  best possible source of challenge for that student at a particular time. Results should be monitored  carefully and modified if necessary.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom With these strategies in place, students recognize that there is a consistent  plan for their growth, and they dont develop expectations for success with little  effort. Be sure you work with these students, as with all students, to provide them  with important teacher connections, to support them when work seems too difficult to them which should frequently be the case for these learners and seldom  is in school, and to provide feedback on their work. Dont forget to make these  students your partners in planning work that enriches and extends them as learners. Like all students, they need and deserve voice in their learning. They often  have insights that might not occur to their teachers and that can benefit their  growthand ours as well. Advanced students need teacher support and attention as much as any other  student doesespecially if their work is truly appropriately challenging. They also  will likely need you to help them identify learning opportunities that are robust  and meaningful and to move forward with that work. When possible, coplanning  or coteaching with a specialist in gifted education can help you understand how  to develop student work at an advanced level of challenge. Recall always that  meaningful challenge does not stem from asking students to do more of what  they have already mastered or from work that is hard. Hard work is tedious  and burdensome and feels punitive. Intellectually challenging work, by contrast,  is engaging, intriguing, curiosity-provoking, enlightening, and purposeful. Develop procedures for buying time. Struggling students will sometimes need to continue working with current tasks after other students have completed their work. You may also need to guide these students to develop essential  knowledge, understanding, and skills from previous years. You must first identify  the knowledge, understanding, and skills that are truly essential to the students  continued growth and that the student has not yet developed. By focusing on  genuinely nonnegotiable knowledge that the student must master and eliminating what would be nice to know if there were time, it is usually possible to identify  a substantial amount of time for working backward on gaps in knowledge from  previous years while still helping the student progress with current goals. Figure  6.6 suggests some mechanisms for focusing students attention on nonnegotiable  knowledge, understanding, and skills, both past and current. Whichever strategies you use for this purpose, students must still be asked  to do essential, proactively planned, sequentially offered, and consistently monitored work. These principles are imperative at all grade levels and in all content  areas. Sometimes, coplanning or coteaching with a learning specialist can yield 
Routines in a Differentiated Classroom Figure 6.6 Methods to Buy Time for Struggling Students to Build  Foundational Learning Strategy Explanation Learning Contracts,  Menus, Centers, and  Computer Programs Instructional strategies such as these are designed to help teachers provide varied work for  students around common topics, skills, or concepts. A student who needs additional practice  with academic vocabulary in science, for example, may have a contract or learning menu focused  on science vocabulary, whereas other students will focus on different content. These approaches  also allow teachers to incorporate both current and past content into student assignments. Regular Individual and  Small-Group Instruction Its important to plan consistent time to work with individuals or small groups who have learning  gaps or who learn content with difficulty. This is a particularly efficient means of understanding  students needs, providing targeted instruction, and assessing student progress. Alternative Homework  Assignments Continually attempting homework that is beyond a students reach leads to frustration and  confusion. If a particular homework assignment is inappropriate for a student, it is much wiser to  give that student an assignment that helps them make progress with past learning gaps. Scaffolded Assignments It is often possible to create a scaffolded version of an assignment that other students can complete  with little or no support. Scaffolding can include step-by-step directions, examples, watch out for  warnings where students might get confused, hints written in the columns, content that is rewritten in more straightforward language, recorded directions or resource materials, and text in both  English and a students first language. Double-Dipping It is sometimes helpful for elementary students to work with a content area more than once a day. For  example, a student might meet with two reading groups to practice decoding or comprehension skills.  Some secondary school students can be placed in two periods of the same subjectin one, the  teacher differentiates the content for students, and in the other, the teacher reinforces the goals of  the first class by teaching the ideas in a different way, probing student thinking for understanding and  misunderstanding and focusing on particularly complex skills. In the latter instance, the two class  periods must be very tightly coordinated and aligned. considerable benefits for both you and your students. Always remember, though,  that remediation should not dominate a students life in the classroom. All students need to work with powerful and engaging ideas and use essential skills to  explore those ideas. All students need to apply essential skills to meaningful and  relevant work and transfer powerful new ideas beyond the classroom. A primary  focus on remediation rarely, if ever, lifts students up. Its much more likely to  confine them to tedium in school and limit their horizons beyond the classroom  Bland, 2022.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Routines for Keeping Track of Progress Teachers in all classrooms have the responsibility to monitor student proficiency  in relation to designated learning goals. A differentiated classroom varies only in  that the teacher assumes students may sometimes work with different goals at different times or for varied lengths of time. Its not difficult to know who has mastered what in a differentiated classroom as long as the teacher is clear about the  essential learning goals and has a system for monitoring student growth toward  those goals. With a clear scope and sequence or delineation of what students  should learn, a teacher can monitor a particular students progress toward established goals, even if the student is working with different materials, on a different  timetable, or with tasks at different levels of difficulty. Figure 6.7 provides an example of a record-keeping system used in an  elementary classroom to monitor student growth in the key elements of reading. Pages are alphabetized by student name, and each form is accompanied by  several blank sheets of paper on which the teacher attaches or writes observations  obtained in a variety of contexts. Even when students work with varied assignments, the teacher is able to readily monitor their progress toward common  goals. Figure 6.8 see p. 162 presents a similar example at a secondary level.  There are also numerous online tools that can help teachers monitor and digitally  keep track of student growth in essential knowledge, understanding, and skills. An Important Reminder School is a place of learning for students and teachers alike. Even though every  procedure and routine in this book is valuable in providing structures that allow  flexible teaching and learning, it makes no sense to teach students of any age to  understand and implement all of them at once. Your goal should be to begin with  the routines that seem the most fundamental to student success and introduce  new ones as they are needed and as students are ready for thempolishing and  revising as you go. Similarly, teachers who are new to leading and managing a differentiated  classroom need to see themselves as learners, too. For most teachers, its overwhelming to think about planning, implementing, and supervising all of these  routines at once. Teachers should accord themselves the privilege of learning  over time, just as they do their students. Choose one or two routines you feel  would be helpful to move your teaching forward. Plan for them carefully. Implement them when you feel ready. Study the results as you go. Take time to polish 
Routines in a Differentiated Classroom Figure 6.7 Record of Reading Progress Student:  1st Assessment Date:  2nd Assessment Date:  3rd Assessment Date:  4th Assessment Date:  Elements of Reading 1 2 3 4 Reading Strategies   skips unknown words and reads on   guesses what the word might be   starts over and reads the whole sentence   derives meaning from the pictures or words   uses beginning letter as a clue   asks for help Phonemic Awareness Concepts of Print Phonics Word Recognition Fluency Comprehension Teacher Comments: 1 2 3 4
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Figure 6.8 Checklist of Writing Skills and Competencies Student:  Date:  Evaluation:  Content and Expression   Main idea is evident and appropriate.   Details support key ideaargument.   Descriptive details engage reader and extend ideas.   Shows understanding of topic.   Shows insight about topic. Organization   Effective title.   Introduction establishes purpose.   Logical flow of paragraphs.   Logical flow of ideas within paragraphs.   Effective transitions to guide reader.   Conclusion summarizesemphasizes key ideas. Style   Word choice is appropriate for audiencetopic.   Word choice is precise for purpose.   Vocabulary is varied and engaging.   Sentences are complete.   Sentences are clear.   Sentence length varies.   Sentence structure is varied. Mechanics   Subjects  verbs agree.   Verb tenses are consistent.   Subjects  objects agree.   Plurals are used correctly.   Capitalization is used correctly.   End punctuation is correct.   Commas are used correctly.   Apostrophes are used correctly.   Spelling is correct. Teacher Comments:
Routines in a Differentiated Classroom and become comfortable with one routine or set of routines before you take on  others. If you pace yourself in a persistent pattern of growth, eventually you will not  be able to recall what it was like to teach any other way. Not surprisingly, your  students will learn the routines more rapidly at that point. In the meantime, however, be patient with yourself. Be a learner. Take one step, then another. Figure  things out along with your students. Dont be afraid to stumble along the way.  Most important, enjoy the journey.
In a real sense all life is interrelated. All men are caught in an inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of destiny. Whatever affects one  directly affects all indirectly. I can never be what I ought to be until you are  what you ought to be, and you can never be what you ought to be until I am  what I ought to be. This is the interrelated structure of reality. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Human beings seldom get excited about the need to make big changes in their  livesand teachers are human beings. In the face of evidence that we would fare  better if we exercised more, we often assert that we simply dont have the time.  Faced with the need to save for a rainy day, many of us declare that there simply  is no margin in our budgets. Presented with evidence that student-focused teaching has multiple benefits for students and teachers, many teachers have a ready  and substantial list of yes, but . . . statements at hand. 7 Yes, But . . . Common Sticking Points About Differentiation
Yes, But . . . Reservations and Responses Here are some common yes, buts . . . that weve heard . . . and that you may be  holding in your own mind:  I cant differentiate instruction because I have to cover the standards with  everyone, and differentiation requires too much class time away from that.  I cant differentiate instruction because the standardized test is not  differentiated.  I cant differentiate instruction because Im already too busy and have  absolutely no extra time in my life for planning differentiation.  I cant differentiate instruction because I teach too many students.  I cant differentiate instruction because I have only one textbook.  I cant differentiate instruction because my classroom is too small.  I cant differentiate instruction because it wont prepare students for  college.  I cant differentiate instruction because parents wont accept it. The reality is, of course, that most of these yes, buts . . . are easily addressed. I cant differentiate instruction because I have to cover the standards  with everyone, and differentiation takes too much class time away from  that. There are at least three issues with this argument that are important, if  difficult, to consider. First, a curriculum should be much more than a list of standards. Second, a race to cover curriculum is highly unlikely to produce durable  and transferable outcomes for students. Third, it does not, or need not, take more  class time to differentiate instruction than it would take to teach a nondifferentiated lesson in which there is time for students to process what they are learning. Envisioning curriculum as a list or set of standards is much like feeding young  people vitamin tablets three times a day and believing that to be as nutritious or  satisfying as eating meals that are appealing, varied, and healthy. Its like making  the case that since people can now see images of most places on the planet via the  internet, they have no need to travel beyond their own backyard. All three omit  the human need for meaning, experience, and fulfillment. Equating coverage of curriculum with either real teaching or actual learning overlooks two important and interconnected realities. First, learning doesnt  happen to students; it happens in them. Passive learning is an oxymoron. The  brain is not well suited to remembering large amounts of information for even 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom a short time span, and certainly not for extended periods. When coverage is the  goal of teaching, it is likely that the teacher is the only one who is truly learning and even that is doubtful. Second, learning requires sense making, or processing of information, ideas,  and skills in order to integrate them into memory and to enable transfer of learning. For that reason, virtually every class period or lesson needs to include time  for students to make sense of or come to own what the teacher is asking them to  learn. Learning happens in those times when students are on center stage rather  than when the teacher is on stage. When we allow coverage to deplete time for  student processing, we have lost touch with the meaning and mechanics of both  teaching and learning. Finally, if there is time during a class as there should be for students to process learning, then there is time to differentiate instruction. If students will have  15 minutes in todays class to work in small groups to solve a problem, try out  a newly introduced form of self-expression, explain in a diagram why a science  demonstration produced the results it produced, and so on, the work students  do during that 15 minutes can be differentiated. In other words, it doesnt have  to take more time for students to complete a differentiated assignment than the  nondifferentiated version would requireand student outcomes should be more  promising. At the core of all three reasons why coverage is a highly questionable  approach to teaching and learning is this: learning happens when an individual  is engaged with what they are learningthat is, when the content seems interesting, relevant, worthwhile to the learnerand when the learner comes to  understand the purpose and mechanics of contentits whys, whats, and hows.  The terms engagement and understanding have, for many years, been used in the  field of psychology to describe underpinnings of successful learning. Educational  neuroscience uses the terms meaning and sense to note the brains requirements  for learning Sousa  Tomlinson, 2018. The meaning of the two pairs of terms  is the same. The two domains of research have drawn the same conclusion: to  learn in ways that make us stronger, more productive, and better able to grapple  with problems and issues, both known and unknown, requires student engagement or meaning as well as understanding or sense Sousa  Tomlinson,  2018; Tomlinson, 2021. A curriculum of coverage rarely results in a learning  environment that provides those critical conditions for durable and significant  learning Wiggins  McTighe, 2005.
Yes, But . . . I cant differentiate instruction because the standardized test is not differentiated. Differentiating curriculum and instruction makes it more likely, not  less, that students will learn what we ask them to learn. The rare IEP aside, differentiation doesnt steer a classroom of students with varied learning needs toward  a varied range of learning outcomes depending on individual students perceived  ability or current achievement level. What differentiation does is provide varied  conditions conducive to helping students with a range of learning needs master  the same set of learning outcomes. As one educator explained, differentiation provides different pathways through the same woods. Students who progressively  succeed with learning throughout the months before a standardized test are more  likely to perform well on the test than students who struggle within one-size-fitsall curriculum and instruction. In addition, these students are more likely to be  able to approach the test with confidence and to work with it more seriously and  hopefully. When standardized test prep either becomes the curriculum or dictates  instruction, we have made a decision that is dangerously limiting for both teachers and learners. I cant differentiate instruction because Im already too busy and have  absolutely no extra time in my life for planning differentiation. The idea is  not to plan everything the way you always have and then plan differentiation on  top of that. Rather, it is to plan instruction in a differentiated fashion from the  outset. In addition, its essential for teachers to pace themselves and move into  new ways of thinking about teaching and learning at a rate that produces growth  and change without being overwhelming. Begin by using some strategies that take less time to plan: standing at the  classroom door as students enter and leave so you can exchange brief comments  with them, providing peer mentors to support newcomers to the class and English learners, giving students a choice of ways to work on an assignment or to  express what they have learned, or meeting with small groups of students as other  students complete assignments. Begin differentiating in just one subject, if you  are an elementary teacher, or in just one class, if you are a secondary teacher. It  makes sense to begin with the subject or class in which students have the greatest  need, but it makes sense in a different way to begin with the subject or class that  is most comfortable for you. In differentiated classes, teachers ask students to take their own next steps  every day. So ask that of yourself too. Go at a pace that challenges you but doesnt  frustrate you. Just dont stand still. The good news is that, like any worthy skill  set, the skills of differentiation become easier and more natural as you continue 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom to develop them. In time, they become just how you do things in your role as a  teacher. I cant differentiate instruction because I teach too many students. We  have heard this comment from teachers who have 5 or 6 students in their classroom as well as from those whose classrooms accommodate 50 students or more.  Its hard not to advocate for smaller class sizes, but at the same time, we regularly  see teachers with reduced class sizes who continue to teach just as they did when  their classrooms were packed, as well as teachers with very large classes who work  persistently and effectively to know their students and respond to their key needs. Research on the impact of reducing class size is a mixed bag. There is little, if  any, agreement on the number of students that is most beneficial in a class or the  percentage of reduction necessary to make a difference in student learning. Some  studies point to generally small achievement benefits for very young students  in classes with greatly reduced class sizes, and other studies suggest reducing class  size has a positive impact on achievement when the class is composed of vulnerable students Bowe et al., 2017; Chen, 2022. John Hattie 2017, whose meta-analysis of 1,000 education-focused metaanalyses considered 50,000 studies including 250 million students, ranked class  size as 190th out of 256 possible positive influences on student achievement not impressive! Some policy analysts find that while decreasing class size is popular among  parents and teachers, funding class size reduction eliminates expenditures on  other initiatives that would likely have a greater impact on student achievementfor example, higher salaries for teachers, developing teacher expertise,  and other conditions that would enable hiring larger numbers of highly prepared  candidates Chen, 2022; Hattie, 2009, 2012, 2017; Jepsen, 2015. Hattie in  Chen, 2022 reports that the key reason class size reduction does not have the  impact we would imagine is that teachers generally do not change the way they  teach when class sizes are reduced. In the end, a decision about whether differentiation is possible given the  number of students in your class should also factor in that this is the only 4th  grade year or kindergarten year, Algebra 1 year, and so on your students will  ever have. Waiting until we all have smaller class sizes to begin considering differentiation could be a long and costly wait. When we believe we cannot do  something, we prove ourselves right, and when we believe we can do that same  thing, we again prove ourselves right. Start with small steps. Build as you go.  Like parenting or mastering a musical instrument or becoming an impressive 
Yes, But . . . basketball player, learning to differentiate instruction is a journey, not a moment.  Our students need us to commit to the journey. I cant differentiate instruction because I have only one textbook. There  are countless materials available to teachers and students now other than the  textbook. Many texts provide supplementary materials to support differentiation  as well as varied modes of taking in knowledge and expressing learning. School  media specialists are also valuable resources for matching materials to student  needs. The internet is full of resources that support learning of particular content  in a great variety of ways. I cant differentiate instruction because my classroom is too small. It  would be great to teach in a spatially generous setting, but many of us dont have  that luxury. Again, a small room size doesnt seem to discourage teachers who  mean to differentiate instructionalthough those teachers would doubtless  love to have a larger roomand a larger room does not seem to be an automatic  catalyst for student-focused instruction. Ask your students to help you figure out  ways to maximize the space you have. Be resourceful together! I cant differentiate instruction because it wont prepare students for  college. This yes, but . . . often reflects two different concerns. One is that if  high school and even middle school students are not learning to listen to lectures,  take notes, and figure out how to study for the kind of exams we presume they  will experience in college, they will not be prepared for the way college classes are  taught. The other concern is that differentiation mollycoddles students instead of  preparing them for the hardships ahead. There are at least two reasons to rethink those two assertions. First, schools  should engage in developmentally appropriate instruction. Clearly, middle  school students are not at the same developmental level as college students, and  high school students arent either. Effective differentiation absolutely prepares  students for higher education by working to ensure that they learn the content,  habits of mind, academic skills, and self-awareness necessary for continuing  learning following whatever path they take beyond high school. There is little  reason to assume that academic boot camp is the wisest route for preparing  students for life after K12. Second, the image of the college professor who stands behind a podium  and lectures for an hour or two or three at a time does not reflect reality in many  posthigh school institutions. Many colleges and universities offer extensive support services for students who have learning disorders, problems with attending  or remaining still for extended periods, executive function challenges, and a wide 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom range of physical challenges. Even colleges with large first-year classes offer lab  sections or tutorials to support student success. More to the point, many colleges and universities provide ongoing and often very high quality support for  faculty members in teaching practices that support the success of the full range  of learners they instruct. A worthwhile book called What the Best College Teachers Do Bain, 2004 finds that the best college teachers are not, in fact, lecturers  who assume their job is to cover content and the job of their students is to figure  it out from there. They recognize that teaching isnt just delivering lectures; its  doing anything they can to help and encourage students to learncreating  conditions in which most, if not all, of our students will realize their potential to  learn p. 173. That sounds a great deal like differentiation, which seeks always to support  students at their current points of development and to prepare them for the  next chapter of their lives by helping them develop as whole human beings, not  restrict learning in ways that do little to commend its appeal and value. I cant differentiate instruction because parents wont accept it. Few  parents recoil at the idea of a teacher who genuinely cares about the growth of  their child and who is willing to invest in making sure each student has the most  productive year possible. This is what differentiation aims to do. If you begin a  conversation with a parent who questions differentiated instruction by explaining  that your goal is to help their child learn as much and as efficiently as possible and  that you are hoping they will be your partner in making that happen, youre not  likely to meet resistance. In effectively differentiated classes, students feel more  seen, accepted, and appropriately challenged. Those students generally go home  in a positive state of mind. Seeing their children feel happy and productive is  likely to make parents happy as well. If you teach in a context where parents and therefore, probably students  feel highly competitive, be ready to listen to their concerns and to answer in ways  that respond to those concerns reasonably. When parents tell you their child  is finding the work too easy, listen. Watch that student carefully. Parents know  students in ways we cannotespecially early in a school year. Maybe the parents  are correct. On the other hand, if more complex work results in anxiety or work of  poor quality, be ready to talk with the parent about the stepwise process of learning. Skipping steps can result in long-term struggles. Help the parent understand  that your goal is to help the student move forward smoothly and successfully, not  to hold the student back. If parents of an advanced learner feel their child is being  punished with work that is harder than what you assign to other students in 
Yes, But . . . the class, help the parents understand that your role is to ensure their child has  the opportunity to grow, not march in place. Parents of a talented pianist would  not accept a piano teacher who only asked the young person to play age appropriate pieces. Parents of a talented athlete would not accept a coach who refused  to challenge their child in a way that would build athletic skills. In fact, parents  should be distressed by situations in which teachers fail to recognize and develop  a learners strengths. In terms of challenge, the goal in a differentiated classroom  is to have students work regularly at a level of challenge that pushes them a little  too hard for comfort and to provide a support system that enables them to succeed with work that, at first, seems out of reach. These yes, buts . . . are common, predictable, and understandable. They  provide a safety net, a shield, in the face of a call to disrupt the generally comfortable routines weve established. To the degree that we can cling to them, we  feel justified in our sense that this differentiation thing is impracticalat least  in our own classrooms. Nevertheless, many teachers who initially have a yes,  but . . . response grow increasingly uncomfortable in the face of student frustration and stagnation. Those teachers finally take the risk and implement studentfocused approaches in their classroom, and they often have three realizations.  First, their students are the beneficiaries of their efforts. Second, addressing their  students needs wasnt nearly as forbidding as they had assumed it would be.  Third, they feel better about teaching and about themselves as teachers. Incrementally but steadily, these teachers learn to be responsive to the  students they teach, and positive student outcomes encourage continued teacher  development. Somewhere in this process, the yes, buts . . . cease to serve a  purpose and become an artifact of the past. In other words, propelled by a sense  of necessity and nurtured by a sense of accomplishment, many teachers answer  their own concerns through increasingly effective practices. Not all yes, but . . . statements are knee-jerk excuses that typify an early  response to change. Some are more complex and confounding. They persist even  as teachers make changes toward effective differentiation in their classrooms.  Two of the more challenging concerns involve students who bring complex challenges of their own into the classroom and grading in a differentiated classroom.  The remainder of this chapter provides some thoughts and guidance on these  two areas, both of which have implications for leading and managing a differentiated classroom.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom But My Students Are Different A number of teachers who genuinely desire to provide all of their students with  the opportunity to access excellence and maximize their capacities are held back  by worries that some, many, or all of them cant handle the sort of flexible and collaborative classroom that differentiation advocates. In essence, their response is  something like, Differentiation would be wonderful, but I dont think you know  the students I teach. The comment is not so much a dismissive yes, but . . . as  it is a real sense that at least some of their students are not now capable of making decisions in their own self-interest, collaborating, or even following general  guidelines for classroom civility. It is important to note that virtually all teachers, at any given time, teach some  students whose deprivation, anger, discouragement, disillusionment, alienation,  frustration, or trauma is so great that it is difficult, if not impossible, for them to  exhibit sustained contributions to a classroom community. Working with only a  few of these students can be both challenging and gut-wrenching. When a school  or class is heavily populated with students whose lives are markedly off-course in  one or more ways, the challenge feels massive. There is no formula for teachers  to follow in such settings. These classrooms demand from the teacher the highest  levels of empathy, persistence, thought, and creativity. Still, there are principles that derive from both research and effective classroom practice to guide teachers who work with deeply disaffected or emotionally  challenged students. Well share a few of these principles in the following sections, including some general ideas about leading and guiding students whose  lives are more difficult than a young persons should have to be, and well share  some guidelines for working with particular groups of students who may experience and create difficulties in the classroom. In most classes, a majority of students are ready, willing, and able to be part  of a learning community that is safe, welcoming, challenging, supportive, and  responsive to their needs. There will likely be a few students who sometimes  need additional support and reminders about procedures and guidelines. In such  classes, the major challenge of leading and managing a classroom comes from  one or a very few students who consistently push against the norms. In other  classrooms, a majority of students do not affiliate with school, and the climb for  teacher and students to achieve an orderly, flexible classroom is much steeper.  The guidelines below are relevant to both contexts, but they will likely need to be  implemented differently in the two contexts.
Yes, But . . . Invest heavily in establishing strong teacherstudent connections and  building trust. Make sure the classroom feels safe, welcoming, and supportive  to each learner. Examine your own mindset, biases, and determination to provide  dynamic learning opportunities for each of your students. Whenever possible,  learn each students name and its correct pronunciation before the first day the  student comes to your class. Meet and observe each student with unconditional  positive regardyour belief that a student doesnt have to be something or do  something to earn your approval Gobir, 2021. Let your students know you  want to get to know them so that you can teach them more effectivelyand  simply because you think a bonus of your role as a teacher is learning about the  people youll spend time with during the year. Help them get to know you. Have interesting things for your students to do from the first moments of  class, and work to be sure students see themselves in what they are learning. Plan  for student engagement. Study your students consistently to begin to understand  what seems to work for them as individuals and as a group and plan accordingly.  Ask them to tell you what they think makes a great class and what they wish  teachers wouldnt do. Ask for student input whenever that is feasibleand honor  what you hear. Let students know that you want to earn their trust, and make  doing that a priority from the outset of the year. Chad Prather, a colleague of ours, has taught almost solely in urban settings  where many students have learned to distrust adults in school. He is white; most  of his high school history students are Brown or Black. His thinking and planning  for the early days of a school year is evident in the passage below. Trust is cultivated over time; it does not just happen. The start matters, though.  Week 1 is a big deal. I go into it every year wanting to lay the groundwork for  some serious trust-building, and I tend to feel really good about it . . . right up to  the moment when we get to the Rules and Management slide. I struggle every  year with this slide. Theres something fundamentally awkward about saying, I  am trying to build trust, but I am going to manage you, and here are rules for  you to follow. I recover quickly, though, because Im confident that what has  happened in the past will probably happen again: Somewhere along the line,  something in most of my students will click toward me, and I will click toward  them, and eventually most of us will be clicking together. But I want more. I want my students, all of them, to start our time together  feeling that theyre on the cusp of something different. That in this classroom,  they do not need to feel policed or compelled into compliance with more rules.  I want them to get that this classroom will be a place of co-ownership and  mutual accountabilitya place of agreements, not rules, and a place where the 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom norms wont only be normative to me. I want them to see that Im not asking  for obedience but partnership. This may feel awkward, too, because how often  have they felt like partners with their teachers? But this will be a different kind  of awkward, more hopeful and inviting. How do I invite students into partnership with me? They hardly know me.  And lets be honest: I look like lots of the people who havent had their backs in  the past. Despite 16 years as a teacher, I am still struggling to know how to do  thishow to shift from rule-giving to agreement-making. Fortunately, I have a  colleague who does this work beautifully, and I have learned over time that asking for help is liberating. in Tomlinson, 2021, p. 250 Chad invites his associate, who is known to and respected by his students,  to lead a discussion of what agreements they feel would benefit the members of  this class. She asks the students and Chad to sit with her in a circle. She begins a  discussion based on their experiences and shares some that were positive in her  development. She provides time for thinking. She points to the different perspectives shes hearing from the students. She affirms the values they express and  moves slowly from those values to agreements by posing four questions: How  should teachers treat students? How should students treat teachers? How should  students treat one another? How should everyone treat the space they will share? The pace is slowthe process takes multiple class periods. In time, the  group has constructed its first agreement. Teachers will not judge students for  their emotions. They will try to understand what is going on and create opportunities for upset students to re-engage. If the students cant or choose not to, then  they will be respectfully dismissed Tomlinson, 2021, p. 252. Chad reflects that  by the time students had considered all four questions and the process ended,  he and his students felt like partners in the work they had completed, and he felt  ready to roll out the process in his other classes. Dont lower your expectations for students. This is just as true when the  focus is behavior, classroom participation, and self-awareness as a learner as it is  when the focus is cognitive outcomes. In regard to cognitive development, there is more than ample evidence that  remediating students often further hobbles them e.g., Berger et al., 2014;  Hopfenberg  Levin, 2008. What they need to succeed are high expectations,  acceleration that focuses on essential content to propel them forward, and support for the journey Hopfenberg  Levin, 2008. In regard to meaningful participation in a classroom community, the same  principle holds. Of all students in a school who need to learn the skills of academic 
Yes, But . . . self-awareness, peer collaboration, and community membership, those who need  them most are those who are most alienated from the skills and the promise they  represent. The path to achieving these skills with disaffected students is not easy,  linear, straightforward, or quick. Nonetheless, you cannot serve disenfranchised  students well unless you keep your eyes on the destination they need to reach and  guide them steadily in that direction. In other words, we fail students when we  look at what we believe they cannot do and lower our sights accordingly rather  than look at what they need to do and continually try to lift them to that level. Marva Collins 1992, an African American educator known as a champion  of equity and excellence for students of color and students living in poverty, says  she discouraged her students from being average, adding that she believed each  of her students could learn significantly so long as she did not teach them that  they could not. She summarizes that philosophy: When our children walk in the door, I say, Welcome to success. Say goodbye  to failure, because you are not going to fail. You are here to win, and if I have  to care more about you than you care about you, thats the way it will be. It  doesnt matter what kind of disciplinary problems they had in previous schools,  there are with us to succeed. We will not let them fail. p. 16 Move slowly but persistently toward helping all students work productively and create quality work. You may or may not introduce ideas and routines more slowly in settings where many students exhibit challenging behavior.  You may or may not use the routines for briefer periods in a class or day. You  may need to practice and model routines more frequently. You may have more  false starts and disappointments along the way. What you should not do is accept  the inevitability of a tight-ship classroom, which, by its nature, communicates  to students a lack of trust, eliminates the opportunity for students to engage with  meaningful content and with one another, and deprives students of the chance to  take control of their lives as learners. Learn from the warm demanders. Its often the case that students  who are perennially disruptive in one class work quite well in another. The   differenceparticularly for students from low-income or African American   backgroundsis often that teachers in the classes where students are successful are warm demanders Alexander, 2016; Berry, 2021; Bondy  Ross, 2008;  Ware, 2006. These teachers have two critical traits that may seem paradoxical  but actually send important signals to studentsespecially those whose feelings about school are ambivalent or negative. First, the teachers are clear and 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom unequivocal about expectations for behavior and work. Said otherwise, they  dont put up with nonsense in the classroom. At the same time, however, they  communicate to students their unconditional acceptance, unwavering belief in  each students capacity to succeed, and full partnership in the goal of achieving  success. In some cultures, parents are direct or even blunt in stating expectations and correcting misbehavior. For students from these backgrounds, such  directness signals adult caring, and the warm demander fits that profile. Even  students whose cultural expectations are for a more subdued form of communication may benefit from this clarity if they lack the internal structures necessary  to make good judgments on their own behalf and if the demands are enveloped  in the warmth of understanding and acceptance. Corita Kent, a graphic artist and  author, once noted that a friend is someone who loves you just as you are and  pays you the compliment of expecting you to become something better. Warm  demanders do just that. In the process, they provide the external structures necessary to survive the moment and the guidance necessary to ultimately create  internal structures that lead to self-direction. Remember that young people will generally succeed if they can. Susan  Craig 2008, 2017 and Ross Greene 2014, 2021a, 2021b are two of many  experts working with disaffected learners who remind us that young people find it  more satisfying to succeed than to fail. For this reason, most students will almost  always do what is in their best interest if they have the skills to do so. Understanding this will help you think about an event or about the classroom in general  from the students perspective and will help you avoid the trap of blaming the  student. The two pertinent questions become What academic and personal  skills does this student need to develop to handle situations like this? and What  can I do to help this student develop those skills and regain agency in their life? Trauma involves experiences that exceed ones capacity to cope. Such experiences include but are not limited to impacts of race, sexual orientation, disability,  poverty, physical abuse, and immigration status. As a result of trauma, students  are unable to access the brain cortexthe area of the brain in which higher-order  thinking takes place. Essentially, their learning is held hostage by relentless fear  and hyperarousal that derail the focus needed to achieve academically. The tension and anxiety are magnified as teachers and peers look at them as problems to  be dealt withas if they were willfully creating classroom disruptionsrather  than understanding that they are young people in acute need of safety and support Craig, 2017.
Yes, But . . . Aim to look at each of your students with empathyto try to see the world  through their eyes. Try to understand the circumstances in their lives that make  growing up more challenging than it ought to be and to offer each student trustworthy support, including the skills and habits of mind they will need for the journey theyre taking. When things go off course, remember that the road to success  is never without pitfalls and perils. Be there to help the student think about the  derailing, to understand what went wrong, and to craft a plan for resuming the  journey with surer footing. Invest heavily in trying to understand the cause of a students misbehavior. Begin with the understanding that behavior is communication and protest.  Young people, especially, often dont have the words to explain negative experiences they have suffered, and so they speak in the only way they can express the  hurtthrough behavior. A student may experience racial animosity on a daily  basis, live with the deprivation that accompanies poverty, feel rejected or be bullied by peers, be frustrated by work that is out of reach, be underchallenged and  bored on a daily basis, be hungry, see school as irrelevant, find it impossible to  sit and listen as much as is required, have a chronically ill family member, or be a  victim of abuse or neglect. The gamut of possibilities is long and wide. It can be  very helpful to understand the origin of counterproductive behavior in order to  address it in a way that helps the student make sense of life rather than in a way  that further complicates life for the student. Greene 2014, 2021a reminds us  that we dont need a diagnosis to address maladaptive behavior, because a diagnosis doesnt yield any strategies for moving ahead. Understanding the world  from the students point of view, however, can be immensely useful in helping you  determine potentially beneficial next steps away from the problem and toward  working with the student for a constructive and long-lasting solution. From that  point, you will be better positioned to help the student understand their behavior  and to develop responses that are increasingly positive and productive. Be proactive. Craig 2008 recalls being a young teacher who was focused  on student accountability for behavior. One day, she complained about a student who was regularly disruptive, and a colleague turned the tables and asked,  What can you change about your teaching practice to help this child be more  successful? p. 13. Recall some key tenets of this book and of differentiation.  Students work more productively and successfully when the classroom feels safe,  when they feel valued and supported, when the work teachers ask them to do is  at an appropriate challenge level, when the work is personally andor culturally  relevant and therefore interesting, and when there are opportunities to learn 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom and express learning in ways that are efficient for them. Working diligently to  ensure that these conditions prevail in the classroom eliminates many problems.  A veteran teacher once noted, If the classroom system works for the kid, the kid  generally quits working the system. However, be cognizant of patterns associated with a students problematic behavior. You might increase the likelihood of  a good outcome by seating the student in a particular place, providing step-bystep directions rather than a long paragraph, reminding the student of a goal they  set, assigning students to groups rather than risking the high likelihood that a  particular student will be the last one chosen by a group, allowing a student extra  time to get organized before beginning a task, ensuring opportunities for students  to move around as they learn, or having a Quiet Zone in the classroom where  a student can go to regain calm when tensions are mounting. As in all aspects of  teaching, planning for success and planning to avoid failure are powerful tools.  Its important to recall that the foundation of student success is nearly always a  strong teacherstudent connection built on mutual respect, empathy,and trust. Pick your battles. Dont let smaller issues become flash points. When a student exhibits a negative behavior, try some small, gentle moves like these:  Look at the student with bewilderment. The message you want to send is  that the student is wonderful but what the student is doing is not wonderful,  so youre confused.  Tap on an item that shouldnt be on a table or desk as you continue to pass  by. This gives the student an opportunity to save face and get it right.  Assume intelligence by simply saying, You know what to do. This tells  the student you know they are smart and you dont need to tell them what  to do next.  State a fact like, Your desk has stuff under it or There are things you  need to do before we begin our next activity. This allows you to avoid nagging or embarrassing a student.  Ask a quick question like, What should you be doing now? When a student knows what to do, this allows them to take positive action without your  telling the student what to do Ervin, 2022. Dont take negative behavior personally. Theres a powerful moment in  the movie Stand and Deliver when the teacher hands a book to a student only to  have the student intentionally let the book fall to the floor. In a single gesture, the  teacher picks the book up, opens it to the correct place, and continues to explain 
Yes, But . . . what the student needs to do. By refusing to allow the students challenge to escalate, the teacher kept the focus on learning and maintained a positive interaction  with the student. Keep the focus on learning whenever possible. Dont become a  co-combatant with the student. Someone has to be the adult, and that someone  is you. Dont be afraid to delay handling a tense situation. Of course, challenging  behavior must be handled swiftly if student safety is an issue, but most of the time,  its both possible and wise to delay dealing with a behavior issue Greene, 2014,  2021a, 2021b. You may simply say to a student privately, if at all possible, I  see that you are angry right now and its difficult for you to concentrate on your  work. I want to talk with you in a little while about this, but for right now, please  write about how youre feeling in your journal. The immediate prescription for  the students next step will vary, of course, depending on their specific needs. The  intention is to allow some time to think before you address the issue. Eliminating  heat from a tense situation allows light to enter the picture. Demonstrate empathy and respect to identify solutions to a problem.  When the time is right, talk with the student privately and with the goal of finding a reasonable and acceptable solution to the problem. Greene 2008 suggests  beginning conversations with comments such as Ive noticed that youre not  getting your homework done. Help me know whats up and Talk about what  happened earlier today when you were so angry with Charles. I need to understand how you were feeling. As the conversation progresses, guide it toward  a problemsolving mode. Say something like, Lets figure out together how to  address this. What do you think we can do to avoid this problem again? Ultimately, the goal is to develop a series of steps that the student will take and you  will support to eliminate, or at least minimize, the issue. Finally, you might end  the conversation with a comment such as Thank you for trusting me enough  to tell me how you feel and for working with me to find a solution we can use.  Along the way, its important to be sure you both understand three things: the  problem that evoked the negative behavior, that there has been an opportunity  to explore that problem and a potential solution in some depth, and when a peer  or other individual has been harmed or wronged by the students behavior, how  the student might go about righting the wrong. It may appear to some that this approach to maladaptive behavior is too  easy on the student or that it lets the student off the hook. In truth, this  approach involves two elements central to differentiation: teaching and leadership. It helps students understand themselves better, develop the insights and 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom skills necessary for continued personal and academic growth, and establish  the kind of trust thats required to follow a leader to a better place. Discipline  implies teaching and learning; punishment does not, and empowering students  to address and correct their own behavior is more effective than punishing  negative behaviorin both the short and long term Smith et al., 2015. When a  students behavior is significantly disruptive or dangerous and must be punished,  it is still important to use interactions with the student as a teachinglearning  opportunity. But Grading Requirements  Dont Work with Differentiation A discussion about grading and report cards seems somehow unrelated to  classroom management, yet the classroom is a system and all of its elements are  interdependent. Confusion about grading and differentiation is rarely an easily dismissed  yes, but . . . excuse. Rather, it usually reflects genuine concern by teachers who  work diligently to teach responsively to student strengths and needs but feel  stymied by an apparent dissonance between the philosophy and goals of a differentiated classroom and those of grading. One teacher notes, For nine weeks,  I play the role of encourager, coach, and advocate. Then, on the last day of the  nine weeks when grade reports go out, I become the judge. My students feel the  change of roles as acutely as I do. It makes me feel like a fraud. Those teachers worry that grading, as schools typically practice it, seems  structured to be punitive to students who struggle, to reward students who are  highly able and often coast to success and damage those who are not, and to  erode teacherstudent trust. Alternatively, they worry that, somehow, differentiation requires a teacher to jiggle grades so that struggling students receive  elevated grades for lesser goals. They are then concerned that those grades will be  misinterpreted by parents, teachers, and counselors at the next level of schooling.  A colleague of ours who is an expert in measurement and grading often remarks  that there is no problem inherent to reconciling grading and differentiation.  Rather, she says, our grading practices are such a mess that they make everything  a problem. All indications are that shes correct. There is no intrinsic conflict between sound grading practices and the philosophy of differentiation. What teachers perceive to be issues typically arise  because grading practices are misaligned with best-practice grading, not because 
Yes, But . . . best-practice grading and differentiation are misaligned. The following principles  and practices of grading are widely recommended by experts in the field of measurement and grading e.g., Brookhart, 2017; Dimich et al., 2022; Earl, 2013;  Guskey, 1994, 2020; Guskey  Brookhart, 2019; OConnor, 2017, 2022; Tomlinson  Moon, 2013; Wiggins, 1993. As you read and think about them, consider the degree to which they support or undercut the goals of differentiation. Grading is one moment in a long progression of assessment decisions.  Perhaps the most common question about differentiation asked by teachers from  all grade levels, subject areas, and countries is Could you talk about assessment  and differentiation? Weve learned to follow up with Explain what you mean by  assessment. Nearly always, the answer is I mean grading. I dont know how to  grade differentiation. We point out that grading and assessment are not synonyms. Assessment is  or should be a process of finding out where students are relative to key goals at  a particular time and over time via formative assessment, with the goal of adapting instruction to support the students efforts to learn more successfully. Grading is the periodic, somewhat public statement about a students performance  at designated intervals, and it will be more honest, useful, and accurate if it is  an outgrowth of appropriate cycles of formative assessment and differentiated  instruction. The nature of a teachers decisions about assessment will affect grading.  For many teachers, assessment means giving enough tests and recording enough  grades so they can defend a students final grade at the end of a marking period.  This conception of assessment invites gotcha teaching. Differentiation advocates for a different perspective. Pre-assessment and ongoing formative assessment become mechanisms to inform teacher planning, create a match between  student needs and classroom instruction, provide helpful feedback to students  on their progress, and help students develop agency as learners. Pre-assessments  should never be graded. Assignments that are used to generate formative data  are rarely graded and then only with advance notice. The emphasis in formative  assessment is providing feedback to students that acknowledges their progress  and points to next steps in the learning process. In this way, ongoing assessment  helps students understand learning goals, trace their progress toward those goals,  and learn without the anxiety that often accompanies graded work so that when  graded assessments do occur, students are more likely to be prepared or to know  how to prepare. Very different classroom climates result when a teacher sees 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom the need for students to practice before they are measured and envisions the  assessment process as largely informative, as opposed to as a series of grading  opportunities. Instruction should be differentiated. The purpose of instruction is to do  whats necessary to help each learner succeed. As teachers become more proficient with using what they learn about students through observation, conversation, and formative assessment to effectively address their readiness, interests,  and learning preferences, an array of benefits occur. Students achievement  rises, and they begin to develop more of a growth mindset about themselves as  learnerswhich contributes to their continuing investment in learning. Further,  grade trauma diminishes not because a teacher awards extra points for trying hard which should not occur, but because student achievement merits a  higher grade. Assessments can be differentiated. Effective assessments enhance the  likelihood that students can truly demonstrate what they know, understand, and  are able to do. The learning targets also known as KUDs that an assessment is  designed to measure should not be differentiated except in the case of students  with IEPs. However, it is allowable, for example, to provide some students more  time to complete an assessment. Assessments that offer more than one way to  demonstrate mastery are likely to enable more students to better show what they  have learned. In addition, when teachers use more than oneor more than one  form ofsummative assessment for example, right-answer assessments and  performance assessments, more students are likely to have the opportunity to  provide a more accurate accounting of what they have learned. Learning is multifaceted, and effective assessment plans take this reality into account. Grading should stem from, not dictate, effective assessment practices.  Too often in schools, the tail wags the dog in terms of grading. For example,  we say, Im required to have at least 10 grades in my grade book each marking  period, so I have to grade everything. We also say, How can I document that I  have provided specific feedback to students on their progress and guided them  in setting personal goals for their work at least 10 times? Finally, we might say,  I cant communicate anything but a single letter grade because the report card  wont let me. In reality, we should ask, What do we need to do in terms of  reporting to benefit student achievement? What mechanisms, including but not  limited to the report card, can support us in doing that? Grades should be based on clear and specific learning goals. When a  teacher clearly articulates precisely what students must know, understand, and 
Yes, But . . . be able to do as a result of the unit and as a result of each segment of learning in  the unit, theres a much better chance that goals, instruction, and assessments will  all be aligned. Likewise, the likelihood of student success rises because expectations for students are clear, instruction is focused squarely on those expectations,  and assessments are crafted to determine each students proficiency with those  expectations. Simple as this sounds, such alignment is uncommon. Using a backward  design process to ensure a curriculuminstructionassessment match contributes directly to student achievement and makes the moment of grading more  transparentand more honest Wiggins  McTighe, 2005. Evidence that contributes to grading should be valid. A grade should  communicate clearly and directly what a student knows, understands, and can  do in comparison to stated goals at a particular time. No doubt a result of handme-down grading practices, teachers subtract points from tests because students  forget to write their names on the paper, add points to grades because students  complete extra credit projects that are only tangentially related to essential outcomes, tweak grades because students are nice or difficult, lower grades because  students dont turn in homework even though they might make a near-perfect  grade on the final assessment, use zeros as a grade, and commonly assign a  mean average as a final grade. All of these are forms of grade fog. That is, they  obscure an accurate picture of the students real achievement. A nonnegotiable, meaningful grade is clear communication of student status  relative to essential goals. Eliminating fog-inducing elements such as the ones  discussed earlier in this chapter from grades also helps students chart a course to  success and maintains studentteacher trust. Students should be graded on clear criteria, not norms. When students  compete against one another in a classroom, it very quickly becomes evident who  the winners and losers will be. When they compete against clearly delineated  criteria, however, every student has a chance for success. Thus, best-practice  grading and differentiation support a J curve, in which all students have the  possibility of earning good grades. This is in opposition to a bell-shaped curve,  in which only a few students can really succeed Tomlinson  McTighe, 2006.  Consider whether you would prefer a surgeon whose practice is based on a J  curve or one who literally operates on a bell-shaped curve. Grade later in a cycle rather than earlier. Schools generally allot a sixto  nine-week period for students to develop proficiency with a given set of content  goals. This decision suggests that it will take roughly that amount of time for 
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom students to achieve those goals, yet we typically begin to grade students on the  content early in the marking period and average the early grades with summative grades to yield final report card grades. The result is that students hear from  teachers, Im so sorry your grades were low early in the marking period. You  made an A on your final, but your early grades pulled that down to a B. A summative assessment should be just thatsummative. Its of little significance that it took a student the entire marking period to learn the essential  knowledge; what should matter most is that the student is finally able to demonstrate proficiency. If we adhered to the practice of grading later in a cycle rather  than earlier, we would encourage persistence and a growth mindset in struggling students who need additional time to learn and in advanced students who  may fear tackling work that challenges them will result in lower status. Report key elements of learner development, but report them separately. Its often difficult to know quite what a grade means. As teachers, we  are inclined to report one grade that includes student achievement, a bit about  compliance, and a bit about work habits. The result is that the grade is mushy.  It communicates poorly and does little to further student achievement. There are three elements that teachers in a differentiated classroom need to  keep in mind for students and their parents: achievement or performance, habits  of mind or process, and growth or progress Guskey, 1994, 2020. An achievement grade should reflect what a student knows, understands, and can do at a  given time relative to stated goals. A grade for habits of mind should indicate the  contribution a student makes to their own success. Does the student persist in  the face of difficulty, ask for help when needed, revise work to improve its quality,  set and pursue important academic goals, accept challenges, and look at issues  from varied perspectives? A grade focused on student growth should stem from  evidence that a student has or has not exhibited measurable progress toward  established goals. These three elements should not be merged into a single grade.  Rather, they should be distinct entities that work together to convey a critical  message: people who work effectively will grow, and persistent growth is the key  to achieving and exceeding academic goals. This is the core of a growth mindset.  Sadly, it is seldom a vital part of teacherstudent, teacherparent, or parent  student conversations. The ability to keep all three elements in the foreground of teacher, student,  and parent thinking would do a great deal to propel student learning in a positive  direction. It would also set the stage for continued success in life. Ideally, report 
Yes, But . . . cards would provide opportunities to describe these three key areas separately  achievementperformance, habits of mindprocess, and growthprogress.  Indeed, some report cards do this, but many do not. If there is only space for  one grade on a report card, it must be the students achievementperformance  grade. The absence of boxes on a report card, however, should not eliminate the  possibility of a teacher monitoring and reporting on all three elements. Teachers  who understand the interconnectedness and importance of all three elements in  student development can do the following:  Talk with parents and students about all three aspects of student work  at the beginning of the year, throughout the year, and at parentteacher  conferences.  Have students keep ongoing records of all three aspects of their learning.  Institute parentstudent conferences to assess student development in all  three areas.  Add an addendum to a report card in the form of a prose statement or  checklist.  Email a three-part report to parents at the end of each marking period. Teachers who lead for differentiation do many things to shape classroom  culture on behalf of student achievement. Publicly valuing and ensuring that  others understand the value of productive work habits and achievement is an  extraordinarily important contribution teachers make to classrooms in which  every student is expected to work hard, grow, and succeed. In an effectively differentiated classroom, support for student achievement  does not include modifying an achievement grade so it appears that a student  has mastered content when they have notand should not reward students for  excellence in the absence of honest personal challenge and struggle. Support  for student success stems from a growth mindset teacher; a classroom environment designed and nurtured to build a community in which all students support  one anothers achievement; a high-quality curriculum that engages students in  the difficult work of learning; ongoing assessment that informs the next steps  in the learning process and that incorporates the best practices for assessment  and grading noted earlier in this chapter; and instruction that is responsive to  students varied readiness levels, interests, and learning preferences. Under these  conditions, grading flows appropriately and naturally.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Concluding Thoughts We began this book by saying that what lay ahead was aspirational. Wed like to  end the book with the same thoughts. Between the two of us, we have a combined teaching experience of more than 80 years and have taught preschool,  elementary school, high school, undergraduate, masters, and doctoral students. We understand that teaching is a devilishly difficult profession, made more  so by external mandates to achieve the delusionalthat is, to ensure that all students reach the same point of mastery of an unwieldy amount of content on the  same day, and to demonstrate that mastery under the same conditions. We know that students lives have always been complex, and we are keenly  aware that the complexity of students lives is growing exponentially as a result of  myriad confounding factors. We know that teachers are responsible for a greater  variety of learners with a greater diversity of needs than ever before. We know  there is not enough time in the day, not enough days in the week, and not enough  weeks in the year to do what teachers need to do. We also know there would be  a severe lack of energy to teach additional hours, days, or weeks if they were part  of the school calendar. Nevertheless, we also know that every student who enters every classroom  will be enhanced or diminished by the collective attitudes, decisions, and practices of the teachers. We know that every young life that is redeemed by learning  is an individual and a collective victory. Likewise, we know that every young life  that is scarred by school is an individual and a collective tragedy. We know that  contemporary schools and teachers need to develop beyond passive acceptance  of what was good enough in the past. We know that this can only happen  when teachers aspire to do their very best and, in the process, create better ways  to ignite the spark of genius found in every human being with the flint of real  learning. It is not our expectation that teachers can read a book, flip a switch, and  magically transform their teaching. Rather, we believe that there are teachers  who aspire to understand the art and science of teaching a little better each day,  who are willing to take the risk of confronting the effectiveness of the work they  do in the lives of each student in their care, and who are courageous enough to  make small and large decisions each day based on benefits to their students  individually and as a whole. It is to those teachers we offer the accumulated  insights that make up this book.
Yes, But . . . We know teachers transform lives. We know because we have had the great  fortune of being their students. We know because we continue to learn from  aspirational teachersone step at a time, day after year after decadebuilding  careers and lives as they go. This breed of teacher is always more excited than  daunted by what lies ahead. We hope youll join up! Yes, But . . . I teach in a four-wall box of drab proportions, But choose to make it a place that feels like home. I see too many students to know them as they need to be known, But refuse to let that render them faceless in my mind. I am overcome with the transmission of a canon I can scarcely recall myself, But will not represent learning as a burden to the young. I suffer from a poverty of time, And so will use what I have to best advantage those I teach. I am an echo of the way school has been since forever, But will not agree to perpetuate the echo another generation. I am told I am as good a teacher as the test scores I generate, But will not allow my students to see themselves as data. I work in isolation, And am all the more determined to connect my students with the world. I am small in the chain of power, But have the power to change young lives. There are many reasons to succumb, And thirty reasons five times a day to succeed. Most decisions about my job are removed from me. Except the ones that matter most.
Alexander, M. 2016, April 13. The warm demander: An equity approach. Edutopia. https:www.edutopia.org blogwarm-demander-equity-approach-matt-alexander Aronson, J., Fried, C.,  Good, C. 2002. Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African American college  students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 382, 113125. Bain, K. 2004. What the best college teachers do. Harvard University Press. Beane, J. 2005. A reason to teach: Creating classrooms of dignity and hope. Heinemann. Berger, R. 2003. An ethic of excellence: Building a culture of craftsmanship with students. Heinemann. Berger, R., Rugen, L.,  Woodfin, L. 2014. Leaders of their own learning: Transforming schools through studentengaged assessment. Jossey-Bass. Berry, R. 2021, March 21. Three ways being a warm demander is culturally responsive and supports students  mathematical identity and agency. Corwin Connect. https:corwin-connect.com202103three-waysbeing-a-warm-demander-is-culturally-responsive-and-supports-students-mathematical-identity-and-agency Berwick, C. 2019, August 9. Is it time to detrack math? Edutopia. https:www.edutopia.orgarticleit-timedetrack-math Bishop, P.,  Harrison, L. 2021. The successful middle school: This we believe. Association for Middle Level  Education. Bland, J. A. 2022, August 31. Back to school: 10 steps schools and districts can take to address new  and ongoing COVID-19 challenges. Learning Policy Institute. https:learningpolicyinstitute.orgblog covid-back-to-school-10-steps-address-covid-19-challenges Bondy, E.,  Ross, D. 2008, September. The teacher as warm demander. Educational Leadership, 661, 5458. Bowe, J., Magnuson, K., Schindler, H., Duncan, G.,  Yoshikawa, H. 2017. A meta-analysis of class sizes and ratios  in early childhood programs: Are thresholds of quality associated with greater impacts on cognitive, achievement, and socioemotional outcomes? Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 313, 407428. Boykin, A.,  Noguera, P. 2011. Creating the opportunity to learn: Moving from research to practice to close the  achievement gap. ASCD. Brighton, C. M., Hertberg, H. L., Moon, T. R., Tomlinson, C. A.,  Callahan, C. M. 2005. The feasibility of highend learning in a diverse middle school. National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented. Brookhart, S. 2017. How to use grading to improve learning. ASCD. Brookhart, S.,  Rasooli, A. 2021, July. Planning for fair groupwork. Educational Leadership, 789. https:www. ascd.orgelarticlesplanning-for-fair-group-work References
References Bruner, J. 1996. The culture of education. Harvard University Press. Chen, G. 2022, May 20. Smaller class sizes: Pros and cons. Public School Review. https:www.publicschoolreview. comblogsmaller-class-sizes-pros-and-cons Cohen, E.,  Lotan, R. 2014. Designing group work: Strategies for the heterogeneous classroom 3rd ed. Teachers  College Press. Collins, M. 1992. Ordinary children, extraordinary teachers. Hampton Roads Publishing. Collins, M.,  Amabile, T. 1999. Motivation and creativity. In R. J. Sternberg Ed., Handbook of creativity pp.  297312. Cambridge University Press. Council of Chief State School Officers. 2013, April. Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium  InTASC Model Core Teaching Standards and Learning Progressions for Teachers 1.0: A resource for ongoing  teacher development. https:ccsso.orgsitesdefaultfiles2017-122013INTASCLearningProgressionsforTeachers.pdf Craig, S. 2008. Reaching and teaching children who hurt: Strategies for your classroom. Paul H. Brookes. Craig, S. 2017. Trauma-sensitive schools: Promoting resiliency and healing, grades 612. Teachers College Press. Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1990. Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. HarperCollins. Cummings, M. 2020, February 12. Study shows race, gender affect teachers perceptions of students ability. Yale News.  https:news.yale.edu20200212study-shows-race-gender-affect-teachers-perceptions-students-ability Dack, H.,  Tomlinson, C. 2015, March. Inviting all students to learn. Educational Leadership, 726, 1015. Darling-Hammond, L. 2001. Inequality in teaching and schooling: How opportunity is rationed to students of  color in America. In B. D. Smedley, A. Y. Smith, L. Colburn,  C. H. Evans, The right thing to do, the smart thing  to do: Enhancing diversity in the health professions: Summary of the Symposium on Diversity in Health Professions  in Honor of Herbert W. Nickens, MD. National Institutes of Health. https:www.ncbi.nlm.nih.govbooks NBK223640 Darling-Hammond, L. 2009. The flat world and education: How Americas commitment to equity will determine our  future. Teachers College Press. Dimich, N., Erkens, C., Miller, J., Schimmer, T.,  White, K. 2022. Concise answers to frequently asked questions  about assessment  grading. Solution Tree. Domina, T., Hanselman, P., Hwang, N.,  McEachin, A. 2016, August. Tracking and tracking up: Mathematics in  California middle schools, 20032013. American Educational Research Journal, 534, 12291266. Doubet, K. 2022. The flexibly grouped classroom: How to organize learning for equity and growth. ASCD. Draeger, C.,  Wilson, D. 2016, March 8. How to give students more control over their learning. Education Week. https:www.edweek.orgteaching-learningopinion-how-to-give-students-more-control-overtheir-learning201603 DuFour, R.,  Eaker, R. 1998. Professional learning communities at work: Best practices for enhancing student achievement. Solution Tree. Dweck, C. 2000. Self theories: Their role in motivation, personality, and development. Psychology Press. Dweck, C. 2006. Mindset: The new psychology of success. Random House. Dweck, C. 2017. Mindset: Changing the way you think to fulfill your potential. Random House. Earl, L. 2013. Assessment as learning: Using classroom assessment to maximize student learning 2nd ed. Corwin. Educational Research Service. 1993. Academic challenge for the children of poverty. Author. Erickson, H., Lanning, L.,  French, R. 2017. Concept-based curriculum  instruction for the thinking classroom 2nd  ed. Corwin. Ervin, S. 2022, March 8. 5 ways to de-escalate challenging student behavior. ASCD Blog. https:www.ascd.org blogs5-ways-to-de-escalate-challenging-student-behavior  Fullan, M. 2001a. Leading in a culture of change. Jossey-Bass. Fullan, M. 2001b. The new meaning of educational change 3rd ed. Teachers College Press. Fullan, M. 2008. Six secrets of change: What the best leaders do to help their organizations survive and thrive.  Jossey-Bass. Fullan, M., Quinn, J.,  McEachan, J. 2018. Deep learning: Engage the world, change the world. Corwin. Gardner, J. 1961. Excellence: Can we be equal and excellent too? Harper  Row. Gobir, N. 2021, May 25. How unconditional positive regard can help students feel cared for. MindShift. https:  www.kqed.orgmindshift57646how-unconditional-positive-regard-can-help-students-feel-cared-for
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Good, C., Aronson, J.,  Inzlicht, M. 2003. Improving adolescents standardized test performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Applied Developmental Psychology, 24, 645662. Gorsky, P. 2018. Reaching and teaching students in poverty: Strategies for erasing the opportunity gap. Teachers College Press. Greene, R. 2014. Lost at school: Why our kids with behavioral challenges are falling through the cracks and how we can  help them. Scribner. Greene, R. 2021a. Lost  found: Unlocking collaboration and compassion to help our most vulnerable, misunderstood  students and all the rest 2nd ed. Jossey-Bass. Greene, R. 2021b. The explosive child 6th ed. Harper. Guskey, T. 1994, October. Making the grade: What benefits students? Educational Leadership, 522, 1420.  Guskey, T. 2020, September. Breaking up the grade. Educational Leadership, 781, 4046. Guskey, T. 2019, October 28. Grades versus comments: Research on student feedback. Kappan. https:kappanonline.orggrades-versus-comments-researchstudent-feedback-guskey  Guskey, T.,  Brookhart, S. 2019. What we know about grading: What works, what doesnt, and whats next? ASCD. Haberman, M. 1991. The pedagogy of poverty versus good teaching. Phi Delta Kappan, 734, 290294. Hattie, J. 2009. Visible learning: A synthesis of 800 meta-analyses on achievement. Routledge. Hattie. J. 2012. Visible learning for teachers: Maximizing impact on learning. Routledge. Hattie, J. 2017. Backup of Hatties ranking list of 256 influences and effect sizes related to student achievement. https: visible-learning.orgbackup-hattie-ranking-256-effects-2017 Hodges, H. 2001. Overcoming a pedagogy of poverty. In R. W. Cole Ed., More strategies for educating everybodys  children pp. 19. ASCD. Hopfenberg, W.,  Levin, H. 2008. The accelerated schools resource guide. Jossey-Bass. Jepsen, C. 2015. Class size: Does it matter for student achievement? World of Labor. https:wol.iza.orgarticles class-size-does-it-matter-for-student-achievementlong Kafele, B. 2021. The equity and social justice education 50: Critical questions for improving opportunities and outcomes  for Black students. ASCD. Katz, I.,  Assor, A. 2007. When choice motivates and when it does not.Educational Psychology Review,194,  429444. Kopp, W. 2001. One day, all children . . . The unlikely triumph of Teach for America and what I learned along the way.  Perseus Books. LePage, P., Darling-Hammond, L.,  Akar, H. 2005. Classroom management. In L. Darling-Hammond  J. Bransford Eds., Preparing teachers for a changing world: What teachers should learn and be able to do pp. 327357.  Jossey-Bass. Lieberman, M. 2020, May 5. Stop giving inexperienced teachers all the lower-level math classes, reformers  argue. Education Week. https:www.edweek.orgteaching-learningstop-giving-inexperienced-teachersall-the-lower-level-math-classes-reformers-argue202005  Lynch, M. 2015, October 9. The first year teaching: Classroom rules and routines. The Edvocate. https:www. theedadvocate.orgthe-first-year-teaching-classroom-rules-and-routines Marzano, R. J. 2009, September. Setting the record straight on high-yield strategies. Kappan, 911, 3037. Marzano, R. J., Marzano, J. S.,  Pickering, D. J. 2003. Classroom management that works: Research-based strategies  for every teacher. ASCD. Maslow, A. H. 1943. A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review, 504, 370396. McCombs, B.,  Whisler, J. S. 1997. The lesson-centered classroom and school: Strategies for increasing student motivation and achievement. Jossey-Bass. McTighe, J., Doubet, K.,  Carbaugh, E. 2020. Designing authentic performance tasks and projects: Tools for meaningful learning and assessment. ASCD. National Association for the Education of Young Children. 2019. Advocating equity in early childhood education:  Position statement. https:www.naeyc.orgresourcesposition-statementsequity National Association for the Education of Young Children. 2020. Developmentally appropriate practice. Position  statement. https:www.naeyc.orgresourcesposition-statementsdapcontents National Association of Secondary School Principals. 2018. Building ranks: A comprehensive framework for effective  school leaders. Author.
References National Board for Professional Teaching Standards. 2010. Mathematics standards 3rd ed. Author. https: www.nbpts.orgwp-contentuploads202109EAYA-MATH.pdf National Board for Professional Teaching Standards. 2014. English language arts standards 3rd ed. Author.  https:www.nbpts.orgwp-contentuploads202109EAYA-ELA.pdf National Research Council. 2000. How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school. National Academies Press. Ng, B. 2018, January. The neuroscience of growth mindset and intrinsic motivation. Brain Sciences, 82, 20.  https:www.ncbi.nlm.nih.govpmcarticlesPMC5836039 OConnor, K. 2017. How to grade for learning: Linking grades to standards 4th ed. Corwin. OConnor, K. 2022. A repair kit for grading: 15 fixes for broken grades 3rd ed. FIRST Educational Resources. OKeefe, P., Dweck, C.,  Walton, G. 2018, September 10. Having a growth mindset makes it easier to  develop new interests. Harvard Business Review. https:hbr.org201809having-a-growth-mindset-makesit-easier-to-develop-new-interests  Olson, K. 2009. Wounded by school: Recapturing the joy in learning and standing up to old school culture. Teachers  College Press. Paley, V. G. 1993. You cant say you cant play. Harvard University Press. Parker, F., Novak, J.,  Bartell, T. 2017.To engage students, give them meaningful choices in the classroom.Phi  Delta Kappan 992, 3741. Paul, A. 2013, November 4. How the power of interest drives learning. MindShift. https:www.kqed.org mindshift32503how-the-power-of-interest-drives-learning Rosen, J. 2016, March 30. Teacher expectations reflect racial biases, Johns Hopkins study suggests. The Hub.  https:hub.jhu.edu20160330racial-bias-teacher-expectations-black-white Rothstein-Fisch, C.,  Trumbull, E. 2008. Managing diverse classrooms: How to build on students cultural strengths.  ASCD. Schlechty, P. 1997. Inventing better schools: An action plan for educational reform. Jossey-Bass. Sizer, T. 1985. Horaces compromise: The dilemma of the American high school. Houghton-Mifflin. Smith, D., Fisher, D.,  Frey, N. 2015. Better than carrots or sticks: Restorative discipline practices for positive classroom management. ASCD. Sousa, D.,  Tomlinson, C. 2018. Differentiation and the brain: How neuroscience supports the learner-friendly classroom 2nd ed. Solution Tree. Sparks, S. 2021, April 9. Growth mindset linked to higher test scores, student well-being in global study.  Education Week. https:www.edweek.orgleadershipgrowth-mindset-linked-to-higher-test-scores-studentwell-being-in-global-study202104  Spiegel, A. 2012, September 17. Teachers expectations can influence how students perform. https:www.npr.org sectionshealth-shots20120918161159263teachers-expectations-can-influence-how-students-perform Stronge, J. 2018. Qualities of effective teachers 3rd ed. ASCD.  Tomlinson, C. 2014. The differentiated classroom: Responding to the needs of all learners 2nd ed. ASCD. Tomlinson, C. 2017. How to differentiate instruction in academically diverse classrooms 3rd ed. ASCD. Tomlinson, C. 2021. So each may soar: The principles and practices of learner-centered classrooms. ASCD. Tomlinson, C. 2022. Everybodys classroom: Differentiating for the shared and unique needs of diverse students. Teachers College Press. Tomlinson, C.,  Doubet, K. 2005, April. Reach them to teach them. Educational Leadership, 627, 915. Tomlinson, C.,  McTighe, J. 2006. Integrating differentiated instruction  understanding by design: Connecting  content and kids. ASCD. Tomlinson, C.,  Moon, T. 2013. Assessment and student success in a differentiated classroom. ASCD. Tomlinson, C.,  Murphy, M. 2015. Leading for differentiation: Growing teachers who grow kids. ASCD. Tomlinson, C. A., Kaplan, S. N., Renzulli, J. S., Purcell, J. H, Leppien, J. H., Burns, D. E., Strickland, C. A.,  Imbeau,  M. B. 2009. The parallel curriculum: A design to develop learner potential and challenge advanced learners.  Corwin. Toth, M. D.,  Sousa, D. 2019. The power of student teams: Achieving social, emotional, and cognitive learning in every  classroom through academic teaming. Learning Sciences International. Truong, D. 2022, May 17. Detracking in K12 classes. U.S. News  World Report. https:www.usnews.com educationk12articlesdetracking-in-k-12-classrooms Villa, R.,  Thousand, J. 2005. Creating an inclusive school 2nd ed. ASCD.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Vygotsky, L. S. 1978. Mind in society. Harvard University Press. Vygotsky, L. S. 1986. Thought and language. MIT Press. Ware, F. 2006. Warm demander pedagogy: Culturally responsive teaching that supports a culture of achievement  for African American students. Urban Education, 414, 427456. Wiggins, G. 1992. Foreword. In R. Villa, J. Thousand, W. Stainback,  S. Stainback Eds., Restructuring for caring  and effective education: An administrative guide to creating heterogeneous schools pp. xvxvi. Paul H. Brookes. Wiggins, G. 1993. Assessing student performance. Jossey-Bass. Wiggins, G.,  McTighe, J. 2005. Understanding by design 2nd ed. ASCD. Wiliam, D. 2011. Embedded formative assessment. Solution Tree. Zhao, Y. 2009. Catching up or leading the way: American education in the age of globalization. ASCD Zhao, Y. 2022. Learners without borders: New learning pathways for all students. Corwin.
Index The letter f following a page locator denotes a figure. ability behavior and, 9697 to learn, philosophy of, 4952 readiness vs., 33 academic teaming, student-led, 146 achievement. See also learning; success mindset and, 5051 self-efficacy and, 58 actors, working with, 9798 administrators, leading to understand differentiation,  8687 affect, differentiation for, 3233, 36f agency, 22, 34 All About Me Bags activity, 104f anchor activities, 154155, 154f assessment. See also grading continual, 99101 defined, 39 differentiating, exceptions for, 182 for effective differentiation, 24, 36, 3940, 182 expectations of teachers for, 2021 formative, 18, 2021, 24, 39 high-quality, 39 ongoing observation for, 101 reservations and responses, 180185 summative, 24, 39, 40 types of, 39 assignment boards, 133, 135, 135f assignment charts, 117 Association for Middle Level Education AMLE, 21,  2223 behavior alienated students, differentiation strategies,  173180 classroom environment and, 9697 engagement and, 5 belonging, 58. See also inclusion Building Ranks: A Comprehensive Framework for Effective School Leaders NASSP, 2324 bulletin boards, 116118, 119f change, teachers as leaders for learner-focused,  2526 checking in, 129 choice, differentiation for, 3435 classroom environment. See also community in  the classroom; learning environment; physical  environment adequate, 95 dysfunctional, 95 for effective differentiation, 3538 enabling, 96 learning and, 9697 orderly, 96 restrictive, 96
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom for success, 139140 teachers and directors roles compared, 98 types of, 9596 classroom management classroom leadership versus, 10, 9293 defined, 10 differentiated classrooms, 9293 practices of, 91 redefining, 140 starting or ending routines, 128130 Classroom Management 101 Tomlinson, 411 classrooms. See also differentiated classroom; flexible  classrooms should mirror the society we want our students to  live in and lead, 4849 size, differentiation and, 169 closure, providing time for, 130 collaboration designing classrooms for, 115 expectations of teachers for, 17 routines for working in groups, 143147 teaching for community building, 110f college, preparing students for, 169170 colored cups for getting help, 151f communication journals, 104f community building among actors, 98 importance of, 105 community in the classroom, building by example, 107109 getting to know students, 106 integrating new students, 110f keeper of the book, 109f modeling what matters, 110f product development, 110f purposeful talk, 109f teaching collaboration skills, 110f using student groups, 111113 welcoming guests, 110f content, differentiation for, 3132, 36f continuous improvement, responsibility for, 24 conversation spaces, 103 curriculum defined, 38 differentiated, responsibility for, 24 for effective differentiation, 36, 3839 modifications for differentiation, 3133, 36f day, routines for starting or ending the, 128130 defensive teaching, 96 democracy, 105106 diagnostic formative assessment, 39 differentiated classroom. See also routines, differentiated classrooms classroom management, 9293 crafting a mutual vision of, 105106 expectations of, 114 factors at work in, 140 framework for creating a, 65 purpose of developing a, 95 differentiated classroom, key questions creating a  framework for How can I learn more about you? 7980 How should I teach you? 7475 overview, 65 What roles will everyone play? 7778 What will fair mean? 8081 What will success mean? 8183 What will the classroom look like? 7578, 78f Who are you as learners? 6674 differentiation. See also philosophy of differentiation beliefs basic to, 6465 central premise of, 7173 conclusions, 186187 curriculum-related modifications, 3133, 36f defined, 44 fundamental tenets of, 101 intent of, 30 interdependent foundational elements of, 3540 key elements of, 3033 meaning of, 28, 30 misunderstandings about, 2930 need as basis for, examples of, 36f purpose of, 95 reasons for, 171 student need and variance in, categories of,  3335, 36f differentiation, activities to understand class discussion, 7475 Graphing Me, 6870, 68f One Size Fits All? 7374 A Trip to the Doctor role-play, 7173, 72f differentiation, reservations about with responses classroom size, 169 class size, 168169 grading requirements, 180185 my students are different, 172180 preparing students for college, 169170 standardized tests, 167 textbooks, limited numbers of, 169 time limitations, 165167 differentiation for alienated students, strategies for become a warm demander, 175176 be proactive, 177178 connect and build trust, 173174 classroom environmentcontinued
Index empathy and respect, 177, 179180 expectations, 174175 handling a tense situation, 179 misbehavior, 177179 move slowly but persistently, 175 pick your battles, 178 private conversations, 179180 success, 176177 directions developing to get help, 150 for multiple tasks, routines for giving, 136138 dismissal signals, 130 diverse learning needs, addressing expectations of teachers for, 1617, 1820, 22, 24 responsibility for, 2324 diversity, student accepted beliefs regarding, 9495 expectations of teachers for acknowledging and  celebrating, 21, 22 is inevitable and positive, philosophy of, 4748 problem of, 57 door greetings to get to know students, 104f drama, staging a successful, 9798 early childhood teachers, expectations of, 2122 empathy for alienated students, 177, 179180 engagement, behavior and, 5 English language arts teachers, expectations of, 19 equal access to education, 28, 5254 equitable treatment, expectations for, 1819 esteem needs, 58 ethics in leadership, 26, 93 excellence is transformational, 56 exit ramp time, 153154 expectations expectations of teachers regarding, 2223 noise management, 147149 positive, results of, 7 responsibility for, 23 routines in, 128129 success and, 33, 56 in transitioning, 152 of warm demanders, 175176 Expert of the Day, 151f extracurricular activities, 103, 105 fairness, defining in the differentiated classroom,  8081 first aid board to get help, 151 flexible classrooms for effective differentiation, 37 interdependent elements of, 4142, 42f leading and managing, 41, 9193 floor plan to support learning, 114116 furniture arrangement to support learning,  114116 Getting to Know You game, 101102, 102f grading. See also assessment anchor activities, 155 differentiation and, reservations and responses,  180185 Graphing Me activity, 6770, 68f, 69f greetings at the door, 104f group charts, 117 groups academic teaming, student-led, 146 building community with, 111113 routines for assigning students to, 131, 132f, 133,  134f, 135, 135f routines for working in, 143147 tasks worthy of, 145146 group work intent of, 146 struggling students and, 146147 guests, welcoming, 110f help routines for getting, 150151 strategies for getting, 151f highway time, 153154 hint cards, 117, 117f home visits, 102103 how to do school the fair way, 64 the right way, 24, 64 success in, determining, 81 human dignity, principle of, 4647, 106 inclusion, 2123, 4849 individualized education, responsibility for, 23 instruction defined, 40 for effective differentiation, 37, 40 highways and exit ramps routines, 153154 teachers as leaders for student-focused, 2526 interest, differentiation for, 3334, 36f Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium InTASC, 1617 investment, sending a message of, 59 invitation, sending a message of, 59 journals, communication, 104f flexible classroomscontinued differentiation for alienated students, strategies for continued
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom keeper of the book, 109f leaders NASSP expectations for school, 2324 natural, 26 leadership differentiated classroom, 2527 ethics in, 26, 93 trust and, 93 learners. See also students capacity maximized is a central goal for, 5456 defining in the differentiated classroom, 6674 development, expectations of teachers for, 17 present-day, expectations of teachers for, 1625 learning. See also achievement; success beliefs embedded about, 24 needs satisfaction and, 5759 philosophy of differentiation on, 4952 learning environment defined, 37 for effective differentiation, 3538 expectations of teachers for the, 17, 18, 20, 2122 learning preferences, differentiation for, 3435, 36f listening, active, 150 Maslows hierarchy of needs, 5759 materials to support learning, 118120 math teachers, expectations of, 20 middle school teachers, expectations of, 2223 mindsets, fixed and growth, 4952, 51f, 53 mini-workshops for getting help, 151f motivation, 3334, 5051 multiple-ability tasks, 112 National Association for the Education of Young   Children NAEYC, 2122 National Association of Secondary School Principals  NASSP, 21, 2324 National Board for Professional Teaching Standards  NBPTS, 1721 needs satisfaction, 5762 noise management, 147149 note taking to get to know students, 104f One Size Fits All? activity, 7374 One to Ten activity, 104f ongoing formative assessment, 3940 opportunity, sending a message of, 60 organizers, 118120, 152 parents, 25, 8385 Peace Corner, 116 peers, asking help from, 150 persistence sending a message of, 60 as teaching strategy, 175 Petition for an Extension of Time on a Project, 156f philosophy of differentiation needs satisfaction and the, 5762 primary goal of, 61 roots of, 44, 45 philosophy of differentiation, core tenets the classroom should mirror the society we want  our students to live in and lead, 4849 diversity is inevitable and positive, 4748 equity of access to excellent learning opportunities for every student, 5254 every student has inherent dignity and is worthy  of respect, 4547 learner capacity maximized is a central goal of  teaching, 5456 most students can learn most things that are  essential to a given area of study, 4952 philosophy of teaching, 4344, 59 physical environment, designing the bulletin boards, 116118, 119f coding areas when assigning students to groups,  133 for collaboration, 115 floor plan, 114116 furniture arrangement, 114116 for individual learning, 115 materials, 118120 organizers, 118120, 152 for private space, 115 purpose of, 113114 room arrangement charts, 153 for storage, 116 supplies, 118120 wall space, 116118 pocket charts, 133, 134f principals leading to understand differentiation, 8687 NASSP expectations for, 2324 private space, designing classrooms for, 115 process, differentiation for, 32, 36f product, differentiation for, 32, 36f product development for building community, 110f progress, routines for keeping track of, 160, 161f, 162f question cards, 151f question chips, 150151 readiness, differentiation for, 33, 36f reflection, sending a message of, 60 relationship-building, expectations for, 2123
Index respect, every student is worthy of, 4547, 177,  179180 room arrangement charts, 153 routines, classroom basic rules of, 123125 defined, 122 directions for multiple tasks, 136138 ending the day or the class, 129130 group assignments, 131, 132f, 133, 134f, 135, 135f purpose of, 122123 starting the day or the class, 127129 routines, differentiated classrooms calling on students equitably, 141143, 143f getting help, 149151 group work, 143147 implementing, 160, 163 noise management, 147149 progress tracking, 160, 161f, 162f time management, 153159 transitioning between tasks and workspaces,  152153 rules, 123127 safety, need for, 5758 school, wounded by, 6061 school mindsets, fixed and growth, 53 seating, assigned, 128, 130 seating plans, alternative, 153 security, need for, 5758 self-actualization, 58 self-efficacy, achievement and, 58 self-transcendence, 58 society classrooms mirroring a desired, 4849 preparing students for, 106 standardized tests, 167 standards, differentiation and time for, 165166 standing groups, 131, 132f, 133 storage, designing classrooms for, 116 students. See also learners ability to learn, philosophy of, 4952 advanced, time management strategies for, 156,  157f, 158 alienated, strategies for, 173180 asking for help from peers, 150 asking to give directions, 137 calling on equitably, 141143, 143f college, preparing for, 169170 integrating new, 110f participation, ensuring, 141142 relationship-building, expectations for, 2123 rights of, 57 routines, establish and implement with, 37 society, preparing for, 106 too many for differentiation, 168169 students, getting to know for building community, 106 creating a differentiation framework, 6674,  7980 as individuals, 56, 99 as a path to learning, 7 students, getting to know strategies All About Me Bags activity, 104f communication journals, 104f continual assessment, 99101 conversation spaces, 103 extracurricular activities, 103, 105 Getting to Know You game, 101102, 102f greetings at the door, 104f home visits, 102103 note taking, 104f One to Ten activity, 104f ongoing observation, 101 surveys, 104f student work, displaying, 118 success. See also achievement for alienated students, 176177 beliefs on the capacity for, 4950 classroom environments and, 139140 defining in the differentiated classroom, 8183 expectations and, 33, 56 responsibility for, 23, 99 The Successful Middle School: This We Believe AMLE,  2223 supplies to support learning, 118120 supply couriers, 152153 surveys to get to know students, 104f talk, building community with purposeful, 109f task cards, 136137 tasks, group worthy, 145146 teacher, becoming a, 13 teachers effective, 10 Graphing Me activity, 6869, 69f mindsets, fixed and growth, 5052 teachers, expectations of accomplished teachers, 1721 acknowledging student diversity, 21, 22 all teachers, 1617, 2125 assessment, 2021 for child agency, 22 collaborative skills, 17 diverse learning needs, 1620, 22, 24 early childhood teachers, 2122 studentscontinued
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom English language arts teachers, 19 equitable treatment, 1819 for expectations of students, 2223 formative assessment, 18, 2021, 24 inclusion, 2122 learner development, 17 learning environments, 17, 18, 20, 2122 for math teachers, 20 middle school teachers, 2223 present-day, 1625 professional knowledge base, 17 relationship-building, 2122 warm demanders, 175176 teachers as leaders of colleagues in understanding differentiation,  8587 for differentiated classrooms, 2627 effective, 27 of parents, 25, 8385 self-motivation of, 25 for student-focused instruction, 2526 successful, 26 teaching colleagues, 2526 teaching beliefs embedded about, 24, 6364 good, difficulty of, 57 philosophy of, 4344, 59 teaching defensively, 96 textbooks, limited numbers of, 169 tight-ship classrooms, 96 time challenges, 152 time for differentiation, 167168 time management advanced learners, strategies for, 156, 157f, 158 anchor activities for, 154155 buying time, 158159, 159f extra time, asking for, 155156, 156f highways and exit ramps, 153154 tracking, 9697 transitioning, routines for, 152153 A Trip to the Doctor role-play, 7173, 72f trust, 66, 93 visual overload, blocking out, 149 wall space to support learning, 116118 work plans review, 129 wounded by school, 6061 Yes, But poem, 187 Zen Zone, 116 teachers, expectations ofcontinued teachingcontinued
About the Authors Carol Ann Tomlinson is William Clay Parrish Jr.  Professor Emeritus at the University of Virginias  School of Education and Human Development,  where she served as Chair of Educational Leadership, Foundations, and Policy and Co-Director of the  Universitys Institutes on Academic Diversity. Prior to  joining the faculty at UVa, she was a teacher in public  schools for 21 years, during which she taught students  in high school, preschool, and middle school and also  administered programs for struggling and advanced learners. She was Virginias  Teacher of the Year in 1974. Tomlinson is author of over 300 books, book chapters, articles, and other  educational materials including How to Differentiate Instruction in Academically  Diverse Classrooms, The Differentiated Classroom: Responding to the Needs of All  Learners, Differentiation and the Brain: How Neuroscience Supports the LearnerFriendly Classroom with David Sousa, So Each May Soar: The Principles and  Practices of Learner-Centered Classrooms, and Everybodys Classroom: Differentiating for the Shared and Unique Needs of Diverse Learners. Her books on differentiation are available in 14 languages.
Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Tomlinson was named Outstanding Professor at UVas School of Education and Human Development in 2004 and received an All-University Teaching  Award in 2008. In 2022, she was ranked 12 in the Education Week Edu-Scholar  Public Presence Rankings of the 200 university-based academics who are contributing most substantially to public debates about schools and schooling, and  as the 4 voice in Curriculum  Instruction. She works throughout the United  States and internationally with educators who seek to create classrooms that are  effective in reaching diverse student populations. She can be reached by email at  cat3yvirginia.edu. Marcia B. Imbeau is a professor and childhood  elementary education program coordinator in the  Department of Curriculum and Instruction at the University of Arkansas, working in its teacher preparation program. She has 40 years of experience as a  classroom teacher in public schools, a coordinator of  university-based summerSaturday enrichment programs, an adjunct professor, and a presenter to teachers,  instructional leaders, and administrators throughout  the United States and internationally. For the past 25 years, Imbeau has worked as a university liaison in local public schools to assist interns and their mentor teachers, a role that allows her to  collaborate with public school faculty many of them former students to prepare  new generations of K6 educators and K12 teachers who work with advanced  learners. Imbeau coauthored A Differentiated Approach to the Common Core and Managing a Differentiated Classroom Grades K8. She worked with colleagues at the  University of Arkansas on Differentiating Instruction in the Inclusive Classroom:  Strategies for Success. These books remind readers of the principles important for  differentiation and provide practical ideas teachers can use in their classrooms.  Imbeau is also a coauthor of The Parallel Curriculum and the editor of Parallel  Curriculum Units for Grades K5. She can be reached by email at mimbeauuark. edu.

EDUCATION Leading and Managing ADifferentiated Classroom 2nd Edition Updated with new research and insights, the second edition of this foundational guide to the   how of differentiation provides the thoughtful strategies teachers need to create and maintain  classrooms where each student is recognized and respected and every student thrives. One of the most powerful lessons a teacher must learn is that classroom management is not about control; its about delivering the support and facilitating the routines that will make the classroom work for  each student, and thus, set all students free to be successful learners. In Leading and Managing a Differentiated Classroom, Carol Ann Tomlinson and Marcia B. Imbeau  explore the central priorities and mindsets of differentiation and provide guidelines for making effective  student-centered, academically responsive instruction a reality. Their classroom management approach  is based on three critical understandings: 1.	 When students are engaged, they have no motivation to misbehave. 2.	 When students understand that their teacher sees them as worthwhile people with significant potential, it opens doors to learning. 3.	 The classroom cant work for anybody until it works for everybody. Written for K12 teachers and instructional leaders, this book is packed with strategies for structuring  and pacing lessons, organizing learning spaces and materials, starting and stopping class with purpose,  setting up and managing routines, and shifting gears if something isnt going well. It also gives teachers  the guidance they need to help students, colleagues, and parents understand the goals of differentiated  instruction and contribute to its success. Along with examples of recommended practices drawn from  real-life classrooms at a variety of grade levels, you will find answers to frequently asked questions and  specific advice for balancing content requirements and the needs of learners. Youll gain confidence as a  leader for and in your differentiated classroom and be better prepared to teach in a way thats more efficient and rewarding for you and more effective for every student in your care.