Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development 1703 N. Beauregard St.  Alexandria, VA 22311-1714 USA Phone: 800-933-2723 or 703-578-9600  Fax: 703-575-5400 Web site: www.ascd.org  E-mail: memberascd.org Author guidelines: www.ascd.orgwrite Gene R. Carter, Executive Director; Nancy Modrak, Publisher; Julie Houtz, Director of Book  Editing  Production; Leah Lakins, Project Manager; Georgia Park, Senior Graphic Designer;  Keith Demmons, Typesetter; Sarah Plumb, Production Specialist Copyright  2008 by the Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development ASCD.  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any  form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any  information storage and retrieval system, without permission from ASCD. Readers who wish  to duplicate material copyrighted by ASCD may do so for a small fee by contacting the  Copyright Clearance Center CCC, 222 Rosewood Dr., Danvers, MA 01923, USA phone:  978-750-8400; fax: 978-646-8600; Web: www.copyright.com. For requests to reprint rather  than photocopy, contact ASCDs permissions of ce: 703-575-5749 or permissionsascd.org.  Translation inquiries: translationsascd.org. Printed in the United States of America. Cover art copyright  2008 by ASCD. ASCD  publications present a variety of viewpoints. The views expressed or implied in this book  should not be interpreted as of cial positions of the Association. All Web links in this book are correct as of the publication date below but may have become  inactive or otherwise modi ed since that time. If you notice a deactivated or changed link,  please e-mail booksascd.org with the words Link Update in the subject line. In your  message, please specify the Web link, the book title, and the page number on which the link  appears. ASCD Member Book, No. FY08-4 January 2008, PC. ASCD Member Books mail to Premium  P and Comprehensive C members on this schedule: Jan., PC; Feb., P; Apr., PC; May, P;  July, PC; Aug., P; Sept., PC; Nov., PC; Dec., P. PAPERBACK ISBN: 978-1-4166-0624-6  

ASCD product 107014    Also available as an e-book through ebrary, netLibrary, and many online booksellers see  Books in Print for the ISBNs. Quantity discounts for the paperback edition only: 1049 copies, 10; 50 copies, 15;  for 1,000 or more copies, call 800-933-2723, ext. 5634, or 703-575-5634. For desk copies:  memberascd.org. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Rothstein-Fisch, Carrie.   Managing diverse classrooms : how to build on students cultural strengths  Carrie  Rothstein-Fisch and Elise Trumbull.        p. cm.   Includes bibliographical references and index.   ISBN 978-1-4166-0624-6 pbk. : alk. paper  1.  Multicultural education--United States. 2.   Classroom management--United States.  I. Trumbull, Elise. II. Title.    LC1099.3.R68 2008   371.1024--dc22                                                             2007036782 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 09 08         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 

To all our colleagues in education whose innovations make  the most of their students cultural strengths.

Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .ix

Foreword by Patricia Green eld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xi

Introduction: The Need for a New Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xiii 1. A New Way of Thinking About Classroom Management . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2. The Culture of the Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 3. Families: Resources for Organization and Management . . . . . . . . . . . 48 4. Helping and SharingDoing What Comes Naturally  . . . . . . . . . . . . 80 5. Culturally Responsive Classroom Orchestration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101 6. The Organization of Learning in the Content Areas. . . . . . . . . . . . . 122 7. Classroom Orchestration of the Assessment Process . . . . . . . . . . . . 144

Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165

References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177

Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 187

About the Authors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195 MANAGING DIVERSE CLASSROOMS H OW  TO  B U I L D  O N  S T U D E N T S   C U LT U R A L  S T R E N G T H S

ix In addition to fresh ideas and high motivation, writing a book requires  numerous other resources. Among them are a goodly supply of optimism, a deep well of patience, and an enormous amount of collegial  support. Like any book, this one is the result of many peoples efforts.  Our Bridging Cultures colleagues have sustained us on all counts. First  among these colleagues is Dr. Patricia Marks Green eld, whose visionary work in the  eld of culture and human development underpins  this book and the project on which it is based. The Bridging Cultures  Project was a direct outgrowth of her research with her colleagues Dr.  Catherine Raeff and Dr. Blanca Quiroz, and her leadership in the project cannot be overstated. It is particularly  tting that Dr. Green eld has  written the Foreword to the book, setting the tone and context for the  representation of a body of work that owes so much to her. Dr. Blanca Quiroz, who was a graduate student at the inception  of the Bridging Cultures Project, is a founding research partner of the  project along with us and Dr. Green eld. Her insights, grounded in  her personal bicultural experience as well as theory, have guided us  throughout the life of the Bridging Cultures Project. Her participation  has continued throughout her graduate study at UCLA, her pursuit of  a doctorate at Harvard, and her  rst years as an assistant professor at  Texas AM University. We are profoundly grateful to the Bridging Cultures teachers, who  began as participants in our workshops on culture, human development, and education and then became coresearchers in their own  classrooms and schools. They are Ms. Marie Altchech, Ms. Catherine  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

x  M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Daley, Mrs. Kathy Eyler, Mrs. Elvia Hernandez, Mr. Giancarlo Mercado,  Mrs. Amada Prez, and Ms. Pearl Saitzyk. These exceptional teachers have shown exquisite skill in interpreting and applying theory as  well as continuously re ecting upon and re ning their practices. Their  innovations and thinking are at the heart of this book. All of these  teachers were generous enough to share both successes and failures  and to make their thoughts and actions explicit for others to learn  from. We also thank their cooperating schools and administrators, who  allowed them to try innovations within their classrooms and permitted  us to observe. Appreciation is due to colleagues who have encouraged us to  write this book, in particular Dr. Beverly Cabello, Dr. Janet E. Fish,  Dr. Rie Rogers Mitchell, and middle school teacher Mrs. Sharon Schneider. We are especially appreciative for the comments and insights  on our manuscript from kindergarten teacher Mrs. Angela Werth. We  believe that feedback from educators at many points in the grade  continuum has strengthened the book. Abundant thanks go also to our editors at the Association for  Supervision and Curriculum Development, Ms. Carolyn Pool and Ms.  Leah Lakins. They have been unfailingly generous with their time  and support, and we have found their guidance astute. It has been  an immense pleasure to work with both of them. Writing a book is inevitably taxing on the authors families, who  can never be given as much credit as they deserve. To our husbands  Bryan Fisch and Jerry Salzman, we are immeasurably grateful for  your patience and understanding and for demonstrating your respect  for what it takes to write a book by taking on endless additional  tasks of daily life. To our children, thank you for being  exible about  family time. The Bridging Cultures Project was initially supported by a grant from the U.S. Department  of Education, Of ce of Educational Research and Improvement to WestEd, the regional  laboratory for the Western United States. This grant funded Elise Trumbull to manage the  project. WestEd holds the Bridging Cultures trademark and has licensed its use to the  four founding Bridging Cultures researchers: Patricia M. Green eld, Blanca Quiroz, Carrie  Rothstein-Fisch, and Elise Trumbull. We thank the Russell Sage Foundation for its support  for the writing of this book, through a grant to Patricia M. Green eld. Additional  nancial  support from California State University, Northridge, has supported the  rst author to collect  much of the data presented here and to prepare the  nal manuscript.

xi My mentor Jerome Bruner was fond of saying, Nothing is so practical as a good theory. Managing Diverse Classrooms: How to Build  on Students Cultural Strengths by Carrie Rothstein-Fisch and Elise  Trumbull proves his point. Starting with a theory of two cultural pathways of developmentone collectivistic, the other individualistic Rothstein-Fisch and Trumbull demonstrate that teachers can use a  theoretical paradigm to generate manifold ways to manage a classroom in culturally compatible ways. When Elise Trumbull was at WestEd in San Francisco, she had the  vision to see the potential of our research, showing that a cross-cultural  con ict in values between Latino immigrant families and the schools was  the heart of the problem of formal education for the families children.  Elise contacted me about our research that documented this con ict in  preschool and elementary school, and a collaboration was born. Carrie  Rothstein-Fisch, from California State University, Northridge, immediately joined us, contributing her professional expertise in preservice  teacher training. This is the team that has produced this tremendously  useful and important volume, making culture and cultural diversity the  heart of classroom management for the very  rst time.  Managing Diverse Classrooms not only shows the value of theory for the practical everyday needs of teachers, it also shows what  teachers can do with empirical research. When we gave our  rst  workshop, we found that teachers had an aha! experience when  our research  ndings showed them that parents had different goals  for child development than they did. For example, they learned that  FOREWORD

xii  M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   helping one another was a very high priority for Latino immigrant  parents, whereas, in the same situation, teachers favored independent achievement. Before that, most had assumed that there were  right and wrong ways to do things at school and with the school.  They had never realized that what was right from the schools perspective could be very wrong from the parents perspective.  From this aha! experience, as readers will see, Bridging Cultures  teachers forged a partnership with us that has lasted to this day, more  than 10 years later. The teachers began to use their understanding of  the two cultures to develop new classroom management practices;  their practices became our research  ndings and results, a most  unusual but rewarding type of research. It was rewarding because the  ongoing development of new practices showed that the training had  stuck and it showed its generativity in producing classroom changes  ranging from increased parent involvement to modi cations in class  procedures and rules. It is these practices that Managing Diverse  Classrooms documents and shares with other teachers and educators  who may experience the same clash of cultures in school settings. In todays test-heavy environment, these results are not necessarily considered to be important effects. However, I believe that  Bridging Cultures will be the Head Start of this decadea key factor  for keeping Latino immigrant children in school. They will stay in  school because Bridging Cultures will allow them to do so without  losing respect for or distancing themselves from their parents. Children from Latino immigrant families, Native American children, or  children from other collectivistic backgrounds will not have to make  an eitheror choice between two value systems because their schools  will show, through the classroom management practices revealed in  this book, respect for the collectivistic value system they often bring  with them. Bridging Cultures classroom management is a bedrock on  which scholastic achievement can rest within multicultural schools. Patricia Green eld Venice, California

xiii INTRODUCTION:  THE NEED FOR A NEW APPROACH Unlike other books on classroom organization and management, this  book examines the topic from a cultural perspective. Our premise  is that cultural values and beliefs are at the core of all classroom  organization and management decisions. In parallel fashion, cultural  values and beliefs are at the center of students responses to teachers  strategies and of students own attempts to engage in and in uence  interactions in the classroom. Books and articles on classroom organization and management  have only recently begun to address the role of culture. But when  culture is addressed in the literature, it tends to be from the perspective of encouraging teachers to recognize cultural differences in  parents orientations to child rearing and schooling. Teachers may be  led to examine culture from the perspective of the outsider that is,  Those people have culture but not to regard themselves as people  whose values and beliefs are inherently cultural. However, schools  and teachers have cultures too Hollins, 1996; Lipka, 1998. School culture is relatively consistent across the United States and  re ects the individualistic values of the dominant, European American  culture. For instance, students are expected to show respect for others  and their personal property, to stay in assigned seats, and to keep their  hands to themselves Marzano, 2003. They are supposed to be responsible for their own individual learning, even as members of cooperative groups Slavin, 2006. Parents are encouraged to participate in  their childrens schooling in certain ways, such as helping with homework, volunteering in the classroom, or attending schoolwide events 

xiv  M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Connors  Epstein, 1995. For students, certain kinds of culture-based  communication styles are sanctioned over others, especially in discussions of subject matter Morine-Dershimer, 2006. Likewise, teachers  approaches to classroom organization and management also re ect  cultural values, usually those of the mainstream institutions in which  they have been schooled see Lipka, 1998. One model that recognizes the role of culture is described in the  article Culturally Responsive Classroom Management Weinstein,  Curran,  Tomlinson-Clarke, 2003. The authors identify three components for achieving culturally responsive management: 1 recognition of ones own cultural beliefs, biases, and assumptions; 2  acknowledgment of others ethnic, cultural, and other differences;  and 3 understanding of the ways that schools re ect and perpetuate discriminatory practices of the larger society p. 270. These are  essential elements for culturally responsive classroom management,  but realizing them can be a daunting task for teachers. They need  to know how to 1 examine their own cultural values, 2 develop  understanding of the values of others and regard them in a nonjudgmental way, and 3 apply what they learn about cultural differences  to the improvement of classroom practices, particularly in a way that  is meaningful, nonthreatening, and not overwhelming. THE BRIDGING CULTURES APPROACH This book attempts to address the how to of building on students  cultural strengths in the realm of classroom organization and management. First, we explore a framework for understanding culture that  focuses on the most important and fundamental differences between  two types of cultural orientationsindividualistic and collectivistic. In  individualistic cultures, the emphasis is on the growth and development of the individual as an increasingly independent entity who learns  to meet his or her own needs. In collectivistic cultures, the emphasis is  on the growth and development of an individual who remains closely  connected to his or her family and makes its well-being a priority.  Chapter 1 provides more detail about the differences. Second, we  show how teachers used the individualismcollectivism framework to 

I n t r o d u c t i o n   xv understand their own cultural values and those of their school as well  as those of the children and families they serve. Third, we provide  many examples of how teachers put their new understanding to use in  order to improve classroom organization, teaching, and learning. We believe an uncomplicated framework that captures the most  basic ways that cultures differ is far more useful than lengthy lists of  the features of various cultures. Teachers, whose roles and responsibilities have become increasingly complex and demanding, could  hardly be asked to remember all those details! Moreover, our research  with teachers shows that the individualismcollectivism framework  described in Chapter 1 is immediately understandable and useful  both for teachers self-re ection and as a way to understand children  and families. Ultimately, it is a vehicle for  nding common ground. Our approach and the teacher innovations presented throughout this book are compatible with a sociocultural, constructivist, and  developmental view of learning as opposed to a behaviorist one.  From our perspective, the organization and management of the daily  life of the classroom should re ect understanding of the following: Students are active learners whose development takes place 

within particular social and cultural contexts and is in uenced  by those contexts. Home socialization practices in uence how students interact 

and solve problems. Good classroom organization and management tap existing 

skills and dispositions while building new capacities. As they mature, students can take increasing responsibility for 

regulating their own learning and ensuring harmony in the classroom. THE BRIDGING CULTURES PROJECT Our model for approaching classroom organization and management  is based on a unique combination of theory, research, and teacherconstructed practices. Working with colleagues Patricia Green eld  and Blanca Quiroz, we developed the Bridging Cultures Project, a 

xvi  M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   collaborative action research project.1 The project emerged from  empirical research demonstrating the presence of cultural values conicts in schools Green eld, Quiroz,  Raeff, 2000; Raeff, Green eld,   Quiroz, 2000 and a theory of cultural differences Green eld, 1994;  Hofstede, 2001; Markus  Kitayama, 1991; Triandis, 1989. Seven elementary school teachers who work with large numbers of immigrant  Latino students and their families became teacher-researchers; they  learned about the individualismcollectivism framework and then  used that framework as a guide for designing culturally informed  instructional strategies that made sense for their classrooms. The result of the seven teachers efforts is a mountain of innovation: a collection of strategies and ideas for classroom organization  and management that are completely  eld-tested by teachers who  have come to understand the central role of culture in learning and  teaching. The teachers did not set out to explore classroom management, yet it became the  rst thing that they changed as a result of  their new understanding of the cultural values of their students. New  organizational strategies were integral to these changes in management. As we observed teachers over a period of  ve years, met with  them semimonthly, and conducted individual interviews with them,  we came to see that classroom organization and management were  among the elements most strongly in uenced by teachers knowledge of cultural differences see Trumbull, Diaz-Meza, Hasan,   Rothstein-Fisch, 2001. THEMES OF THE BOOK This book has several themesbig ideas that rise to the surface on  the basis of many examples. Readers may discover additional themes,  but the following seemed particularly salient. Teachers as Cultural Brokers When teachers have models for understanding cultural differences,  they can create classroom organization and management from the  1 Bridging Cultures is a registered trademark of WestEd. All rights reserved.

I n t r o d u c t i o n   xvii inside out instead of responding only to students external behaviors  and guessing what might be going on inside their minds and hearts.  Teachers who are knowledgeable about the culture of school and the  cultures of their students can serve as cultural brokers, helping their  students and students families negotiate new cultural terrain and  become biculturally pro cient Cabello  Burstein, 1995; DelgadoGaitan, 1996. They can also share their cultural knowledge about  families with other school personnel and help to in uence the development of policies that are more culturally congruent for families. Teachers Constructing Their Own Strategies The Bridging Cultures Project did not have a compendium of  strategies up its sleeve for teachers to learn and implement. In fact,  no strategiesnone whatsoeverwere recommended to teachers.  The idea was that, given a useful framework and some provocative research results, these capable, motivated, experienced teachers  were likely to design their own strategies to make their classrooms  more hospitable for their students. We still believe that nothing is as  practical as a good theoretical framework that gets teachers observing, thinking, re ecting, and devising new practices that make sense  in their own professional contexts. Making the Implicit Explicit One problem with differences in cultural values is that they tend  to remain implicitinvisibleand hence a source of con icts that may  never get satisfactorily resolved. Children whose home values con ict  with school values may become very confused as to what is appropriate behavior. When parents instruct children to listen quietly and not  bother the teacher, for instance, the teacher may think the children  are shy or limited in English pro ciency. A teacher who understands  that such students may have been socialized at home to be quiet and  respectful is likely to both interpret and act on the students behavior in  a different way, one more aligned to what the real reasons are behind  the students apparent lack of oral participation.

xviii  M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Listening to Teachers Voices The innovations from Bridging Cultures teachers are the heart  of this book, and many of them are presented in the teachers own  words. Teachers voices are not  ltered to achieve a consistent editorial style. The examples of practice presented in the book are  teacher-designed,  eld-tested practices designed by real elementary  school teachers to better serve their largely immigrant Latino student populations. The level of insight exhibited by the teachers as  they digested the research and theory and experimented with new  practices in their classrooms was impressive. And their synergistic  exchanges when they met as a group were incredibly rich with ideas  on topics such as the use of small-group activities, monitors, discipline, family communication, and the organization of instruction and  assessment. It is fair to say that the four professional researchers were  impressed at the quantity and quality of the teachers insights and  changes in practice! The data we cite come from classroom observations and  eld  notes, in-depth interviews, notes from group meetings, videotapes,  and informal conversations in person, by phone, and via e-mail.  Through these varied means, we believe we have accurately captured the thinking and practice of the seven dedicated educators  with whom we worked. We cite the teachers by name because they  have served as colleagues and researchers in their own right rather  than anonymous subjects in the project. Implementing Innovations in Homogeneous  Versus Heterogeneous Classrooms In the majority of the Bridging Cultures classrooms, students were  from immigrant Latino populations, and although teachers reported  that many were born in the United States, the data available to us  suggest that few of their parents were. In some classrooms, all of  the students were Latino; other classrooms included some African  Americans and a few European Americans. Thus most of the students  were from collectivistic cultures. Latin American cultures tend to be 

I n t r o d u c t i o n   xix far more collectivistic than the dominant, European American culture  Hofstede, 2001. African American culture, too, is more collectivistic than the dominant culture, though it has been described as also  having some strong individualistic elements Boykin  Bailey, 2000;  Nelson-LeGall  Resnick, 1998. Overall, the practices described throughout this book re ect a  turn away from the individualistic practices of most classrooms. The  intent is not an effort to eliminate them completely, but to bring  them into balance with the collectivistic practices of the homes of  the students. When teachers in more heterogeneous classrooms try out some  of the practices we offer, the results may differ from those observed  in Bridging Cultures classrooms. Teachers will need to consider what  mix of organizational and management strategies work best for their  students. Nevertheless, it would be dif cult to argue that collaboration, helping, and sharing are not important for all students. At the  same time, some students may need explicit coaching on how to  work more collaboratively. It is likely that in culturally heterogeneous  classrooms some mix of individualistic and collectivistic strategies  will be most effective. Even the Bridging Cultures teachers do not use  exclusively collectivistic organizational and management strategies,  as mentioned, because they believe their students need to be able to  learn to operate in an individualistic society as well as in a collectivistic family. They wish to develop a bridge that facilitates learning in  both directions. The key to making good decisions about organization and  management, as we emphasize, is to develop an awareness of the  important values of school and home cultures so as to avoid putting  students in the position of choosing one system over the other. This  tension was identi ed by one of our Bridging Cultures teachers, Mrs.  Amada Prez, who was born in Mexico. Speaking of herself and her  siblings, she said, We came to feel that the rules at school were more important than the rules at home. The school and the teachers were 

xx  M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   right. As a child, you begin to feel the con ict. Many of my  brothers stopped communicating with the family and with  my father because he was ignorant. Rothstein-Fisch, 2003,  p. 20 THE ORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK Chapter 1 introduces the individualismcollectivism framework and  key concepts related to classroom organization and management.  Chapter 2 shows how the power of the group is drawn upon to  maintain a focus on instruction and a harmonious interpersonal environment. Chapter 3 discusses how classroom organization and management can be built upon knowledge of families cultural value  systems and how this allowed Bridging Cultures teachers to vastly  improve home-school relations. Chapter 4 shows how students values and skills of helping and sharing were tapped to keep classrooms humming with meaningful learning activities. Chapter 5 gives  many examples of how classroom management, or orchestration,  was accomplished through strategies that relied on students collectivistic values. Chapter 6 deals with the organization of learning in  the content areas, with special attention to language arts and mathematics. Chapter 7 addresses classroom orchestration as applied to  student assessment. Finally, the Conclusion examines several important issues, including new directions for classroom orchestration and  recommendations for future research. It has been challenging to organize this book into discrete chapters because new ways of thinking about classroom organization and  management are integral to many aspects of educational programs. In  addition, the cultural strategies that teachers have used are interrelated  and integrated throughout their instructional programs. For example,  collaborative group work, helping, and sharingall compatible with  students collectivistic valuesoften occur simultaneously and can  apply to many aspects of instruction. Thus the same example may  appear in several places in the book, but can be analyzed with regard  to different issues.

I n t r o d u c t i o n   xxi Two additional points of clari cation may help readers. First, it  is important to know that over the  ve years of the project teachers assignments occasionally changed, though they remained at the  elementary school level. We cite the grade level in many of our  examples, but to avoid redundancy, we have purposely omitted it  where it doesnt seem as critical to the example. Second, when we  cite an example of a practice or an extended teacher quotation that  has been published previously, we give the published source. When  a quotation is not attributed, it comes from our  eld notes, observations or group meetings, interviews, or videotaped workshops.
C H A P T E R 1 A NEW WAY OF THINKING ABOUT  CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT Teacher 1: Im having real problems with my class. They keep helping each  other when I want them to work independently. They touch each other,  cant seem to keep their materials to themselves, and every time I ask them  a question about a fact, they answer with a story about their family! Teacher 2: It must be a cultural thing. Teacher 1: What does culture have to do with classroom management? I  have to get the kids to behave and learn! What does culture have to do with classroom management? As it turns  out, it has a lot to do with it! The goal of Managing Diverse Classrooms is to look at the impact of culture on classroom organization  and management. Throughout this book, we examine how teachers  equipped with a framework for understanding cultural differences  have constructed novel ways of organizing their classrooms. One of the most common concerns of teachers is how to manage  a classroom full of students Evertson  Weinstein, 2006. After all, if  the classroom is in chaos, how can learning take place? In this book,  we suggest that, in order to make good decisions about classroom  organization and management, teachers need to understand the role  of culture in human development and schooling. Understanding the  role of culture does not mean learning endless facts about a great  many cultures, but rather coming to see how culture shapes beliefs 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   about learning and education. When teachers understand cultural  differences, they begin to re-examine and redesign their classroom  organization and management in many fruitful ways Trumbull,  Rothstein-Fisch, Green eld,  Quiroz, 2001. As a result, teaching  and learning become easier. In this chapter, we lay the foundation for the innovations described  throughout the book. We brie y de ne classroom management and  culture so as to be explicit about what we mean by our terminology. In particular, we describe the intersection of classroom management and culture. Next, we introduce the individualismcollectivism  frameworkthe system for understanding cultural differences that  underlies all the innovations described throughout the book. Finally,  we describe two important studies that demonstrate how cultural  value systems of individualism and collectivism can in uence school  settings. WHAT DO WE MEAN BY CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT? In Figure 1.1 we de ne the terms used throughout the book. Both  classroom organization and classroom management have the ultimate  goal of making the classroom environment hospitable for learning.  We agree with Weinsteins 2003 observation that the fundamental  task of classroom management is to create an inclusive, supportive,  and caring environment p. 267. Organization, especially the social  organization that includes how students communicate and interact  with each other and the teacher, is also a key to an inclusive, supportive, and caring environment. Every choice a teacher makes about  organization or management re ects a cultural perspective, whether it  is visible or not. Likewise, the teachers choices will affect students in  different ways, depending upon how the children have been socialized within their home cultures. Thus, effective classroom management requires knowledge of cultural backgrounds Weinstein, 2003,  p. 268. Such knowledge is essential also to the development of  caring relationships and the interpersonal skills needed to interact  effectively with both students and their families.

A  N e w  Wa y  o f  T h i n k i n g  A b o u t  C l a s s r o o m  M a n a g e m e n t   3 F I G U R E  1 . 1 Classroom Management Terms Classroom managementthe set of strategies that teachers and students use to  ensure a productive, harmonious learning environment to prevent disruptions in  the learning process Classroom orchestrationthe processes of structuring classroom interactions and  activities in ways that harmonize values of home and school, drawing on students  cultural resources to resolve problems, avoid confl icts, and minimize the need for  discipline Classroom organizationthe ways that teachers structure classroom interactions  and activities to promote learning, including communication, relationships, time, and  the arrangement of the physical environment Disciplineany action or set of actions taken by the teacher to directly control  student behavior a component of management Punishmenta form of discipline entailing either withdrawing a privilege or subjecting the student to unpleasant consequences WHAT DO WE MEAN BY CULTURE? What, exactly, is culture? Our way of thinking about culture has been  called a cognitive approach to culture because we are interested in  the deep elements of culture related to thinking, teaching, learning,  and making meaning Fetterman, 1989. We de ne culture as the  systems of values, beliefs, and ways of knowing that guide communities of people in their daily lives Trumbull, 2005, p. 35. The concept of systems of values and beliefs is central to what we describe  later in this chapterthe cultural values framework that has proven  effective in helping teachers learn about two differing cultural values systems. By ways of knowing, we mean how people organize  their world cognitively through language and other symbol systems.  It includes how they approach learning and problem solving, how  they construct knowledge, and how they pass it on from generation  to generation. Culture is manifest in how groups of people carry on  in their daily lives. For example, some people like to stay together as  a family for all kinds of weekend activities, whereas others prefer to 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   do their own thing. These are not just matters of personal preference, but are guided by cultural values, as we will see. HOW IS CULTURE INVOLVED IN  ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT? Questions of organization and management are, ultimately, questions of what is valued in a particular setting Evertson  Randolph,  1995, p. 19. What happens in the classroom is primarily re ective  of the cultural values of the school and the teacher. For example,  what teachers consider to be discipline problems are determined  by their own culture,  ltered through personal values and teaching  style Johns  Espinoza, 1996, p. 9. Of course, there are differences in teachers instructional and management styles Walker   Hoover-Dempsey, 2006, but the underlying values motivating teachers behaviors are likely to be quite similar. This similarity results  from two observable facts: 1 the majority of teachers are European  American and implicitly hold dominant-culture values Gay, 2006;  and 2 most other teachers have been educated in U.S. schools,  and in that process, they have been taught the right way to teach  and manage the classroom. For this reason, teachers from nondominant cultural groups have often learned to suppress their intuitive  cultural knowledge in favor of the best practices that they learned  in school Hollins, 1996; Lipka, 1998; Trumbull et al., 2001. THE BRIDGING CULTURES PROJECT The examples that  ll these pages come from the Bridging Cultures  Project, a collaborative action research project involving seven elementary school teachers in classrooms with large numbers of immigrant Latino students. Unlike most teacher training interventions that  are short term, the Bridging Cultures Project has been a longitudinal  professional development and research endeavor. The project began  with three professional development workshops completed in four  months, and it continued with a series of whole-group meetings, 

A  N e w  Wa y  o f  T h i n k i n g  A b o u t  C l a s s r o o m  M a n a g e m e n t   5 classroom observations, and interviews over a period of  ve years.  Although the project is described in detail elsewhere Trumbull,  Diaz-Meza, Hasan,  Rothstein-Fisch, 2001, readers of this book  will bene t from knowing about the participants, the schools demographics and contexts, and the Bridging Cultures approach to classroom organization and management. Participants Professional researchers. Four professional researchers collaborated to develop and carry out the project: Dr. Patricia M. Greeneld, a professor of Cross-cultural Psychology at the University of  California, Los Angeles; Dr. Green elds graduate student, Ms. Blanca  Quiroz now Dr. Quiroz is an assistant professor at Texas AM University; Dr. Carrie Rothstein-Fisch, associate professor of Educational  Psychology and Counseling at California State University, Northridge;  and Dr. Elise Trumbull, an applied linguist and, at the time, senior  research associate with WestEd, the regional educational laboratory  based in San Francisco. Teacher-researchers. The seven teachers in the Bridging Cultures  Project were all teaching in bilingual Spanish-English elementary  school classrooms and had an interest in multicultural education.  They all had ample teaching experience, ranging from 5 to 21 years,  with an average of 12.7 years. Four of the teachers are Latino, and  three are European American. Two teachers were born in Mexico,  one in Peru, and one in Germany, although all of these four had  immigrated to the United States between the ages of 2 and 8. The  other three teachers were born in the United States. Six teachers are  female, and one is male. As a fortuitous bonus, the teachers represented all grade levels  from kindergarten through 5th grade, and this remained true throughout the project, even with changes in grade assignments for the  rst  four years. Three of the teachers have masters degrees two in education, one in  ne arts, and two were highly involved in the Los  Angeles Uni ed School Districts Intern Program as mentor teachers. 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   During the course of the project, two teachers earned their National  Board for Professional Teaching Standards Certi cation. These were  not average teachers! However, they were perfect candidates to help  us understand and apply the framework of individualism and collectivism to educational practice in the real world. We use the teachers  real names throughout this book because it contains their teaching  and learning innovations. They are Marie Altchech, Catherine Daley,  Kathy Eyler, Elvia Hernandez, Amada Prez, Giancarlo Mercado, and  Pearl Saitzyk.  The participant selection process deserves some description.  Teachers were recruited speci cally because they were identi ed as  being interested in learning more about their Latino students. We  mindfully selected teachers committed to bilingual and multicultural education and willing to give up three Saturdays for a modest stipend in schools serving a large student population of poor  immigrant Latino students from Mexico and Central America. Experience with this particular population turned out to be very important  because evidence indicated that immigrants from these areas might  be among the most collectivistic students in the United States see  Goldenberg  Gallimore, 1995; Green eld, Quiroz,  Raeff, 2000;  Raeff, Green eld,  Quiroz, 2000; Valds, 1996. This fact would  increase the likelihood that knowledge of the individualistic and collectivistic systems would provide teachers with an immediate context  for applying new content knowledge to a population that might bene t most. Our hypothesis was that if the framework were useful for  committed teachers working with a population who had experienced  con ict in cross-cultural values, then they would be able to construct  meaningful new classroom practices based on their knowledge of  the competing cultural values systems. School Demographics and Contexts The seven teachers taught at six different schools. All the schools  are in Southern California:  ve teachers taught at four schools in 

A  N e w  Wa y  o f  T h i n k i n g  A b o u t  C l a s s r o o m  M a n a g e m e n t   7 the Los Angeles Uni ed School District LAUSD, one teacher taught  in Ventura County about 60 miles north of Los Angeles, and one  teacher taught in the city of Whittier in southern Los Angeles county.  The teacher from Ventura County taught at a school where a vast  majority of students came from immigrant or migrant farm worker  families. These children lived in the most rural area, and because of  the association of collectivism with rural residence and an agricultural way of life, we consider them to be the most collectivistic of all  of our classroom groups. Two of the seven teachers taught in one  of the lowest-performing schools in Los Angeles, based on standardized test scores. Two other schools were located in high-crime, urban  neighborhoods. Approach to Classroom Organization and Management Overall, the purpose of the project was to foster culturally  responsive teaching and learning opportunities for immigrant Latino  students and their families, the population served by the participating teachers. The project used a cultural values framework to see if  teachers understanding of the deep meaning of culture would have  implications for teaching and learning.  The Bridging Cultures Project emphasized two things: 1 supporting teachers to deepen their knowledge of cultural values systems and the role of those systems in human development, schooling,  learning, and teaching; and 2 offering teachers an opportunity to  adopt a self-re ective stance whereby the contribution of their own  attitudes, values, and taken-for-granted cultural patterns Bowers   Flinders, 1990, p. 7 and those of their schools can be examined. It  was this combination of a powerful but accessible cultural theory  and the innovations of the Bridging Cultures teachers that motivated  us to write this book. Many teachers feel frustrated and overwhelmed when it comes to  acquiring cultural knowledge. Describing her perspective before she  participated in the Bridging Cultures Project, Mrs. Eyler said
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   I wanted to understand my students better, so I started studying Mexican culture. Then I realized that the children in my  class came from so many distinct regions of Mexico, Central  and South America, each with differing histories and traditions. I knew that I would never know enough. I had to give  up trying. Though many teachers may have had at least some opportunity  to learn about cultural issues in education, whether through preservice courses or professional development workshops, they are not  likely to have had access to a theoretical framework that is both easy  to grasp and immediately useful for understanding arguably the most  important distinctions among cultures. The individualismcollectivism framework is just that. We have come to call it the Bridging  Cultures framework, but in truth sociologists and anthropologists  have seen the explanatory power of the framework for more than 50  yearsalthough they have not always used the labels individualism  and collectivism Waltman  Bush-Bacelis, 1995. Using this streamlined framework, with only two elements, the  Bridging Cultures teachers were able to generate an almost endless  array of successful strategies for working with the students and families they served. The framework and the examples we present should  stimulate readers to generate their own innovations that make sense  in their particular school communities. In fact, the framework is most  useful when it is used as a guide to learn from students and families  directly about the details of their own lives. INDIVIDUALISM AND COLLECTIVISM:  TWO CONTRASTING VALUE SYSTEMS Research suggests that two broad cultural value systems, individualism and collectivism, shape peoples thoughts and actions in virtually all aspects of life Green eld, 1994; Hofstede, 2001; Markus   Kitayama, 1991; Triandis, 1989. Figure 1.2 lists some of the  most important contrasts between individualism and collectivism.

A  N e w  Wa y  o f  T h i n k i n g  A b o u t  C l a s s r o o m  M a n a g e m e n t   9 The fundamental distinction between these two systems is the relative emphasis placed on individual versus group well-being. While  self-realization is the ideal with many individualistic cultures, in the  collectivist model, individuals must  t into the group, and group realization is the ideal Waltman  Bush-Bacelis, 1995, pp. 6667. It is  not a matter of valuing one or the otherindividual or groupbut  rather the degree of emphasis accorded to each. F I G U R E  1 . 2 The IndividualismCollectivism Framework  Individualism Collectivism Representative of mainstream United  States, Western Europe, Australia, and  Canada Representative of 70 of world cultures Triandis, 1989, including those  of many U.S. immigrants Well-being of individual; responsibility for self Well-being of group; responsibility for group Independenceself-reliance Interdependencecooperation Individual achievement Familygroup success Self-expression Respect Self-esteem Modesty Task orientation Social orientation Cognitive intelligence Social intelligence Before proceeding further, we caution once again that every culture has both individualistic and collectivistic values. The dichotomy  we present is a distillation of the general tendencies that may emerge  when the members of . . . a culture are considered as a whole  Markus  Kitayama, 1991, p. 225. Great variation exists within a  culture, just as any one person will exhibit both individualistic and  collectivistic behaviors at different times. The elements that constitute  culture are not separate and static but rather interactive and constantly evolving see Rogoff, 2003; Shore, 2002. Of course, within 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   any cultural group, individuals will vary in the degree to which they  identify with particular values, beliefs, or ways of knowing. Yet it can  be very useful for teachers to understand the dominant tendencies of  a cultural group as a starting place for exploration and further learning. We return to these points later in this chapter. In the United States, a country known for its history of rugged individualism, the dominant values include independence,  self-reliance, individual achievement, and cognitive development.  Children learn early on that they are expected to take responsibility for themselves  rst and foremost, and it is regarded as a healthy  developmental step when young adults achieve separation from their  families Hofstede, 2001. The individualistic American views himself  as someone who is a distinct individual . . . capable of self-assertion  and . . . free to think and act according to personal choice or volition  Raeff, 1997, p. 225. Common proverbs capture this individualistic  world view: Stand on your own two feet. Every man for himself.  The squeaky wheel gets the grease. In contrast, children from collectivistic families are socialized with  values that emphasize working together interdependently rather than  working alone independently Green eld, 1994. In Mexico, a highly  collectivistic country, the dominant values are interdependence,  cooperation, family unity, modesty, respect, and social development  Delgado-Gaitan, 1994; Green eld, 1994; Tapia Uribe, LeVine,   LeVine, 1994. Personal choices are likely to be evaluated relative  to their potential bene t to the family, respect for elders, and modesty about ones accomplishments. These choices are valued over  self-expression. When it comes to completing a task, it is far more  important to engage social relationships  rst, and then the task will  get done Hofstede, 2001. Once again, we can look to popular proverbs for insights into  what a society values. Consider how the following proverbs re ect  a collectivistic perspective: No task is too big when done together.  Many hands make light work. The nail that sticks up gets pounded  down.

A  N e w  Wa y  o f  T h i n k i n g  A b o u t  C l a s s r o o m  M a n a g e m e n t   11 According to Green eld 1994,  Each society strikes a particular balance between individual  and group. The major mode of one society is the minor mode  of another. The balance is never perfect. Each emphasis individualism or collectivism has its own psychological cost. . .  In socially oriented societies, the cost of interdependence  is experienced as suppression of individual development,  whereas in individualistically oriented cultures, the cost of  independence is experienced as alienation. p. 5 Hence, both systems have advantages and disadvantages. INDIVIDUALISM AND COLLECTIVISM AT SCHOOL Schools in the United States tend to re ect the values of the dominant culture, which has its roots in Western Europe. They are highly  in dividualistic, with the goal of teaching children to become independent and to strive for in dividual success Green eld, Quiroz,   Raeff, 2000. In contrast, many immigrant families as well as American Indians, Alaska Natives, Paci c Islanders, and African Americans  socialize their children to be more collectivistic. In their child-rearing  practices, these families emphasize maintenance of close bonds to  family, responsiveness to family needs and goals, and working on  tasks together as a group. In a large study encompassing 72 countries, Hofstede 2001 found that the purpose of education is perceived differently by individualist and collectivist societies. In the former, education  is seen as aimed at preparing the individual for a place in  society of other individuals. This means learning to cope with  new, unknown, unforeseen situations . . . The purpose of  learning is not so much to know how to do as it is how to  learn . . . In the collectivist society, education stresses adaptation to the skills and virtues necessary to be an acceptable  group member. This leads to a premium on the products of 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   tradition. Learning is more often seen as a one-time process,  reserved for the young only, who have to learn how to do  things in order to participate in society. p. 335 From the individualistic perspective, learning is an individual  matter; knowledge is acquired or constructed by individualsalbeit  in a social context. Students are considered responsible for their own  learning, and one of the developmental goals of schooling is to foster  independent, autonomous learners Betts, 2004; Centre for Promoting Learner Autonomy, 2006. The learning relation ship is primarily  between the teacher and the child, not among the group of students in  the classroom. If students need help, they ask the teacher questions something dominant-culture parents often encourage their children  to do. Even when students work in cooperative-learning groups, the  emphasis is on individual learning and achievement; students receive  individual grades based on their contribution Slavin, 2006. In U.S.  schools, aca demic progress is measured frequently through individual assessment and reported through individual grades. It is easy to  assume that autonomy and collectivism cannot coexist. But members  of collectivistic cultures do have autonomy. The individual makes  choices, but always voluntarily in cooperation with others. As Mosier  and Rogoff 2003 note, small children in Japan or among the Maya  in Guatemala may not be urged to help, but they see everyone else  helping, and eventually they are likely to choose to help. Children from collectivistic families are socialized to work toward  group rather than individual goals. They may be accustomed to working together as a group to help others with their tasks even before  they consider their own assignment Raeff, Green eld,  Quiroz,  2000. Collectivistic families also emphasize learning embedded in  a social context. In the classroom, collectivistic students help each  other, and group success rather than individual achievement is the  goal McLaughlin  Bryan, 2003. When such students are placed  in cooperative-learning groups, they collaborate easily. They have  learned to rely on and support each other, and they have been taught 

A  N e w  Wa y  o f  T h i n k i n g  A b o u t  C l a s s r o o m  M a n a g e m e n t   13 not to bother the teacher with questions because that could show  disrespect Valds, 1996. From the individualistic point of view, an academic task has value  in and of itself. In the classroom, the most important thing is to get  ones work done. Relationships with other students come second.  But given all that we know about the collectivistic value system, it is  not surprising that students from collectivistic backgrounds may be  confused when their teacher tells them to pay attention to the task at  hand to the exclusion of their peers Isaac, 1999. In their minds, the  relationships are paramount, and academic tasks can be completed  much more easily if they help and are helped by each other. Schooling itself, even in collectivistic societies, is intrinsically  individualistic in the sense that achievement is ultimately measured  on the individual level. However, the individualism associated with  formal education is moderated by the indigenous collectivism in  countries such as Mexico McLaughlin  Bryan, 2003, Japan Lewis,  1995, and Israel Ben-Peretz, Eilam,  Yankelevitch, 2006. Educacin Versus Education An illustration of the differences between collectivistic and individualistic orientations is the meaning of education in the United  States versus the meaning of educacin in Spanish. In the United  States, education typically refers to formal education in school settings. It is associated with doing well academically and demonstrating that ability through good grades. For immigrant Latino parents, the purpose of educacin is much  broader: to produce a good and knowledgeable person, one who  respects other people and does not place self above others in importance Valds, 1996. Social and ethical development and cognitive  and academic development are seen as integrated rather than separate Goldenberg  Gallimore, 1995. Ones social behavior in a  group such as the family or the classroom is of paramount concern; in fact, being a respectful contributor to group well-being rather  than focusing on ones own achievement is highly valued. So when 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   immigrant Latino parents come for a parent-teacher conference, their   rst question is likely to be Cmo se porta mi hijohija?How is  my sondaughter behaving?. A teacher may  nd it dif cult to sti e  her consternation after hearing the same question from 25 or 30 sets  of parents, believing that all the parents care about is their childs  behavior, when the teachers goal is to discuss the childs academic  progress. RESEARCH ON GROUP VERSUS INDIVIDUAL ORIENTATION Two empirical research studies have contributed important insights  into how individualism and collectivism operate in the classroom.  The  rst study Raeff, Green eld,  Quiroz, 2000 demonstrated that  helping in the classroom can be viewed very differently, depending upon ones cultural value orientation. Fifth-grade students, their  mothers, and predominantly European American teachers in two  schools responded to a series of short scenarios depicting homeschool con icts. In one scenario, a classroom dilemma was posed: It is the end of the school day, and the class is cleaning up.  Denise isnt feeling well, and she asks Jasmine to help her  with her job for the day, which is cleaning the blackboard.  Jasmine isnt sure that she will have time to do both jobs.  What do you think the teacher should do? p. 66 The parents and children sampled in School One were all European American, and they tended to agree with the teachers that in  the case of cleaning the blackboard, a third person such as a volunteer should be sought. They reasoned that Jasmine had her own job  to do, and her  rst responsibility was to complete her own task. This  response illustrates an individualistic value, a primary focus on task  completion over social relationships or the welfare of others. It also  emphasizes the importance of choice: whether or not a person wants  to help is an individual decision.

A  N e w  Wa y  o f  T h i n k i n g  A b o u t  C l a s s r o o m  M a n a g e m e n t   15 School Two served immigrant Latino students and their families.  An overwhelming majority of immigrant Latino parents 74 percent  selected a helping response to solve the dilemma, believing that the   rst obligation is to help others regardless of ones own individual  responsibility to complete a task. In contrast, only 13 percent of  the teachers responded with a helping solution. Similar to School  One, the teachers believed that  nding a third person or protecting  the tasks completion was most important. The students response to  help 36 percent demonstrates that they are being socialized in the  direction of the teachers and away from their parents. What do these outcomes mean? European American students,  parents, and teachers responded very similarly, representing a harmony between home and school for the students in School One. But  School Two showed a dramatic difference between the Latino parents on the one hand, and their children and childrens teachers on  the other. The cultural value of helping, so central to the collectivistic  family, was being undermined by the schools individualism. By 5th  grade, the students, already becoming products of their U.S. schooling, responded more like their teachers to this scenario. Thus the  value of helping that was so important to parents had already begun  to lose its potency, and the resolution of con ict between home values and school values shifted toward the value system of school. In a second study, Green eld and colleagues 2000 videotaped  a series of naturally occurring parent-teacher conferences between  immigrant Latino parents and their childrens European American  elementary school teacher. Discourse analysis of the conversations  during conferences revealed that parents and their childs teacher  agreed on developmental goals only one-third of the time. More  often than not, parents fell silent or changed the subject. The teacher  exhibited frustration with the ways parents responded to her comments, and she, too, steered the conversation away from topics the  parents brought up. It was evident that the teacher and parents were  not understanding each othernot in terms of actual words but in  terms of their expectations for the child. The areas of con ict in the  discourse tended to cluster around the following themes:
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   The

 individual versus the family accomplishment The teachers criterion for positive development was individual  accomplishment; the parents criterion was the accomplishment  of the family as a whole or the childs contribution to family  accomplishment p. 104. Praise versus criticism

The teacher tended to praise the  students and their accomplishments, to promote self-esteem,  whereas parents appeared to avoid praise in favor of criticism  to encourage normative behaviorthat is, not sticking out from  the group. Cognitive skills versus social skills

Parents were typically  more interested in their childrens social behavior, whereas the  teacher preferred to discuss cognitive and academic skills. In  addition, when the teacher did talk about a social behavior such  as talking to other students in class, she evaluated it negatively.  However, it would not necessarily be seen as negative by the  parents, who might, from a more collectivistic perspective, view  this form of behavior as a way to strengthen social ties among the  class members p. 105. Oral expression versus respect for authority

The teacher  considered talking in class to be valuable not only for language  development but also for cognitive development. Collectivistic  parents, on the other hand, tended to want their children to show  respect for authority through quiet listening, thus the lack of positive response to the teachers comments from the parents in the  study. In fact, in 26 out of 28 cases, the teachers suggestion that  the students talk more was met with a noncooperative response  from the parents. Parents often simply disconnected from the  portions of the conversation related to that topic. Parenting role versus teaching role

The teacher advocated  that parents teach their children at home, whereas the parents  likely believed that academic instruction was solely the teachers  job. In 21 out of 22 times the topic came up, parents either did  not respond or changed the topic. Nor did parents respond positively to the teachers advice on parenting skills. They seemed 

A  N e w  Wa y  o f  T h i n k i n g  A b o u t  C l a s s r o o m  M a n a g e m e n t   17 to believe that it was their job to parent and the teachers job to  teach. The researchers suggest that perhaps parents prefer to  socialize their children in their own way at home because of a  sense that the teachers suggestions undermine rather than support their ideal child p. 106. Taken together, these two studies by Green eld and colleagues  demonstrate that parents and teachers may often have opposing  goals for children from immigrant Latino families, and these differences may cause many kinds of tension and con ict. On the one  hand, teachers are interested in task completion, cognitive development, and speaking out. On the other hand, parents seem to value  social skills such as helping and sharing, noncognitive aspects of  intelligence, and respect for authority. Guess who is caught between  these two sets of con icting values? As we mentioned in the Introduction p.xix, this tension is described by Bridging Cultures teacher  Amada Prez: We came to feel that the rules at school were more important than the rules at home. The school and the teachers were  right. As a child, you begin to feel the con ict. Many of my  brothers stopped communicating with the family and with  my father, because he was ignorant. Rothstein-Fisch, 2003,  p. 20 No child should have to choose between family or school values and thereby lose out on crucial socialization. But how can optimal learning take place when students are con icted about what is  right? Recognition of this cultural tension is the impetus for this  book, because when teachers act as cultural brokers, all kinds of  harmonious learning and classroom organization can take place. THE LIMITATIONS OF THE BRIDGING CULTURES FRAMEWORK Generalizations are risky, and dichotomous lists of cultural features  can be misleading on many grounds. In the case of generalizations, 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   nave or incorrect inferences may be made about groups or individuals, whose histories and lives are always more complex and varied  than any framework can capture. Or, as Raeff 1997 puts it, we  must bear in mind that common values may be played out in different speci c forms . . . , shaping different goals and routes of selfdevelopment p. 228. So, for instance, the collectivism of Korean  Canadians Kim  Choi, 1994 will look different from that of Mexican Americans Delgado-Gaitan, 1994. In the case of a dichotomous cultural framework, one may be led  to think that the values represented by the two categories are mutually exclusive. Learning in any culture has both an independent individual and an interdependent social aspect. Human development  takes place primarily through social interactions; but the nature of  these social interactions varies in large part according to the cultural  values of the society within which the child is developing and learning. Thus, independence and interdependence intersect in different  ways within the individual, and the way they do is shaped by culture  Raeff, 1997. As we have said, the two categories represent tendencies in emphasis rather than absolute presence or absence of a given  value. Human experience is far too complex to  t neatly into any  conceptual scheme. No society is all one thing or another Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch,  Green eld, 2000, p. 4. There will always be  diversity within any group, even if the group members are all recent  immigrants from the same state of Mexico. Another caution has to do with making assumptions about cultures solely on the basis of peoples ethnicity or national origin. Other  factors are equally, if not more, important. Socioeconomic status  SES affects tendencies toward individualism or collectivism, with  higher SES associated with greater individualism Hofstede, 2001.  Likewise, other aspects of social context, such as whether the family resides in a rural or an urban area, or if the parents have been  formally or informally educated, affect the degree to which a family  is individualistic or collectivistic. For example, urban life and higher  levels of formal education tend to make people more individualistic. In short, oversimpli cation of culture should be avoided. See 

A  N e w  Wa y  o f  T h i n k i n g  A b o u t  C l a s s r o o m  M a n a g e m e n t   19 Green eld, Keller, Fuligni,  Maynard 2003 for a discussion of the  frameworks validity. THE POTENTIAL OF THE BRIDGING CULTURES FRAMEWORK Despite the limitations of this frameworkand, indeed, any framework is likely to have limitationsit is a good place to start in order  to grasp major differences among cultures. Although cultures change  over time as they come into contact with each other and as their economic circumstances change, many child-rearing values persist over  time Green eld, Suzuki,  Rothstein-Fisch, 2006; Hofstede, 1991;  Lambert, Hammers,  Frasure-Smith, 1979; Nsamenang  Lamb,  1994. For example, outward acculturation can move people toward  individualistic behavior at school or work, but collectivistic values  and child-rearing practices are likely to persist at home Roman,  2006. The value orientation of collectivism is particularly robust among  recent immigrants from rural and poor areas of Mexico and Central  and South America, who maintain a strong emphasis on the unity of  the family Delgado-Gaitan, 1994; Valds, 1996. Thus if the framework proved useful with this populationilluminating dramatic differences between school and home, generating ways to draw on  students strengths, and helping to avoid con icts in the classroom then educators could address how it might apply in settings where  relations between home and school values were more subtle, such as  with second-generation students or in heterogeneous classrooms. As we seek to build bridges between home and school cultures,  we must not reduce complex individuals to simple categories; nevertheless, we cannot ignore the compelling in uences of childrens  home culture on their education. If we can remember that the framework is just a tool, a heuristic for helping us organize our observations  and questions, we can avoid the pitfalls associated with categories  Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch, Green eld,  Quiroz, 2001, p. 4. Taking  the perspective that every child is unique and treating each student 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   as an individual is, in itself, taking an individualistic perspective, thus  negating the strong and powerful in uence of culture. The individualismcollectivism framework has the potential to  help educators make implicit cultural patterns explicit. By naming  them and by developing a theoretical understanding of the relationships between the patterns Bowers  Flinders, 1990, p. 20, teachers can be supported to understand the kinds of con icts immigrant  students and their families may face. This level of understanding can  lead to constructive classroom practices and decisions about management and organization that build upon students and parents cultural strengths.

In Chapter 2, we explore how the group orientation of immigrant  Latino students plays out in a variety of classroom situations. We  also show how teachers were able to capitalize on students highly  developed social skills to maintain a harmonious instructional environment. In many instances, teachers found that simple solutions to  issues of management and organization lay right before their eyes in  the cultural strengths of their students.
C H A P T E R 2 THE CULTURE OF  THE GROUP  Traditionally, teachers have ignored the notion of peer culture and group  norms in the classroom. They have focused their attention on individual  learners and have viewed in uencing students to behave appropriately as  an issue between the teacher and the individual student. James Levin and James F. Nolan,  Principles of Classroom Management: A Professional Decision-Making Model  A group orientation is the hallmark of a collectivistic culture. Thus,  understanding the depth and meaning of a group orientation is at  the heart of teachers strategies to make classrooms culturally responsive for their students from collectivistic backgrounds. Based on our  observations, interviews, and meetings with the teachers, a group  orientation, more than anything else, is what distinguishes Bridging  Cultures classrooms. According to the Bridging Cultures teachers, it  is the concept of group that often keeps the learning going and  virtually eliminates the need for discipline. Students from collectivistic backgrounds seem to need little or no instruction on how to  form groups or function within them. Students very sense of self is  constituted by their group membership, with wide-ranging implications for how they think, communicate, learn, and behave Markus   Kitayama, 1991.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   In this chapter we explore the family as the basis for understanding a group orientation and look at what it means to organize classrooms around the idea of the group. We describe idealized versions  of two kinds of classroom organizationcollectivistic and individualistic. We discuss physical aspects of the classroom and strategies  for creating and organizing inclusive groups. We also discuss the  nature of group membership through a series of examples on how  the group manages itself and cares for its members. THE FAMILY AS THE BASIS FOR CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT  AND ORGANIZATION The examples throughout this book illustrate a perspective on classroom organization that originates in the family relationships of students from collectivist cultures. Students behaviors and the beliefs  that motivate them emerge from within their families, where group  interdependence begins and is most prominent Delgado-Gaitan,  1994; Markus  Lin, 1999. In Mexican American cultural contexts,  the extended family provides a primary social network for selfde nition that affects all relationships beyond the family Markus   Lin, 1999, p. 323. Once teachers recognize that the family is the  central organizing schema for students behavior, then they can construct classroom practices that work with instead of against that orientation see Gay, 2006. When teachers leverage this knowledge  into classroom organization and planning, the bene ts are manifest:  students engage in more learning because they are not uncomfortably isolated from peers, confused about what counts as appropriate  behavior, or fearful of risk taking. The family notion of working together for the mutual bene t of  all is easily applied to group work in schools. Group-oriented classrooms, with students working together interdependently, support  academic accomplishment and minimize misbehavior. The group is  seen as having the potential for self-regulation, cohesiveness, and a  synergy that derives from its members acting in concert with each  other rather than as individuals.

T h e  C u l t u r e  o f  t h e  G r o u p   23 Others have recognized the metaphor of the class as a family  as useful for understanding the relationships among immigrant and  minority students. For example, Nieto 1999 describes research in a  largely Latino high school wherein a teachers knowledge of the Latino  value of familia transformed relationships and reversed the trend in  dropout rates in that school. However, we question the authors conclusion that students learned to develop collective responsibility for  one another through activities such as peer tutoring and mentoring.  Those students almost certainly came to school with that skill. It  may have been ignored, devalued, or even provoked punishment in  classrooms where helping others and supporting group efforts were  seen as either unrelated to academic achievement or, worse, as the  sources of classroom disruption. However, once collective responsibility was valued, it could apparently reemerge. In a prominent book on elementary classroom management, the  authors present four teachers as successful, but different, exemplary  classroom managers Weinstein  Mignano, 2003. One teacher,  Viviana Love, is an immigrant herself, from rural Puerto Rico. She  structures her 1st grade bilingual class as she would a family, telling parents, At home youre the parents . . . but at school, Im the  mother. Were all family, one big family, all Hispanics, and we all help  each other p. 15. Her comment echoes the proverb La maestra es  la segunda madre The teacher is the second mother. Thus, even without precise and explicit explanations of why  the family metaphor is so fundamental to student success and wellmanaged classrooms, insightful teachers recognize its usefulness.  Yet without a theoretical framework to guide teachers classroom  organization, such intuitive knowledge can go untapped or be only  partially effective. A limited understanding of how critical groupness is for collectivistic students can result in mixed messages unless  teachers make explicit rules about when to help others and when  to work alone. Both individual work and group work are important,  but until teachers recognize the cultural strengths that students bring  to schools, they may fail to fully use those strengths to the bene t of  students success in school.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   INDIVIDUALISM AND COLLECTIVISM:  TWO APPROACHES TO  CLASSROOM ORGANIZATION Knowledge of the collectivistic cultural value of groupness has  become the foundation for many of the innovations of the Bridging Cultures teachers. However, the individual is not absent in the  collectivistic orientation to the classroom. The individual remains an  active entity but is not the primary focus for organization and management. If a group activity does not work well, or if a student has  certain special needs, the teacher can certainly respond with appropriate actions. Incorporating the needs of individual students is not  meant to represent the last resort when organizing classrooms. In  reality, the processes of developing group activities and coming to  know the individual students happen simultaneously. However, the  group model re ects special emphasis on collectivistic values and, in  particular, the values of the family. In the individualistic classroom, knowledge of individuals is the  basis for classroom management see McCaslin et al., 2006; Robinson   Ricord Gresiemer, 2006. The emphasis is on supressing each students potential for distracting, disrupting, or disrespectful behaviors.  Theoretically, when each student must be considered as a single  unit, classroom management should become more complex. In an  individually oriented classroom, even when students are grouped,  the teacher is likely to see them as a collection of individuals who  are potentially in competition with each other Isaac, 1999. Or, as a  new teacher told one of us, I never realized that 30 students equal  60 arms moving all at once! In a classroom oriented toward an individualistic approach, families are part of the management equation,  but primarily when problem behaviors escalate to the point where  teachers feel they need support from the home Evertson, Emmer,   Worsham, 2006.  Figure 2.1 compares an idealized version of two approaches to  classroom organization: one collectivistic and the other individualistic. In the collectivistic organization shown in the top triangle, the  teacher begins with an understanding of the family as indicated by  the arrows under the triangle. This understanding guides classroom 

T h e  C u l t u r e  o f  t h e  G r o u p   25 F I G U R E  2 . 1 Collectivistic and Individualistic Classroom Organization A Collectivistic Classroom Organization An Individualistic Classroom Organization
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   management strategies that focus on the class as a group, much like  the family as a unit. A dashed line and a double arrow indicate that  the  ow of information goes back and forth between the classroom  and the family. The class is depicted as one group in which all the  learners are linked with each other and the teacher as a whole. Individual students are factored into a collectivistic classroom, though  not as a starting point. Teachers in collectivistic classrooms incorporate their knowledge of individuals into organizational practices, as  indicated by another dashed line and double arrow. But the placement of Family and Class as a Group at the wider end of the triangle indicates that the majority of classroom practices are based on  the group rather than a loose confederation of individuals.  The lower triangle in Figure 2.1 shows an individualistic classroom organization, which begins with an emphasis on the individuals  in the class. Teachers in this kind of classroom might try to promote  the values of independence, choice, and individual decision making  to promote self-reliance, self-respect, and self-esteem. The emphasis  is clearly on each childs individual needs. Thus the class is seen  as a collection of individuals, each requiring something or, more  likely, some things different. The students in the  gure are sitting at  individual desks, poised to show what each one knowsdepicting  the values of individual achievement and self-expression. Students  in such a classroom would not necessarily be enlisted to help or  support others. Because classroom organization is based on the individual, Individual and Class as a Collection of Individuals occupy  the wider end of the triangle. But, as in the collectivistic model, the  family does have a role, though the teacher may think of it as an  afterthought or use it as a focus of punishment, revealed in a threat  such as, Do I need to call your parent? RECONSIDERING CONVENTIONAL WISDOM  ON GROUP ORGANIZATION AND SUPPORT Research has identi ed a number of strategies that promote the  effectiveness of cooperative groups. Such strategies include teachers

T h e  C u l t u r e  o f  t h e  G r o u p   27 modeling how to work in groups in order to promote interdependence along with individual responsibility within a group. For example, teachers may model how students should give and receive help  from other students. Group skills such as these are well honed by the  immigrant Latino students we have observed. However, unless teachers are aware of students group-related skills, these may be overlooked or undermined, orworst of allstudents may be punished  for using them. A well-meaning individualistic teacher with collectivistic students  may instruct students to take a vote to resolve a con ict in a group  situation, when in fact this strategy might cause con ict when it clashes  with a preexisting orientation toward developing consensus to resolve  disagreement. Girard and Koch 1996 say that a consensus  re ects a considered agreement that everyone involved unanimouslyaccepts a speci c course of action as best for  the group and agrees to support it regardless of private preferences and interests. Consensus encourages a deeper level  of con ict analysis and encourages all participants in the  negotiation to express their opinions and concerns. p. 87  The following vignette illustrates how important consensus can be  for students socialized in collectivistic homes. THE HAUNTING HALLOWEEN The students in Mrs. Prezs 5th grade class were faced with a diffi cult choice:  should they have their own Halloween party in class, wear costumes, and  bring refreshments from home to share with each other, or should they don  their costumes and go to a communitywide parade and celebration at the  neighboring naval base? Some wanted to stay in the classroom for a private party, but more were drawn to the community celebration. Mrs. Prez  decided to have the children vote. The class would then do what the majority wanted.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   As it happened, most voted to go to the parade; only six voted to stay at  school, two of whom eventually came around to thinking the parade was a  good idea. But four children did not want to go to the parade and continued  to feel disappointed about not having the class party. Suspecting that they  were not comfortable going to the large event with so many people, Mrs.  Prez gave them the option of staying behind with a parent helper. Only one  child, Selena, chose this option. The others ultimately went to the parade. As  it turned out, Selena stayed home that day. At the celebration, Selenas classmates missed her immensely and found it impossible to enjoy themselves. Troubled feelings about the incident did not fade quickly. Weeks went  by and Mrs. Prez continued to hear small but persistent conversations  about how sad it was that Selena hadnt gotten to do what she wanted. The  class seemed unsettled about the outcome of their decision-making process.  It wasnt until Mrs. Prez participated in the Bridging Cultures Project that  she understood how the childrens reaction might be related to the values  of the childrens collectivistic culture. Her students were refl ecting a deepseated discomfort with a process that inherently separates members from  the group. Mrs. Prez realized that a more extended process could have led  to a full-group consensus and avoided the turmoil that ensued. Adapted  from Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch,  Greenfi eld, 2000. Reprinted with permission from WestEd.  All rights reserved. In the past, Bridging Cultures teachers may have intuitively understood their students groupness, but it was access to the individualismcollectivism framework that crystallized a conscious awareness  of this orientation. When we asked Mr. Mercado which practices  inspired by Bridging Cultures he used most with his 4th graders, he  responded, Collaborative ones, because they are natural. They seem to  go with the  ow. I think of the example of perming straight  hair. I leave it as it is; I am not going against the grain. The 

T h e  C u l t u r e  o f  t h e  G r o u p   29 class runs more smoothly. It promotes more harmony and a  much more  nished product.  Mr. Mercado emphasizes collaborative learning because the  students can produce more and are more engaged in the learning  process. Failing to capitalize on students culture-based strengths  does not result in simply a lost opportunity; it undercuts the cultural  values of the family and can cause students to feel torn between the  behaviors valued at home and those valued at school. THE POWER AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE GROUP From the beginning of the school year, Mrs. Prez talks explicitly  with her students about the power of the group. From the start,  her students know that their actions are important to the rest of the  class, and this orientation is evident throughout the day in virtually  every learning experience. The power of the group comes through in  students harmonious and supportive peer relationships, their respect  for each other and for adults, and their striving for group success.  We have observed  rsthand what happens when these qualities  are allowed to  ourish. They support the smooth operation of the  class and maximize learning opportunities, in part because students  help each other learn and also because little time is diverted from  meaningful learning to classroom management issues. Ms. Daley expects her 2nd grade students to rely on each other  whenever possible. I can give an assignment to a group and walk  away, she said. On a rare occasion, a child will ask me how to do  something. I say I think I know who you have to go to  rst. Then  they  nd someone to ask. Now they do it on their own. She reported  that even the most hard-to-discipline children are willing to listen to  their peers. . . . It is an expectation within the community. The following example from Mrs. Hernandezs combined classroom of kindergartners, 1st graders, and 2nd graders shows how  the kinds of behaviors demonstrated in Bridging Cultures classrooms  also result in a sense of responsibility among the students.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   DINA LEADS ALPHABET PRACTICE Mrs. Hernandezs 18 students are working together on the rug practicing  alphabet skills. She has to leave the group to work with a parent volunteer  the father of one of the students, who is building some shelving for the  classroom. She asks Dina, a 1st grader, to supervise the practice. Although  Mrs. Hernandez is away from the circle-time activity, Dina continues to move  the group through the routine. She climbs on a chair, points to each letter of  the alphabet with her pointer, and has the children chorally say each letter. The children stay very focused, with no off-task behavior. Mrs. Hernandez returns to the group after about 10 minutes, and she and Dina continue to lead the group in alphabet-related activities. Ultimately, there are  no disruptions for nearly 45 minutes of rug time. The children sit very close  to each other, but there are no confrontations or problems. The children  appear to be very attentive to the activities.  We posit that because classroom organization and management  were designed with collectivistic students in mind, no disciplinary  problems arose. Mrs. Hernandezs expectations were in line with  how the students had been socialized at home: to work together  in harmony for the good of the group. The rituals of student-led  morning songs, alphabet practice, and calendar activities prevalent  in this classroom evoked helpfulness from others. Corrections by  students about their peers performance did not appear to embarrass, discredit, or humiliate them. Instead, such corrections appeared  to be consistently accepted as a way to support others learning.  They would help a friendnot to shame them, Mrs. Hernandez  explained, but theyd move the pointer to the correct word. Never everto tease; just to help. The next observation comes from Ms. Daleys 2nd grade classroom.

T h e  C u l t u r e  o f  t h e  G r o u p   31 TAKING MS. DALEYS PLACE Ms. Daley is about to read La Calle Es Libre The Street Is Free, when the  children inform her that they already know the book. Could you tell the  story? she asks. While Ms. Daley fi lls out a required health document, six  children line up in front of the rest of the class. Each child tells a part of the  story. One girl walks around and shows the pictures in the book to the rest  of the class. Other children who are part of the group in front of the class  correct or amend the story as needed. The seated children in the audience  seem genuinely content to be observer-learners rather than the leaderparticipants.  This observation is interesting from several perspectives: 1 young  students 2nd graders quickly responded to a teachers request to  carry out an academic activity without her guidance, showing a high  level of self-management and group organization and support; 2  the leaders were self-selected and apparently accepted by the group  without any squabbling or discussion; 3 classmates pitched in to  help for the good of the whole just as those who were in the audience were helping to keep the group functioning optimally; and 4  the self-appointed leaders worked collaboratively and without any  strife. The teacher did not need to waste students time by asking  them to sit quietly until she could teach, and she was able to take  care of an important task without interruption while the children  continued to learn. PHYSICAL ORGANIZATION OF  GROUP-ORIENTED CLASSROOMS The group orientation of Bridging Cultures classrooms is re ected  in their physical organization. One of the  rst and most important  requirements for group work is the appropriate room arrangement  Evertson, Emmer,  Worsham, 2006. The Bridging Cultures teachers 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   have created learning environments that accommodate group work  and diminish the need for behavioral control from the teacher. Desk Arrangements, Rug Time, and Physical Proximity In  ve of the seven Bridging Cultures classrooms, desks are  arranged in clusters of four, with children facing each other. The  two exceptions are in the classes of the youngest children kindergarten through 2nd grade, where a large rug dominates the room,  surrounded by learning centers for three or four children each. In all  cases, teachers have overtly group-oriented classrooms. At any given  time, the children are either all together on the large rug, or they are  in small groups. Rug time is especially common in Bridging Cultures classrooms  and differs somewhat from what might be typical in other classrooms. In most elementary school classrooms, teachers require children to identify and maintain their own spaces, using such strategies  as individual carpet squares to help children identify their area on  the rug or a grid to demarcate one square for each child. In contrast,  Bridging Cultures teachers do not prevent children from having the  physical closeness to each other that they seem to seek. The concept  of owning space, if only temporarily, is probably foreign to these  students. Especially noticeable in the classrooms of Mrs. Hernandez, Ms. Daley, and Mrs. Prez, children sat close together on the  rug, often shoulder to shoulder, or occasionally touching each others hair. Contrary to what many teachers might expect, this kind of  behavior never became disruptive. Instead, it seemed to sustain the  childrens focus, as if they were getting some comfort from contact  with their friends. When asked during a debrie ng about the childrens physical  proximity to the teacher and to each other during circle time, Mrs.  Prez said the proximity brings the children closer together as a social  group. Thus the nearness of the students to each other is another  reminder of how the group stays together. The closeness never 

T h e  C u l t u r e  o f  t h e  G r o u p   33 appeared to lead to any con ict or altercation, and it didnt seem  to distract the children from the learning activity. Rather, it seemed  desirable and sought out by the students. This practice may not work  for all students, but on no occasion did we observe any problems  caused by physical contact in Bridging Cultures classrooms. The culturally collectivistic students in these classrooms seem to  understand the need for the whole group to participate in rug time.  In Mrs. Hernandezs K12 class, children helped their friends get to  the circle promptly, were attentive to the needs of the whole group,  and seemed to demonstrate group pride in their accomplishment of  getting the whole group altogether. Group activities proceeded with  no disruptions for periods lasting up to one hour! An understanding  of this tendency to seek physical proximity could lead teachers to  eliminate or modify the rule that tells students Keep your hands to  yourself. At times, it may be helpful to hold hands or touch someone nearby in appropriate ways, as we observed. Therefore, before  establishing  xed classroom rules, teachers should consider what  the children do naturally according to their own cultural models and  within appropriate boundaries Carlson, 2006. Bulletin Boards and Walls Teachers in Bridging Cultures classrooms use bulletin boards and  walls for a range of purposes, such as exhibiting student work, posting rules or directions for tasks for example, the steps in the writing process, motivating students through inspirational posters, or  sharing personal facts about students of the week. Bulletin boards  and walls are notable for their re ection of both the academic and  the personal lives of students. Some sections may be devoted to student writing or to charts and illustrations from various projects, while  other sections display photographs and drawings of families. Bulletin  boards in Bridging Cultures classrooms often re ect a collectivistic  orientation not only in content but also in the way they are created frequently by the whole group. 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Mr. Mercados classroom of 4th and 5th grade students who are  in their  rst year of an English-only curriculum provides an excellent example of the use of bulletin boards. MR. MERCADOS BULLETIN BOARDS A prominent bulletin board, titled Tell Us About Your Grandmother, displays childrens neatly crafted papers with their earlier drafts underneath.  The showcased papers are a result of childrens fascination with their grandmothers, who often still reside in the country of origin, such as Mexico or  El Salvador. According to Mr. Mercado, the children all wanted to share information about their grandmothers, but they needed a fi xed structure. He  allowed them to construct a framework of questions as a way to systematically prepare their descriptive paragraphs according to state standards. The  children decided to ask questions about where their grandmother lived, how  old she was, what foods she cooked, what they like to do with their grandmother, and how much they loved their grandmothers. During one class period, Mr. Mercado draws the childrens attention  back to the bulletin board, asking the students to remember what they did  to describe their own grandmothers as a way to link the academic skill of  descriptive writing about a family member to a new topicdescriptive poetry. But even then, the centrality of family is evident when Mr. Mercado asks  Yasmin, Why do people write poems? and she replies, Id give my mother  a poem to tell her I love her.  Mr. Mercados classroom also includes several large laminated charts on  punctuation, proofreading marks, and cognates in Spanish and English i.e.,  words coming from the same Latin roots in both English and Spanish. These  commercially produced charts hang above the chalkboardhigher than the  eye-level display about grandmothers. In this way, grandmothers are always  present in the room at the childrens level, but the information that the children need for editing is still in plain view.

T h e  C u l t u r e  o f  t h e  G r o u p   35 Murals, a common sight in Mexico, appear on the interior and  exterior walls of many schools in Southern California. Bridging Cultures schools are no exception. One large-scale group mural project  was initiated with help from a UCLA art student volunteering in Mr.  Mercados class. The goal was to understand more about the communityVenice Beach, California. The project began with a neighborhood walk to identify points of interest, and upon their return to the  classroom, the students decided what they wanted to contribute to  a large mural that was intended for the hallway to share with others.  A student who had dif culty drawing was happy to paint the background or help  ll in colors where others had produced outlines.  In this way, everyone contributed and felt pride in accomplishing  something together. Similarly, Ms. Altchechs 5th graders had painted a large mural,  The Animals of the Wetlands, that hung in a prominent spot in the  classroom. All students collaborated on the mural, but they could  choose how they wanted to contributeby painting an individual  element, such as a bird; by contributing to a team-constructed element, such as a grassy area or a  ock of birds; or as a general artist  working on the background or assembling the separate sections of  the mural. To Ms. Altchech, the range of choices about how to participate made good sense, because by 5th grade, even students from  highly collectivistic families are likely to have absorbed a degree of  individualism. Some may, in fact, prefer to work alone. The result  was that all students could look at the mural with pride on the basis  of their contributions to the whole. Approximating the Home Environment Two other examples of the physical classroom environment are  notable because they demonstrate how the classroom may resemble  the home environment. The  rst, Mrs. Eylers kindergarten classroom,  has limited space, equipment, and materials. Three teachers share  the classroom simultaneously. However, this situation is not entirely  undesirable. The children come to school and see their teachers 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   sharing a common space and resourcesa situation that is similar to  what they experience at home, with everyone working together in  close proximity. The children do not seem hampered by the lack of  open space. The second example is Mrs. Prezs classroom desk. It represents  a similar, smaller-scale crossover of home and school. Her desktop  displays three photos: one of Mrs. Prezs family and two of the entire  class. By displaying the personal family photo, Mrs. Prez brings her  family into the classroom. According to Mrs. Prez, the students ask  questions about her husband also an elementary school teacher  and her two sons as a way of connecting to the teacherestablishing  and maintaining a personal relationship. The two photos of her students are prominently displayed as well. How esteemed the students  must feel to have their photos alongside that of Mrs. Prezs family! ESTABLISHING AND ORGANIZING INCLUSIVE GROUPS All seven of the teachers reported using cooperative group work  before they received the Bridging Cultures training, but the amount  of time devoted to it has changed, as has the quality of it. With a  greater understanding of the childrens home values, the teachers  have a deeper sense of why group work has always tended to be  successful. As a result, they have increased their use of both small  and large groups. Many of the examples in this section are drawn from the 2nd  grade classroom of Mrs. Prez with good reason. The vast majority  of Mrs. Prezs students are children of farm workers. They live in a  rural area that is surrounded by large areas of strawberry  elds and  lemon groves. This area is less urban than that of the other Bridging  Cultures teachers. Living in an agricultural area with family members  engaged in farm work and earning low wages is more likely to be  associated with collectivistic values Hofstede, 2001. To encourage her class to function as a whole unit, Mrs. Prez  and her students recite their own group pledge in addition to the  daily pledge to the  ag. This second pledge illustrates how the 

T h e  C u l t u r e  o f  t h e  G r o u p   37 individual can contribute to the well-being of the wholein this  case, the world: I pledge allegiance to the world, To cherish every living thing, To care for earth and sea and air, With peace and freedom everywhere. Mrs. Prez says, Coming together as a group sets the tone in  the morning. We say the pledge together and look into each others  eyes and connect. When they are in a circle together, they look at  each other at the beginning and end of the day and everything else is  connected that way. The class ends the day by sharing their thoughts  on the best things that happened that day. Mrs. Prez reported that  the children always talk about group experiences. Nothing is ever  said about them standing out by themselves, she said. It is always  something that we did. Mrs. Prezs class is organized around a set of activity areas  through which children rotate. By organizing the children in groups  of two or more students, Mrs. Prez ensures that children are working with or very close to others. In fact, in none of our observations  in her classroom did we see children working alone. The room is  organized with a set number of chairs at each of the learning centers: six at the reading comprehension table; four at a learning center  activity table; and two each at an art table, where children work on  a theme-related project; a gamesbookslibrary center; a computer  technology center; a listening center; and a transition corner, where  students read posters on a wall display and look at books jointly  created by the whole class. Each station has instructions about task  goals and methods, and perhaps partly because of that, we never  observed any con icts as students moved ef ciently to each station  and immediately began the task. Mrs. Prez also uses a simple numbering system to organize the  class as well as to encourage student participation. The students have  a number that establishes them as a member of a particular group. 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Mrs. Prez calls upon students by groups, and she reports that they  are much more likely to volunteer as a result. Although they do go  up alone, they feel like they are a part of a group, she said. I have  wasted so much time in the past deciding the order to call upon  students. This way it is spontaneous, and the children look at each  other to encourage each otherthey face each other. Mrs. Prez  said that it is surprising to see that sometimes the quiet, shy people  will be part of the  rst group. Students can pass if they do not want  to respond, but, Mrs. Prez reported, students eventually do respond  because they are part of a groupresulting in 100 percent participation time and time again. Mrs. Prez also reported that the best way to get something  accomplished is to bring the children together in their group circle.  We begin our day in a class circle, she said, and we end our class  in a circle. RISK TAKING IN THE GROUP CONTEXT Early in the Bridging Cultures project, as she was experimenting with  groups, Mrs. Prez re ected on how the group orientation of the  classroom affects the students risk taking: Togetherness releases the  stress, and they are more willing to risk. They feel more con dent.  Im still struggling with how to do it. But we are a team. Reducing stress while increasing the willingness to take risks is critical for  optimal learning see Doyle, 2006. Group work also reduces the  need for heavy-handed classroom management: if students are not  anxious about their work or assignments, they can concentrate on  learning. This effect is particularly true if they are newcomers to the  culture or if they are English language learners. Mrs. Prezs comments in a later interview provide additional  observations about the childrens willingness to take risks in a grouporiented classroom. She noted the presence of way more risk takingand that is in spite of more shy children this year. . . . But yet  they risk because they are comfortable. Citing an example, she said  that working on a poem together yielded 100 percent participation. 

T h e  C u l t u r e  o f  t h e  G r o u p   39 Before that . . . I might have a few children go up and say a poem  or take turns at the microphone. It was much more individualistic.  It is so much more powerful when they are all together, doing the  same things. Mrs. Prez reported that if one of the students has not  participated, the children will say, Juan hasnt read his! They ask  Juan to do it too. The children . . . want each person to present. The  students in Mrs. Prezs class monitor each other to ensure that everyone in the group participates. Thus the group encourages full participation and offers support in ways that are culturally harmonious. ADULTS AS MEMBERS OF THE GROUP Group inclusiveness embraces both children and adults. Bridging  Cultures teachers were generally included as a part of group activities, though, as we have seen, the group will continue even if the  teachers leave for a short time. The teachers often took the role of  facilitator, to keep activities on track. Teachers have reported, and we  have observed, that the children ask for their participation in a wide  range of contextsat rug time, during discussions, or at lunchtime.  Even observers were made to feel part of the classa testament  to the students strong orientation to include people in their group.  For example, throughout our observations, the students monitored  what we were doing, always smiling, as if to say, We want you to  feel part of our group. The experience was completely different  from the more typical situation in which observers become a distraction, diverting attention from the lesson to something novel. The  children never seemed to disconnect from their learning activities,  but instead would glance over as if to be sure we were connecting  to the social setting. For example, Mrs. Hernandezs class was quick to notice that the  observers couldnt see the pictures in the book during the reading  of 100 Hungry Ants. A student named Celeste asked the teacher,  Why arent you showing the pictures to the teachers? in reference  to not sharing the pictures with the observers. This orientation is particularly interesting given the young age of the students, who were 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   primarily kindergartners and 1st graders with a few 2nd graders as  well. The ability to take the outlook of another reminds us of the  Piagetian task of the three mountains as a test of egocentrism: the  mountain task requires children to describe what others are seeing  from an opposing viewpoint. These children seemed to understand  this even in kindergarten Piaget, 1952. In Mr. Mercados classroom, guests were overtly included. At the  start of one observation, Mr. Mercado began by saying, This is my  friend, Dr. Rothstein-Fisch. He wrote the long and complicated name  on the chalkboard, and the class said in chorus, Good morning, Dr.  Rothstein-Fisch. During the two-hour visit, the teacher made several  references to the observer: Lets show Dr. Rothstein-Fisch what we  know about . . . Janet, tell Dr. Rothstein-Fisch how you are spelling  that word so she will know. Dr. Rothstein-Fisch hasnt been in our  class while weve been reading our book. I told her about the book,  but how can she  nd out about it? The children responded with a  list of ideas: 1 read it to her; 2 let her borrow the book; 3 have  her see the movie; 4 write to her about it; 5 explain it to her; 6  tell her the most signi cant part. Mr. Mercado had planned a review of the book the class was  reading, Annie and the Old One, that day, but he set up the context  for doing that task with a larger, inclusive social purpose. To help  the observer understand and ultimately make her part of the group,  students in each group organized to tell a portion of the story. The  students decided collectively how the observer would best understand the story, and then each group told a part of the story to the  classroom observer in chronological order. Not only was this strategy a natural approach for the students, it also mirrored the kind of  language arts instruction known to promote reading comprehension  Pearson  Duke, 2002. To make judgments about what an outsider  would need to know about the story for it to make sense, students  had to consider what they knew and determine how to express it  best to someone else. In a similar fashion, Mr. Mercado encouraged his students to connect personally with his classroom volunteer, Mr. G., a retired member 

T h e  C u l t u r e  o f  t h e  G r o u p   41 of the community. During math instruction, Mr. Mercado asked the  children, Who uses geometry? The children responded by saying,  architects, abstract artists, carpinteros carpenters. Mr. G.s son  is a carpenter, said Mr. Mercado. What does he do? Lets say the door  is a little bit too big, what would happen? Responding together, the  children said, It wouldnt close. Bringing Mr. Gs son and his occupation into the discussion was a natural approach in this classroom of  mostly immigrant Latino students, for whom family is more important  than anything else. This example acknowledged the importance of Mr.  G.s family while linking its signi cance to a math concept. GROUP REGULATION OF BEHAVIOR AND CONFLICT Many of our observations revealed a substantial amount of student  leadership. Earlier in the chapter we described instances of students  taking charge when the teachers attention was required elsewhere.  In the case of Ms. Daleys class, students just pitched in for the good  of the group, whether as leaders or as listeners. The same was true  in Mrs. Hernandezs class, where the appointed leader took charge  without any disruption to the ongoing lesson. In both instances, a  deep and well-established mutual understanding about behavior and  learning was established between the teacher and the students. In  these classrooms, everyone seemed to know that group learning was  expected. Examples of student-led practices covered a wide range of activities, including correcting a sentence riddled with errors as part of a  Daily Oral Language lesson; leading the morning calendar, weather,  alphabet, and song routine; guiding fellow students in a lesson on  math facts; and maintaining social order in the absence of the teacher.  Its dif cult to know the extent to which these practices resulted from  the Bridging Cultures Project. Teachers may have been in uenced by  previous exposure to critical pedagogy Freire, 1970, as described  by Mrs. Prez, other philosophies, or professional development on  collaborative learning groups and leadership. Mr. Mercado and Ms.  Daley became National Board certi ed teachers during the  ve years 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   of the project. However, it is clear that students readily took on a  variety of leadership roles and that their classrooms operated without disruptions or con icts. Evidence points to students collectivistic  socialization at home as at least one signi cant source of the social  skills they exhibited. For collectivistic students, leadership appears to come from the  desire to contribute to the group rather than to gain individual recognition. Classroom goals are met when student leaders use their  desire and skills to ensure that the group is on task and participating  in appropriate ways. During our many hours of observation, the student leaders who, teachers reported, shared leadership across tasks  and days were highly effective in managing their peers, alleviating  the need for teacher intervention. Class Meetings During one observation toward the end of the school year, when  Mrs. Prez was teaching 5th grade, a regular Friday class meeting  was taking place. The class president gathered ideas about what  topics should be included in the meeting. The class president and  vice president conducted the entire meeting as the teacher listened  from the back of the room. The  rst topic of discussion was elections  for new class of cers. There was a great deal of discussion about  who had been elected previously and who had not, with concerns  expressed about how those children not elected would feel and what  they would think. At one point a student said, Tony wont be nominated because hes too American. This seemed like a moment that would prompt immediate  teacher intervention, but Mrs. Prez honored the groups process and  remained silent as she watched. After a few seconds, the children  articulated their concern about this potentially hurtful remark. They  discussed how that might make Tony feel, and they suggested telling  Tony how to gain the good graces of the group: he should be less  aloof in discussing his high grades and participation in special gifted  classes. In this case, Tony was not ultimately nominated as a class 

T h e  C u l t u r e  o f  t h e  G r o u p   43 leader, but the students agreed that he would be considered a top  contender for the next election. In a sense, the children were telling  Tony not to stick out and be boastful, so as to draw him back to  group acceptance. Tony appeared to be European American and likely had an individualistic cultural perspective that led him to seek to improve his  self-esteem by emphasizing his individual achievement and his cognitive intelligence. In contrast, his classmates were trying to incorporate him into the group and help him to understand the need  to  t in without grandstanding. This observation demonstrates the  real power of a well-functioning groupto have everyone included.  Students from collectivistic backgrounds did not want to belittle the  accomplishments of a student who might be in honors classes, but  they recommended that he not brag about it because that would  make him stand out from the whole and make him less a part of  the group. The class suggested ways for Tony to become part of the  group again, and possibly a class leader in the future.  The power of the group is only as mighty as the teacher allows.  In the situation with Tony, the teacher held back, waiting to see what  would happen, but she later reported that she knew the group well  enough to trust them to do the right thing, and she had to provide  enough time to allow that to emerge. By respecting the group, she  helped empower the students with their own problem-solving skills.  We may imagine what the outcome might have been had the teacher  stepped in: punishment for the initial remark about Tony or digression into a discussion of what it means to be an American. In either  case, these classroom management decisions would have shifted the  focus to the teacher to solve the problem without allowing the demonstration of the natural abilities of the students to  nd a culturally  harmonious solution to student con ict. This example also relates to an important aspect of the collectivistic value of the group:  tting in or standing out. Standing out from  the group may be something immigrant Latino parents strive to avoid  for their children. Quiroz and Green eld 1996 report the experience  of a Mexican immigrant mother when her daughters teacher told her 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   that her child was outstanding. I did not know what to do about her  being outstanding. I had tried to show my daughter not to show off  or to be cruel to others, but it seemed that it was not working p.  6. The mother may have understood the word outstanding to mean  literally standing out from the group, something highly undesirable  in a family with a collectivistic orientation. The mothers fear that her  daughter would draw attention to herself, at the risk of being different  from other students, must be understood in the context of a group  orientation: in fact, the mother was socializing her daughter not to  stand out from the rest of the class. The Group as Manager During our observations, we saw many instances in which the  group took responsibility for classroom behavior. The following  examples illustrate the managerial role the group maintains for itself. During an outdoor activity, two 2nd grade classes combined to  form one large group. Groups lined up and went to eight different  stations featuring different activities, such as jump rope, monkey  bars, zig-zag jumping, four-square, hot potato, and long jump. When  a child arrived late, Ms. Daley said, Youve never been at that station?  Ask your group what to do. Her directive underscored the responsibility of the group to help the late-arriving student, thereby eliminating the teachers need to explain directions again. In a second example, during a long storytelling episode, one  student began relating to the story of The River by sharing his knowledge of the subject. He spoke for some time, and a few children  began to whisper to each other or engage in subdued chatter during  the discussion. Nearby children said, Shhhh, and immediately the  whispering children complied and redirected themselves to listening.  This incident was especially impressive because these were kindergarten and 1st grade children. They had already been sitting for a  long while, but their willingness to be regulated by peers attests to  their wanting to be part of the whole. This minor incident was not 

T h e  C u l t u r e  o f  t h e  G r o u p   45 even noticed by other members of the group, nor did the teacher,  Mrs. Hernandez, indicate that she had observed it. Group awareness also helped Mrs. Eyler solve a mystery. She was  distributing pictures collected from the previous days to the students  who had created them. When she discovered one with writing that  could not be deciphered, she asked the small group nearby, Who  writes like this? The children knew immediately that it belonged to  one particular child. During an observation in Ms. Altchechs class, a child had just  returned from a lengthy absence due to a court order involving child  abuse. The whole class was genuinely glad to see her, and yet they  carried on as if she had never left, not making her feel apart from  them, but rather instantly included. Some time later, several students  were dismissed for chorus. A classmate came back hurriedly into the  class because she remembered that her returning classmate might  still like to be in chorus. But what happens when group consciousness appears to cross  the line and students run the risk of embarrassing a fellow classmate?  In one example, Ms. Daleys 2nd grade class was on the playground,  and many students were playing on the monkey bars. A boy, apparently anxious for his turn, told the others, Shes losing! But a girl  also waiting for her turn retorted, No, shes learning. It is dif cult to know whether the comment shes losing emerged  from the boys annoyance that the student on the climbing apparatus  was taking too long to cross, which appeared to be the case. However, the second students comment, Shes learning, seems to be an  effort to quash the boys criticism and to encourage her classmate.  From a collectivistic perspective, she was bringing both of her classmates back into the group. The boys comments were rebuffed to  draw him back into the group, and the struggling girls efforts were  supported as a way for her to gain inclusion into the group of those  who could successfully cross the monkey bars. When asked about  this scenario, Ms. Daley said that the children now celebrate each  others accomplishments, whereas in years past they didnt do that.  Now she feels as though she can create more of a family feeling in 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   the class. She can also teach them by reminding them, You know  how you feel when someone accomplishes something in your family . . . We do that at school.  GROUP CONTINGENCIES In setting up groups, it is important to consider what is truly rewarding  for students. When teachers set up interdependent group contingenciesrequiring the entire group to reach a designated goalseveral  advantages follow, according to Robinson and Ricord Greisemer  2006: Interdependent group contingencies have several advantages  that make them appealing to teachers. First, interdependent  group contingencies have been found to be time-ef cient,  cost-effective, and easy to implement. Either all or none of  the students meet the goal and receive reinforcement, making  it less complicated procedurally while allowing more activities to become available for reinforcement e.g.,  eld trips,  extra recess, and pizza parties. Second, because individual  students are not directly singled out even though there may  be a target student in mind, there is little risk of individual  students being targeted for ridicule based on their performance. Finally, because it is in everyones best interest to  meet the goals, cooperation and encouragement are more  likely to occur. p. 796 We agree that groups do help students to work cooperatively, but  the notion that this is contingency-based because of external reinforcement should be reexamined in light of cultural values. In general,  considerable research suggests that the whole notion of external reinforcement should be reconsidered see, for example, Deci, Koestner,   Ryan, 2001. Students from collectivistic homes do not get rewarded  for working well together; they are expected to do so without an  extrinsic reward. The contingencies that are most powerful are social 

T h e  C u l t u r e  o f  t h e  G r o u p   47 ones, based on relationships. It is likely that, for these students, working together is already an intrinsic reward.

In this chapter we have offered a wide range of examples demonstrating how the culture of the group operates in the classroom.  We saw how students contributed to managing activities and disturbances themselves. This kind of monitoring assists learning because  teachers are not distracted by students committing minor infractions.  The children, even those as young as kindergarten age, can help  maintain a proper learning environment. As a result of the groups  efforts, more time is spent engaged in learning, and very little is  taken up with reprimands, rebuffs, redirections, or rejections. In the next chapter, we look at families as the  rst and most logical place to understand where students are coming from and how  this can affect classroom functioning.
C H A P T E R 3 It appears . . . that teachers and parents can use similar mechanisms to in uence student behavior; however, the nature of their contributions is different . . . Parents involvement often focuses on socialization for culture and  school rather than instruction whereas teachers focus more on instruction  and socialization at school. These two roles represent different but essential  resources for childrens development. Joan M. T. Walker and Kathleen V. Hoover-Dempsey,  Why Research on Parental Involvement Is Important to Classroom  Management in Handbook of Classroom Management Families set the context for childrens cognitive and social development. They establish the foundation for childrens orientation to the  classroom in terms of their patterns for relating to peers and adults  and how they approach learning tasks Walker  Hoover-Dempsey,  2006. For these reasons, it is crucially important for teachers to  form partnerships with families and  nd ways to promote two-way,  transactional learning, with parents learning from the teacher about  school expectations and teachers learning from parents about childrens socialization at home over time. In this chapter, we investigate the relationships among cultural  values, family involvement in schooling, and teachers approaches to  classroom organization and management. This up-front discussion  FAMILIES: RESOURCES FOR  ORGANIZATION AND  MANAGEMENT 

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   49 about the role of families in classroom management follows from our  discussion in Chapter 2 indicating that families factor in at the beginning of the management equation. We use the terms parents and families interchangeably because  not all children are cared for by their parents, yet parents are most  frequently childrens primary source of socialization and are responsible for their attendance and, to varying degrees, their success in  school. However, in some cases the responsible individuals for any  given student could be grandparents or other relatives. We also like  the term family because students are often taught important behavioral skills from older siblings or cousins, particularly how to work in  groups, how to give and receive help, and the consequences of not  being part of the group. CHALLENGES TO CROSS-CULTURAL UNDERSTANDING  BETWEEN SCHOOLS AND FAMILIES  Perhaps one of the greatest challenges to cross-cultural understanding  between schools and families arises from the all-too-natural human  instinct to judge differences in approaches to child development and  education as unenlightened or simply wrong Valencia  Solrzano,  1997. And when one person or group such as the professionals  from the dominant culture holds more social power than the other  the family members from a nondominant culture, it is not hard to   gure out whose judgment will hold more sway Harry, Allen,   McLaughlin, 1995; Lipka, 1998; Salas, 2004.  When teachers attribute students inappropriate behavior to cultural de cits in child rearing, they may consciously exclude parents  from the problem-solving process. We put the term inappropriate in  quotation marks because judgments about appropriateness are relative to ones cultural perspective. What is considered too quiet or  too noisy, for instance, is extremely variable according to culture.  In some cases, parents are contacted only when it is apparent that  the teacher and school have explored all the interventions at their  disposal Levin  Nolan, 2007, p. 243. In other words, the school 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   staff members wait until they are desperate rather than at the apparent  onset of the problem, when information from the family could possibly prevent further stress for all concerned. Blaming parents for students failure to behave in expected ways  can seriously corrupt the essential relationship between the teacher  and the family. Such a de cit approach to difference is not only ill  informed, it prevents teachers from gaining the kind of information  that might very well help students reach their full potential. Research  makes it clear that teachers who reach out to families and are open  to learning from them have the greatest success in involving them in  their childrens schooling Caspe, 2003; Hoover-Dempsey  Sandler,  1997. Contrary to what some teachers may believe, parents from all  backgrounds have been shown to be open to helping their children  learn and do well in school. A review of 51 rigorously designed  research studies on parent involvement in schooling concluded the  following: Every study in this review that compared levels of parent involvement found that families of all backgrounds are equally  involved at home, although the forms of involvement varied somewhat by culture and ethnicity Henderson  Mapp, 2002, p. 61. Scarpaci 2007 notes that deciding when to accommodate a  students cultural preference and when to push the child toward  assimilation into the larger community is a decision that teachers  must make with the utmost care p. 47. This is a morally challenging decision. Without understanding the familys child-rearing and  educational goals, the teacher can undermine the entire home-school  relationship, not to mention the parents social control over their own  child. It should not be necessary for students to forgo home values  and to defy parental expectations in order to function successfully  in the classroom. Much of current research and theory is, in fact,  centered on the belief that people canand routinely dofunction  biculturally see, for example, Padilla, 2002. Knowledgeable teachers can co-constructwith students and familiesclassroom environments that re ect students cultural values as well as values of the  dominant culture.

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   51 COLLECTIVISTIC PARENTS ORIENTATION TO CHILD REARING Numerous studies have revealed common denominators in the childrearing goals of parents from collectivistic societies see DelgadoGaitan, 1994; Lewis, 1995; Nsamenang  Lamb, 1994; Reese, Balzano,  Gallimore,  Goldenberg, 1995; Tapia Uribe, LeVine,  LeVine, 1994;  Valds, 1996; and Whiting  Whiting, 1975. Despite many differences among the societies represented in such research Mexican,  Japanese, Mexican American, West African, and Kenyan, among others, they share a common goal: moral children who maintain strong  bonds to and respect for family. Family is important in all cultures, but  in collectivistic families the meaning of family is expanded because  the primary developmental goal is a child who will hold family wellbeing as his or her ultimate priority. Research conducted with 121 families of immigrant Latino kindergartners showed that parents believe it is their primary responsibility to raise good, moral, respectful children Reese, Balzano,  Gallimore,  Goldenberg, 1995. One mother in the study said, One  has to teach them to be good, aside from schooling. Teach them to  be correct in behavior. Teach them morals, teach them to be good,  because they can have studied a lot, but if one hasnt taught them  correct behavior, in the end it study doesnt help them p. 65.  Similarly, Valds found in her ethnographic study that even very  young children were . . . expected to get along with their siblings and not to see  themselves as the focus of their mothers existence . . . A dults were considered to be more important than children,  and children did not expect to control either their mothers  attention or her interaction with others. . . . Young children  who constantly hung on their mothers were considered to  be ninos molestos bothersome children, and mothers who  gave signs of catering to such behavior were chastised by  members of the family as being at fault for not teaching them  better. 1996, pp. 120121
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Fostering teachers insights into this collectivistic perspective on  child rearing and schooling was a primary goal of the professional  development associated with the Bridging Cultures Project. Now we  turn to a discussion of how teachers actually responded to learning  about the collectivistic values of families. CHANGES IN TEACHERS RELATIONSHIPS WITH FAMILIES  The most substantive change documented among the Bridging Cultures teachers vis--vis families has to do with their relationships  with family members. As a result of the project, they have established  more mutual and personal relationships with familiesrelationships  founded on greater understanding and respect. Bridging Cultures teachers repeatedly told us how their perspectives on families and on themselves had changed as a result of the  professional development provided through the project. Learning  about a collectivistic orientation helps me to have more of a sense  about how a parent from such a background might think and feel,  what kind of expectation the parent might have of me as teacher,  said 1st grade teacher Pearl Saitzyk. It fosters more empathy. I see  how important it is to have background information about the parents that allows us to make parents comfortable in the school environment. According to Mrs. Hernandez, changing the way she views  families has helped to solve many potential problems with students.  She said, I am more patient with parents now, and I look deeper  into the why of things and make less assumptions. Mr. Mercado came to recognize that his good relationships with  families were based on more than his Spanish pro ciency. I always  had good rapport with families, he observed, but now I understand why, and I can maximize, strengthen, and reinforce it now. I  understand what I am doing right.

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   53 CHANGES IN TEACHERS APPROACHES  TO PARENT INVOLVEMENT Bridging Cultures teachers have increased and improved parentschool communication, both formal and informal, through a variety  of strategies. They have changed the ways they conduct open house,  parent meetings, and parent-teacher conferences. The teachers now  understand why parents often ask, How is my child behaving?  before anything else in parent-teacher conferences. They know that  if children are well behaved, parents believe they have done a good  job in preparing children for school. So when this question comes  up, they take parents cues and address behavior  rst, rather than  moving directly to academic concerns. Using Informal Communication to Establish Relationships  Teachers used informal communication to learn more about students families and to demonstrate a more collectivistic approach  to parents. In a sense, they were engaged in ethnography, learning  about cultural perspectives directly from members of a culture and  taking a nonjudgmental stance. The following examples show how  teachers conducted informal communication with parents under  strikingly different situationsthe  rst in a school whose policies  fostered such interactions, and the second in a school whose policies  inhibited them. Ms. Daley reported the following about the urban  school where she teaches: One of our school rules directs the teachers to accompany  their students to the exit gates and to remain there until the  parents arrive or until the gate is closed. I take this opportunity to have mini-conferences with the parents. These conversations may never even deal with the child. They may  touch on the weather or any other social topic. It may even  be just a simple greeting. Yet I  nd that these interactions  foster a closer bond with the parents. Trumbull, RothsteinFisch, Green eld,  Quiroz, 2001, p. 77
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Across town, the new schedule for Mrs. Hernandezs kindergarten class reduced her opportunities for informal contact with parents.  Parents dropped their children off early in the morning, and at the  end of her morning session, she had to rush to eat lunch at a time  when she would have preferred to have a few minutes with the  parents who were picking up their children. Because she believes  parent contact is a priority, she adhered to a personal policy of not  turning parents away, no matter when they showed up at her classroom. I have told parents that if they need to talk with me, they can  come in, and Ill step away and meet with them, she said. It may be  the only time they can meet me. . . I dont tell them, Oh no. Youve  got to make an appointment. I always make time to see them. Mrs.  Hernandez said she shares experiences about her own children with  the parents, follows up on things the parents have shared with her,  and asks about siblings who were in her previous classes. But I try  to keep the relationship professional, she noted. I dont get into the  buddy-buddy relationship with them.  Her  nal comment makes a point that other teachers have made:  although they have more personal exchanges with parents than they  may have had in the past, they still maintain their professional role  as teacherssomething that is actually quite harmonious with a collectivistic perspective in which the teacher is an authority and worthy  of respect. Reaching Out via Telephone Calls Face-to-face contact is not always an option. Early in the project,  Mrs. Prez recognized that because nearly all of the parents of her  3rd grade students were employed in agriculture, they often had  dif culty coming in at the beginning or end of the day for informal  conversation. Yet she wanted to increase her communication with  families to show her support and appreciation, so she began to use  telephone calls in new ways. Before the Bridging Cultures Project,  she had called parents only when a problem arose, perhaps only two  or three times a semester.

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   55 Now I call to congratulate them when their student gets student of the month, or to tell them that the child is really  improving, when they do something wonderful, as well as  when there is a problem . . . It is a very big difference. I  really strive to stay more connected. It is all that importance  of family. Trumbull, Diaz-Meza, Hasan,  Rothstein-Fisch,  2001, p. 29 However, telephone communication obviously requires a common language. Mrs. Prezs ability to communicate via telephone  would be impossible if she were not  uent in Spanish. Without the  help of an interpreter, a telephone conversation between a Spanishspeaking mother and an English-speaking teacher would also be  impossible.  Moreover, not every Latino family speaks Spanish. This issue  came up at a Bridging Cultures meeting. One of the teachers told  of another teacher who had tried to conduct an informal conversation with a mother whose child seemed virtually aphasic. When the  teacher tried to speak with the mother to learn more about the child,  she found communication with the mother equally challenging. The  teacher knew that the mother was from Mexico, and yet she did not  respond to even the simplest questions in Spanish about the child or  her family. The teacher reasoned that the mother must be retarded,  just as the child appeared to be. Later someone suggested that the  mother might not speak Spanish at all, but perhaps spoke one of the  many indigenous languages in Mexico. When this turned out to be  correct, the school made efforts to  nd someone who could interpret  for the teacher and the parent. Another permutation of the communication problem occurs  when the teacher is conversational in Spanish, but the parents want  to communicate what they can in English. Both the teacher and the  parent share the desire to communicate in the others language, to  show respect and to gain practice in the language of home from the  teachers perspective or in the language of school from the parents  perspective A. Werth, personal communication, July 2006.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Teachers may want to try speaking English with parents at  rst,  recognizing that many parents may still be making efforts toward  developing their English pro ciency. If the communication between  the teacher and the parents becomes hampered and the teacher is  pro cient in Spanish or any other home language, then it is wise to  use the language of greatest common pro ciency. In so doing, teachers and school personnel acknowledge the familys attempt to learn  English. The familys English learning can also be supported with family  literacy programs. These programs will give them extra practice with  other families who have the same goal. The teacher can approach  this topic by saying something like, Ive seen many families who  have had a wonderful experience getting to know other families  who are trying to learn English through our family literacy program  on Wednesday nights. However, teachers should be careful not to  put off parents attempts to use English in the moment, as if to say,  This is not the time or place for you to practice your English. Go to  a class. As with all communication, in any language, its important to  pay attention to nonverbal cues about the other persons understanding and comfort with the conversation. OPEN HOUSE Gathering families for open house or Back-to-School Night typically  early in the school year is a common way to involve parents in their  childrens education. Given the busy schedule of most families and  particularly those who may work several jobs or have more than two  children, rethinking the traditional open house format may be critical for making a favorable  rst impression Weinstein  Mignano,  2003. Open house can be a wonderful opportunity to establish  two-way communication, or it can be a hurried and overly scripted  affair, with administrators and teachers taking a ponti cal posture by  emphasizing what parents need to do for the school without asking  what parents want for their children and from the school. The latter 

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   57 situation is not desirable if teachers are seeking to promote communication and parent involvement. The typical agenda for open house includes a quick overview  of academic goals, standards, and schedules, and suggestions for  how parents can augment school learning at home. In some cases,  the agenda may include an exhaustive list of other topics, including  social and personal expectations for students, the grading system,  issues related to homework, discipline procedures, and housekeeping rules Jones  Jones, 2007. This much information could easily  overwhelm parents, especially if they have limited knowledge of U.S.  schools. The topic of parents helping their children with school work at  home may be particularly problematic for some parents, who may  perceive this as inappropriate. As we have said, this expectation conicts with the expectation that most immigrant families may have:  that the parents role is to rear well-behaved and respectful children,  not to be their childrens second teacher Valds, 1996. Not only is  this something immigrant Latino families may reject as their responsibility, it also may be beyond their current level of ability, given the  often limited access to formal education in rural areas where many  immigrants lived before coming to the United States. Parents may  also have limited pro ciency in English, which would make homework help impossible.  Open house may also exacerbate communication barrierseven  with well-intentioned bilingual teachersif the teacher uses technical language that may be unfamiliar to most parents; an example is  terminology connected to statewide assessment, such as standards,  stanines, and portfolios Harry et al., 1995; Sosa, 1997. Another  example is the concept of a scoring rubric, which may not be comprehensible for many parents, serving to confuse them rather than  help them understand their childs progress. The same is true for  jargon and acronyms such as API Academic Performance Index or  NCLB No Child Left Behind. Although these kinds of hindrances present challenges, they are  not insurmountable. The Bridging Cultures teachers came up with a 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   number of innovations to make open house a more welcoming event  for immigrant families. Open House as a Family Photo Opportunity To promote interest in attending the schoolwide open house,  Mrs. Prez asked her 3rd grade children to tell their parents that  she would be taking family portraits that evening. In addition to  thinking of a way to entice the whole family to attend, Mrs. Prez  provided materials for the children to craft their own handmade personal invitations. There is power in their words when they write  the invitation, she said. It is just as important as having something  professionally done from the computer. In producing the invitations,  she noted, the students are learning how to write a letter or use an  invitation. They use it to bring the families in. The childrens personal invitations to their parents initiated a  home-school link. Once family members were in the classroom, Mrs.  Prez demonstrated that she valued their presence by taking photos  of them. The photos served two purposes. First, she created a family  bulletin board that served as a visual reminder to the students that  their families are esteemed. Having photos of family members in  the classroom may be especially powerful for recent newcomers to  the United States who are experiencing their  rst few months in this  country. The second function of the photos came later, when Mrs. Prez  realized that family photos could be used as a prompt for writing.  Using the digital family images on the computer, the students wrote  stories of their migration. When families came back to the classroom  for a subsequent parent meeting, they could see their childrens work  related to their family. Even parents who did not speak English could  understand that the children were using their family as a source of  knowledge that was appreciated by the school. When parents feel  welcome in the classroom, they are more likely to participate in parent activities Delgado-Gaitan, 1994; Trumbull et al., 2001.

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   59 Show What You Know Mrs. Hernandez also crafted a novel strategy for fostering understanding and relationship building with families right from the start.  She realized that it could take weeks or months to learn about each  family individually, so at the beginning of the year, during kindergarten orientation, she took the half hour she had with her parent  group after a whole-group orientation in the cafeteria to develop  an ethnography chart. She distributed seven sticky notes to each  family and asked parents to write only their name and their childs  name on each sticky note. She knew that some parents were not  literate, particularly in English, but she expected that they would be  able to write their own and their childs name. She had seven questions posted on large chart paper see Figure 3.1, which she read  aloud one by one, allowing parents to place their names under those  questions for which they would answer yes. F I G U R E  3 . 1 Questions for Parents at Kindergarten Orientation Is this your fi rst child in school? Do you have any other children at our school? Do you read or write in English? Do you read or write in Spanish? Is there anybody to help with English homework at home? Do you work in or out of your home? Put up name if you work outside of the  home. Would you like to volunteer in our class? Source: From Parent Involvement in SchoolingAccording to Whose Values? p. 61, by E. Trumbull, C.  Rothstein-Fisch, and E. Hernandez, 2003, School Community Journal, 132. Reprinted with permission.  Mrs. Hernandez reasoned that the parents, who are all Latino  many also immigrants, might feel more comfortable answering  some questions in the group rather than being put on the spot individually. Their participation in this group-oriented activity seemed to  con rm her assumptions. She was able to use the resulting chart of 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   sticky notes to make decisions about how to work with the families  and how to target additional information she needed. Because one of the obstacles to home-family partnerships is parents embarrassment about their own lack of formal education Valds, 1996, an alternative strategy might be to conduct a dialogue  at open house about parents common experiencesidentifying  countries of origin and shared concerns about the education of their  children. Then targeted conversations among similar subgroupsall  those from El Salvador, for examplecould be organized, with subgroup members invited to gather in different areas of the room.  These examples demonstrate how a group experience that incorporates the informal and social aspects of communication can be  initiated at open house or Back-to-School Night, despite the events  limited time frame. Forging a sincere and caring parent-teacher connection bene ts more than good classroom organization; it can serve  the larger goal of cultivating multiple sources of support for academic success. As an added bene t, the establishment of meaningful  relationships among families at the start of the school year can be an  asset for solving chronic problems such as poor attendance, as we  discuss in a later section of this chapter.  PARENT-TEACHER CONFERENCES Parent-teacher conferences are time consuming and challenging for  many teachers. They can be redundant and tedious, and are usually  scheduled at a time immediately following the preparation of report  cards. In addition, they are often fraught with emotion for everyone  involved.  Parent-teacher conferences were among the  rst practices that  Bridging Cultures teachers changed. Mrs. Eyler exempli es an evolution in teachers perception. Early in the project, she re ected on her  dawning awareness that she, and not just her diverse students, has  a culture. She recalled an incident from a few years earlier:

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   61 At one of my  rst parent conferences at Hoover kindergarten  with a mother and her friend or sistertwo womenI said  to them, You are the  rst teacher of the child, and I remember the two women looking at each other, and it landed with  a thud! I thought I was being so wise, but they just went,  What? in a nonfriendly way. They thought I was shirking  my responsibility. Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch,  Hernandez,  2003, p. 56 Mrs. Eylers observation shows her recognition that different cultures may have different ideas about the roles teachers and parents  should take. She said that one of her goals in participating in the  Bridging Cultures Project was to relate to parents in a better way. I  think I was always good, but it is much better now because I dont  come to them like they are ignorant. Im not patronizing. One of the empirical studies that provided the foundation for the  project, as described in Chapter 1, explored nine naturally occurring  parent-teacher conferences between immigrant Latino families and  their childrens grade teacher, who is European American Greeneld, Quiroz,  Raeff, 2000. This research was presented in the  course of the initial Bridging Cultures training to provide real-world  examples of home-school con icts that the individualismcollectivism framework could explain. Elsewhere, we have written about how  conferences became powerful communication tools for the project  teachers Quiroz, Green eld,  Altchech, 1999; Trumbull et al., 2001.  In this section we offer a few highlights. Group Parent Conferences Ms. Altchech began to experiment with parent-teacher conferences after recognizing that the popular format of student-led conferences might be incompatible with Latino culture because it puts  children in a position of assuming authority rather than of showing  respect for their parents and teachers as authority  gures. Here is her  account of how she redesigned parent-teacher conferences:
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   To incorporate the concept of collectivism, I redesigned my  parent conferencing into group conferences. For families  who couldnt attend, I arranged a separate time. I divided my  children by ability levels and language into one Englishspeaking group and two Spanish-speaking groups . . . I  explained the report card format and the meaning of the  marks and discussed my expectations for the next quarter.  I also discussed what I could do to help students progress  academically as well as how the parents could help at home  . . . A comfortable and warm feeling came across during  the conferencing. Many parents had questions that bene ted  the others . . . The group conferencing was relaxing for the  parents. It was a less threatening environment than the individual style; parents supplied support and were company for  one another. This format provided a group voice for the parents rather than an individual voice. After one hour, parents  could sign up for a private conference or ask a few questions  privately. My new format was successful. I saw all 28 parents  in three days. The conference design impressed my principal,  who asked me to lead a staff development program on the  subject. I see this conferencing format as an evolving process.  Quiroz, Green eld,  Altchech, 1999, p. 69 Conferences for Families Whose Children Are Bused to School Scheduling conferences can be dif cult, even in the best of circumstances, but when children are bused across a large urban area  to a distant school, the challenges are even greaterespecially for  families with many children. Several years after the project started,  Mr. Mercados class included 16 studentsabout half the classwho  were bused in, yet he was determined to meet with every family.  Heres how he described his thinking and actions to deal with the  situation: 

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   63 I realized I had to go to them. So I took a day off from work  not easy to arrange, but possible and went to their neighborhood. I was able to get a classroom at a year-round school  that had some teachers off-track at the time. I scheduled all  16 parents between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. I introduced  myself, and they told me about themselves. We always start  with chit-chat. Ive been to all but three of the Latin American  countries, so I can talk with them about places and foods. I  ate lunch with some parents, looking for commonalities with  the purpose of creating bonds. It takes the teacher off the  pedestal . . .  Goals begin with what the parent feels the child needs . . .  We talk about a wide spectrum of things. We write the goals  together and list strategies for achieving them. I use a piece of  carbon paper so that we each end up with a  nal document. I  set it up so that theres a list of all the areas to improve and a  list of all the areas of strengths . . . Four months later, I bring  the original sheet to the next conference, and I start crossing  out the goals that have been accomplished, so the parents  can feel the progress. Some parents have told me, and this is  with a child in 4th5th grade, that their child has gone all  ve  years without the parents ever meeting his or her teachers.  The child may have never been referred for assessment, yet  children come to me unable to read or not having been tested  for gifted. Im shocked this year that two students have been  recommended for special education in the 5th grade. Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch, Green eld,  Quiroz, 2001, p. 70 Mr. Mercados mobile conference was cited by his principal as an  example of positive practice during the school audit in 2002. Because  the principal recognized the value of this commitment to improve  relations with parents, the school decided it would provide transportation for all the parents to attend a special open house. Now parents  with children in all grade levels take a bus with children ages 5 and  older from their neighborhood school to Mr. Mercados school.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Parent-teacher conferences need not be a series of hurried 15or  20-minute exercises in frustration. Bridging Cultures teachers have  constructed numerous ways of making conferences a more positive  experience for all. In particular, they honor collectivistic values by  making social relationships between parents and teachers a priority  and the  rst step in creating shared supports for students success.  The examples of teachers innovations illustrate the linkages among  cultural understanding, organizational changes, and new relationships with families that can lead to better home-school coordination  over time. HOME  VISITS As another way to understand students and their culture, Bridging  Cultures teachers began making home visits. First-grade teacher Pearl  Saitzyk described some of her experiences:  I think it was more harmonious after it boiled down to the  understanding of what is going on. That changed me. I felt  more connected. One thing that was different that year the   rst year of the project was that I was invited to birthday parties . . . I went . . . It just added more depth to my relationship with parents. I went to one childs home, and there was  no furniture. I came there, and there was a child sleeping on  the  oor in the corner. I had an extra bed, so I brought it over  . . . Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch,  Hernandez, 2003, p. 55 Although home visits may seem likeand often area good  way to reach out to families, it is important that teachers take cues  from parents about the kind of personal contact the parents want.  Mrs. Prez would like to visit each childs home, but she listens to  parents messages: Ive let the children know that Id be happy to come if they  invite me . . . Ive made some home visits. I just sit and talk 

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   65 with the parents. I tell them if they cant come to the conference, I would come and do a home visit. Some parents  have thanked me for offering . . . and they prefer a phone  conversation. The parents situation would be sad, and they  dont want me to see it. And I know that because I would  have died to have a teacher come to my home. Trumbull,  Rothstein-Fisch,  Hernandez, 2003, p. 55 HOMEWORK Although the merits of homework are contested, the bene ts can  reach beyond the simple acquisition of knowledge Cooper, 2001.  Homework can help develop study habits and foster responsibility.  In an idealized form, homework engages parents in the supervision  of their childrens work by involving them in the processes of establishing work ethics, managing time, and consolidating new concepts.  But in reality, parents often feel inadequate to the task HooverDempsey, Bassler,  Burrow, 1995, and the expectation of parent  engagement can be even more problematic for parents who have  limited if any  uency in English and may be unfamiliar with U.S.  schooling practices and philosophies Delgado-Gaitan, 1992. When teachers or schools instruct parents to establish a  xed  homework time, to have their children sit in a quiet, well-lit area,  and to ensure that homework is checked each evening, they are not  being realistic. Among immigrants, it is not uncommon for several  families to share an apartment intended for one family, eliminating  any possibility of a quiet space for solitary study time. Moreover, if  there were such an area, the student might not want to be isolated  from the family. Separation would be considered punitive rather than  purposeful in accomplishing homework goals. Despite the obstacles and some of the debate about homework  in general, Bridging Cultures teachers have developed a number of  strategies to help support students successful completion of homework. Using the group as a resource, homework challenges have  been reduced or eliminated.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Homework Packets In the year-round school where she taught, Mrs. Eylers kindergarten class was getting ready to go off track for about four weeks.  She gave the children homework packets, introducing the concept  by saying that one of her two coteachers had made the packets especially for the children. They cheered in response. As she discussed  each assignment and previewed the skills they would need to complete it, the children clapped their hands and told the teacher thank  you. From a collectivistic perspective, the homework was situated in  the context of their teachers care for them. The homework seemed  to be more like a gift from a caring adult rather than an intrusion on  their vacation time. Group Homework Practice During an observation in Amada Prezs 3rd grade classroom, a  reading group had just completed their oral language lesson when  Mrs. Prez distributed the homework sheet. It required  tting spelling  words into the story they had just read. With Mrs. Prez as a nonparticipating member of the group, the children read each sentence and  decided via consensus which spelling word in English  t in each  sentence. The children were only allowed to use their  ngers to follow along; they did not have pens or pencils. The observer asked,  Was this because the parents might not be pro cient in English to  help at home? Was this a result of the Bridging Cultures Project? Mrs.  Prez said, Yes, and added that the students English pro ciency  was improving as a result of the project. The English homework was  nonthreatening now, because of the group experience, she said.  Its  ne because they can do it. They know their spelling words and  can complete it at home without help. When we go over it orally,  they can all have success. Group homework practice had multiple bene ts for the students.  First, they had an immediate opportunity to apply what they had  just learned in their reading lesson, expanding their understanding  of the reading material to a new context. Helping each other and 

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   67 sharing answers in a small group of similarly skilled students provided  a low-risk opportunity to contribute answers. When students appeared  unsure of their answer, the group quickly discussed the matter and  decided, via consensus, on the right answerand they could provide  an explanation for why it was correct. It is highly unlikely that the same  higher-order reasoning skills would have occurred if the students prepared their answers independently at home. Enhanced memory skills  were fostered within a social contextone that might have particular meaning for the students from collectivistic backgrounds. Finally,  more students turned in completed homework assignments because  doing homework was not a traumatic experience. Instead of triggering  what students couldnt remember, doing homework was a time when  they were able to recall the earlier instructions and responses, probably because they had shared a socially engaged experience. Two years later, Mrs. Prez added another layer to her approach  to homework. The students desks were organized in clusters of  four. Each cluster maintained its own daily homework  le. As part of  the morning ritual, the teacher asked if everyone in the four-person  group had put their homework in the group folder. As each group  responded that they had done so, everyone clapped. It was true in  every case during our observation. Mrs. Prez reasoned that the students would never want to disappoint their team, so the homework  return rate soared to 100 percent. She used the power of the group  to ensure that homework was completed consistently. Homework Delivery According to Marie Altchech, whereas she formerly had to ask  for a volunteer to write down homework assignments for absent  students, in her more collectivistic classroom, now it happens automatically. Now children remember who is sick; they take the initiative to write the homework assignment down and even deliver it  to the child. Its possible that by the 4th grade these students may  have been socialized at school to protect their own tasks and not  consider the needs of others Raeff, Green eld,  Quiroz, 2000. But 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   perhaps with Ms. Altchechs approach to create a more balanced  individualistic and collectivistic classroom, their natural inclination to  think of others returned. Ms. Altchech recounted her surprise when  a previously absent 4th-grade student returned to school with all her  homework completed. When she asked the student how this happened, she replied, My partner brought it to my house. When classrooms are organized to foster group responsibility,  teachers work becomes easier. Managing the various issues associated  with homework becomes inconsequential when classrooms build on  the concept of group support. The same is true for attendance. ATTENDANCE Attendance is not typically considered a classroom management  problem. A number of popular books on classroom management  do not include the topic of attendance in the subject index Jones   Jones, 2007; Levin  Nolan, 2007. This omission is hardly surprising,  insofar as absences may actually make classroom management easier  because of a lower child-teacher ratio. However, consistent attendance is important to the functioning of  a cohesive classroom group. When children attend school regularly,  everyone shares the rules and norms of the class, and activities and  scheduling have continuity. In contrast, when students are absent,  they miss out on opportunities to absorb classroom expectations as  well as the content and process of learning, making it more likely  that the teacher will need to resocialize them to classroom expectations and respond to questions about whats going on. Bridging Cultures teachers have used their knowledge of collectivism to  nd ways to improve attendance. Attendance-related experiences have emerged as topics during project meetings, interviews,  and observations. The  rst example that follows describes how a  teachers understanding of families actually changed her views of  why children were absent and resulted in vastly improved attendance. The second example raises questions about the need for 

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   69 extrinsic motivation for perfect attendance. The third shows how the  group typically responds when a student is absent. Solving the Attendance Problem Mrs. Eyler observed that many students in her school were absent some quite frequently. Some of her colleagues held almost cynical  views about the likelihood of enlisting parents help in addressing  the problem. But Mrs. Eyler recalled discussions in Bridging Cultures meetings about the strong value of helping and cooperation  associated with collectivistic cultures, and she decided to approach  the parents of her immigrant Latino students. She simply asked several mothers what they thought could be done to help children get  to school more consistently, conveying the sense that this was a  group concern by saying, We have a problem. The mothers worked  together to build a network of parents who could walk each others  children to school if an emergency such as the illness of an infant  prevented the parent from doing so. In the school neighborhood, it  was not safe for young children to walk to school alone. The mothers solved the problem, and Mrs. Eylers relationship with them was  strengthened. As a result, she resolved to work more closely with  parents on other problems see Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch, Greeneld,  Quiroz, 2001. Communicating the Importance of Attendance In the past, Mrs. Prez tried to improve attendance by awarding stars to the whole group for perfect attendance. With her knowledge of Bridging Cultures, she realized why this method didnt seem  to work. She reported, The children didnt really care that much  about the stars; they only cared about having perfect attendance. They  didnt even ask for the star . . . it didnt matter . . . it was just the idea  that everyone was there. Mrs. Prez also said that the children felt  sad for their absent classmates and were eager to volunteer to get  the homework to a sick friend. She said, Before Bridging Cultures, I  dont remember that happening too often. Instead, she recalls parents 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   coming in to get the homework, as opposed to the situation now  where children want to help.   This is an important example that illustrates how the teachers  extrinsic rewards for improved attendance fell  at as a motivator. Her  students were not interested in earning stars, but they were highly  motivated to help their fellow classmates return to the group. Prior  to the project, Mrs. Prez might have assumed that the children were  just not interested in attendance issues, as evidenced by their lackluster desire to earn stars, but she would have been wrong. With  her understanding of collectivism, she could forgo the need for little  gimmicks and leverage the students own needs to have their group  together. Making an effort to reach out to absent children was also evident  in Mrs. Hernandezs class. Returning from recess one day, the children  gathered in the computer lab. Mrs. Hernandez asked, Who is missing from our class? The children replied, Joel, and the computerbased lesson centered on the production of get-well cards for him.  Mrs. Hernandez instructed the children, who were in kindergarten  and 1st and 2nd grade, to pick four pictures that Joel will like to  have on a card. If you dont know how to do it, raise your hand. We  observed the children helping each other  rst and then raising their  hands if they couldnt  gure out what to do. These examples illustrate how a focus on the group helps support attendancea responsibility that elementary school teachers  typically assume belongs exclusively to parents. The last example  also illustrates how a lesson on the computer can be used in service  to the group, maintaining a social orientation while learning technological skills. PARENT VOLUNTEERS Parent volunteers can help with classroom management in myriad  ways. But teachers need strategies for organizing parent participation  in the classroom, and choosing good strategies depends on cultural  knowledge. Parents can support students work at learning centers, 

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   71 read to children, listen to them read aloud, and help with routine  clerical duties. In busy, crowded classrooms, extra help can bring  welcome relief, but the role of parent volunteers in Bridging Cultures  classrooms has special meaning. Mrs. Hernandez has been developing, modifying, and documenting innovative ways to increase parent involvement since the beginning of the Bridging Cultures Project, when she indicated in her exit  survey that such involvement would be one of her goals. We provide a brief overview of her innovations here. For a more in-depth  description, see Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch, Green eld,  Quiroz,  2001; and Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch,  Hernandez, 2003. Fostering Increased Parent Involvement Mrs. Hernandez initially sought parent volunteers to help her with  an escalating amount of work. I thought the whole burden of teaching was mine. I would stay long hours after school doing what I  needed to do to get my kids ahead. But my needs, combined with  new understandings from Bridging Cultures meetings, led to new  steps Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch, Green eld,  Quiroz, 2001, p. 85. First, Mrs. Hernandez decided she would transcend her fears of  having parents observe her. Then, understanding that formal education is often limited in parents home countries, Mrs. Hernandez  began to engage parents in simple conversations to determine how  much schooling they had and how they might be able to help in the  classroom and at home. Next, she welcomed younger siblings into  the classroom along with their parents, acting on the assumption that  the young siblings of her kindergarten, 1st, and 2nd grade students  would bene t from the experience. In observations, her expectations seem to have been born out, when, for example, older students  read to the younger ones and included them in songs and games. At  conference time, she showed parents a folder she had created with a  variety of classroom volunteer tasks, including those that seemed to  match each parents ability. Describing the folder, she said,
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   I included a paragraph about how much I needed them to  help their children achieve different academic goals . . . I  typed a page addressed to each individual parent in which  I explained whom they could work with and what skills to  focus on. I also included a page with other activities that  werent necessarily academic that they could all help me  with. Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch, et al., 2001, p. 86 As a result of her efforts, the number of volunteers in Mrs. Hernandezs classroom increased from 1 to 12 from the 17 families represented in her class. The volunteers responsibilities ranged from  supporting students reading and, in the process, modeling appropriate reading skills for other new volunteers to sewing costumes for  a schoolwide program. One parent became the school-community  liaison. Several years later, and at another school, Mrs. Hernandez faced  new challenges in recruiting parent volunteers. More mothers were  working outside of the home, limiting the number of mothers who  were available to volunteer, and a mandated, highly scripted Open  Court reading curriculum made it more dif cult to use parents to help  with reading activities. Mrs. Hernandez responded by meeting with  working parents at times convenient to them and engaging them in  creating materials that could be used in the classroom and at home.  However, the circumstances of the new school and the new curriculum continued to keep the number of classroom volunteers low,  despite her previous successes at a different school. Clearly, even  some of the best practices wont work if the setting doesnt match the  practice. Ultimately, schoolwide policies can either support or inhibit  parent involvement that supports classroom functioning Trumbull,  Rothstein-Fisch,  Hernandez, 2003. Parents as Guest Speakers and Resources Mrs. Prez acknowledges that many parents are unable to volunteer regularly in her class. However, maintaining open, informal 

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   73 relationships makes parents feel comfortable coming into her class  in other capacities, allowing her to use them as valuable resources.  She described how one father came into the classroom to talk about  his work. He owns a used car lot. He brought prizes and asked  questions. It was amazing. I just asked him to tell his storyhow  he came, and how he progressed. He had never done it before and  he loved it! Her example reminds us of the practice of uncovering  families funds of knowledge as resources for students learning in  the classroom Moll  Gonzalez, 2004. Developing a trusting relationship with familiesthrough formal  and informal meansis the  rst step toward gaining their support for  classroom orchestration see Chapter 5 for more information. Once  that trust is achieved, families can be enlisted for many kinds of help,  just as Bridging Cultures teachers have demonstratedfrom helping  neighborhood children get to school to volunteering in the classroom. But sometimes, before seeking to develop trust, it is necessary  to give parents explicit information about how schools in the United  States operate. In the next section, we show how Bridging Cultures  teachers have approached parents with this information and how  they balance collectivism and individualism in their classrooms. INDIVIDUALISM AND COLLECTIVISM:  TWO VALID CULTURAL ORIENTATIONS In addition to recognizing that they need to understand parents cultures better, the Bridging Cultures teachers know that parents can  bene t from an understanding of the culture of schooling in the  United States. As a result of their increased awareness of the potential  con icts between home and school cultures, teachers began to talk  with parents more explicitly about school practices and policies and  the rationales for them in cultural terms. As mentioned, some teachers have designed parent workshops and used the individualism collectivism framework to highlight why the school has certain expectations, and they invite parents to talk about their own perspectives.  Others have introduced the topic in conversations or conferences, or 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   in the context of a particular incident. All the teachers in the project  agree that parents deserve to have and can bene t from a greater  understanding of school culture. They also believe that parents need  to meet the school halfway and that students need to acquire a dualcultural perspective and the ability to function in the cultures of both  school and home Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch,  Hernandez, 2003.  Explicit Explanations Elvia Hernandez, herself an immigrant Latina, has experienced  the clash of cultural value systems in her classroom, so she has tried  to make the differences and the interplay of individualism and collectivism explicit. I told the parents at an inservice session about  individualism and collectivism, and my goals and values about individualism, she said, because one of the things we teach is individualism in little ways, and we need to prepare them for this. Parents  have become aware of the importance of responsibility and independence in the classroom. Parents and teachers may have different assumptions about  how children should behave, but new norms of behavior can be  taught without denigrating parents values. Mrs. Hernandez used her  personal experience to help parents accept the need for a certain  amount of cultural change: Ive come to think that I want to help the parents . . . learn  more about what is expected of them and their children in  society here in the United States. I want them to know that I  accept them and I came from the same roots they did. Were  immigrants. For a while we didnt have legal status here. We  share that. I want their children to be bilingual. Lets get them  a good base in English. I want the parents to know what the  reality is. They have to learn English. . . . Basically a little bit  of how society works and whats expected of them. Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch,  Hernandez, 2003, pp. 6364

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   75 As an immigrant herself, Mrs. Hernandez has taken the position that  parents need to acculturate to dominant norms, yet she accepts their  cultural values in the ways she works with them and their children. Using Parent Meetings to Explain Individualism and Collectivism Catherine Daley used her parent meetings to help make parents  more aware of the culture of the school, and, in particular, how the  school values related to individualism differ from those of collectivism. Together the teacher and parents have forged their own cultural  bridge. In Ms. Daleys view, We have a right to not negate students  culture but also not to negate the American culture that their parents want them exposed to as well. So neither should be negated.  Both should be accepted and explored Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch,   Hernandez, 2003, p. 64. She communicates this perspectiveof  the need for students to have bicultural skillsto parents as they  discuss the topic of culture. SCHOOL POLICIES AND CULTURAL CONFLICT In this chapter, we have described some instances in which school  policy encouraged parent involvement, such as in Ms. Daleys school,  where the requirement that teachers walk their students to the gate  provides the opportunity to chat informally with parents. In other  cases, school policies may create huge obstacles to parent involvement. Mr. Mercado provided an example of the latter situation. For security reasons, the district where Mr. Mercados school is  located implemented a lockdown policy; that is, schools would be  locked, and anyone who wanted to gain entrance to them would  need an appointment and personal identi cation. The district also  banned baby strollers from all schoolsfrom the buildings as well  as the schoolyard. Mothers with infants would now have to  nd  someone to care for their baby or park the stroller and get a chain  to secure itwhich is another hindrance for parent participation,
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Mr. Mercado said. To make matters worse, teachers and parents were  battling over parking spaces, which were limited in number. Teachers arriving after a certain time would  nd the lot full; they attributed  the problem to parents parking in what should be their spaces. A  couple of the teachers began putting  yers on offending parents cars  saying, Do not park in our parking lot. These factors added up to an unwelcoming stance toward parents. As Mr. Mercado said, We dont want to discourage them from  coming to school . . . We complain that parents dont come to school  . . . but we have been sending these negative messages out. Parents were, in fact, extremely upset and came in as a group to meet  with the principal. Mr. Mercado continued, I urged the principal to  explain to the parents why this policy was happening and explain  to staff why the parents were acting this way. According to Mr.  Mercado, It was a very hostile meeting, with parents saying, How  dare you lock us out from where our children are all day? No one  had told the parents why the district had mandated the lockdown  policy or the stroller policy. Once the principal explained the reasons, with the help of a translator, understanding replaced mistrust  and anger. Because the principal knew of Mr. Mercados involvement  with Bridging Cultures, she prevailed upon him to explain the situation to the faculty in a short after-school presentation. Mr. Mercado has frequently found himself in the position of cultural broker, trying to sensitively explain to colleagues why a con ict  might be occurring. A kindergarten teacher in his school complained  that too many parents were coming in and out of her room. They were  interfering with her ability to teach, she said, and they needed to cut  the apron strings. When Mr. Mercado explained his interpretation  of the situation, suggesting that the Latino parents behavior came  from the cultural value of the family staying together, the teacher  became less angry and maybe more sympathetic. She couldnt allow  them in, but she greeted them with less anger and made them feel  less unwanted, according to Mr. Mercado. On another occasion, Mr.  Mercado ventured an explanation for parents preference to voice  their concerns as a group rather than individually to the principal as 

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   77 a combination of respect for authority and their natural group orientation Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch,  Hernandez, 2003, p. 63. School Breakfast as a Context for Confl ict As a result of a discussion about cross-cultural miscommunication  related to school breakfast programs that came up during a Bridging  Cultures meeting, Ms. Daley interceded with a similar schoolwide  policy problem at her school. Ms. Daleys school, like many others,  has a federally funded school breakfast program. Family members  parents and younger siblings are not allowed to sit with students  during breakfast or lunch because regulations stipulate that all food  is designated for enrolled students only. For families who value closeness and sharing, this policy must seem absurd. Frustrated with the constant stream of parents coming into the  cafeteria during breakfast and the consequent threat of losing funding, the school posted a sign in English and Spanish: Only students  permitted in eating area. Parents, mostly mothers, were insulted and  angry and marched as a group to the principals of ce to complain.  The schools perspective was that the food belonged to particular  students and perhaps less overtly that parents were babying their  children by helping to feed the younger ones. From the mothers  point of view, families share everything, and helping young children models a value of helping and caring. Assumptions, based on  cultural perspectives, were rampant but unquestioned, no doubt on  both sides. When Ms. Daley heard that this problem was developing in her  school and that administrators were ready to take action, she intervened by going to the bilingual coordinator. The coordinator wrote  a letter to parents explaining the district policy and assuring them  that it was meant to protect their school-age childrens access to free  breakfast. She also expressed the schools desire to involve them in  other school activities and asked for their support. Rather than the  stark sign posted, as previously described, friendly signs decorated  with childrens drawings were displayed. Because the communication 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   was based on better cultural understanding, no parents objected to  the policy. Ms. Saitzyk observed that learning about parents values of helping, sharing, and keeping the family together led her to a better  understanding of why it was so hard for parents of young children  to sit on the sidelines at breakfast time while their children were  struggling with their little milk containers. I was able to explain it to  them in a way that they didnt feel offended. Then they were pretty  good about sitting there. All of the project teachers have intervened on students behalf to  see to it that the school system works better for them. For example,  Ms. Altchech visits the middle school her students will be attending to talk with counselors and teachers there about the strengths  and needs of students. Her concern is that their capabilities may be  underestimated in the new educational environment, where they are  likely to get less personal attention and cultural and linguistic sources  of difference may be overlooked, dismissed, or simply regarded as  intellectual de cits. She also talks with parents about how to advocate for their children so that they get what they need at the next  level of schooling.

Equipped with the Bridging Cultures framework, teachers have  demonstrated agility in constructing new ways to bring home and  school together in ways that are culturally relevant for families, that  improve classroom organization and orchestration, and that are educationally meaningful. Demystifying U.S. schooling is an important  step, but when teachers think that the cultural shift must be unidirectionalmoving from family belief systems to school belief systems they miss the opportunity to take advantage of all the strengths that  collectivistic families offer, such as keeping the family together, helping and sharing, and working as a group with common purpose.  This situation seems particularly ironic given that these family-based  strengths are among those often cited as contributing to students 

F a m i l i e s : R e s o u r c e s  f o r  O r g a n i z a t i o n  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t   79 resiliency and school success see Benard, 2004. Classroom management shifts to classroom orchestration when teachers understand  the likely origin of students behavior, as we will see in the next  chapter on helping and sharing.
C H A P T E R 4 Mrs. Prez: You have two things to do. One is in Spanish and one is in  English.  Children: Moan Mrs. Prez: But what if I tell you that you can help each other? Children: Cheer  As we have noted, the well-being of the group is the most fundamental collectivistic value. In this chapter, we take a closer look at  two prominent ways people contribute to the welfare of the group:  helping and sharing. We describe teacher practices that capitalize  on students inclination to help and share. Of course, these themes  come up in other chapters too, because helping others, whether in  the context of the group or assisting individuals, was prominent in  all Bridging Cultures classrooms. HEADING OFF POTENTIAL CONFLICT Helping and sharingseemingly so important for well-organized  classroomscan cause problems if the tacit values of the teacher and  students differ. When teachers and other school personnel are not  consciously aware of these differences, they may construe students  helping each other not only as off-task and unproductive but, worse,  HELPING AND SHARING DOING WHAT COMES  NATURALLY

H e l p i n g  a n d  S h a r i n g  D o i n g  W h a t  C o m e s  N a t u r a l l y   81 as cheating discussed further in Chapter 7. Even sharing a book or  a pencil can be seen as enabling an irresponsible student to continue  forgetting required materials. In general, helping others learn in the context of U.S. schools is  the teachers exclusive domain. When confusion or questions arise,  students are often instructed to raise your hand and continue working until the teacher can respond. Yet students may be unable to  continue working on assignments that are confusing, and any number of disruptive behaviors, from  dgeting to talking to getting out  of seats, may follow. Disorder and chaos can result when students  are unclear about their task and the teacher is busy helping others.  Figuring out how to proceed may become even more dif cult if the  student is not pro cient in the language of instruction. The answer to  the question Who can help? seems unnecessarily narrow if the only  answer is the teacher. When only the teacher can help, confusion  can escalate to the point that children swarm around the teacher asking for help. Incidentally, swarming occurred only once during 40  hours of observations in Bridging Cultures classrooms. As we discussed in Chapter 1, a study that included asking students, their mothers, and their teachers about responsibilities related  to the classroom job of cleaning the chalkboard evoked different  responses from the three groups. In that study, Latino immigrant parents believed that children should defer their own task in order to help  a sick classmate. This response con icted with the teachers predominant response, which involved  nding a third person and maintaining  the integrity of task completion Raeff, Green eld,  Quiroz, 2000. The example from the study shows how decisions about helping  others can present inherent cultural con ict between individualistic  schools and collectivistic families. The situation of children waiting  for help from the teacher suggests the potential for a similar con ict.  From an individualistic perspective, there is the need to comply with  the teachers directions to wait for her helpbeing careful not to talk  and to generally stay out of trouble. However, collectivistic students  may have deeply ingrained tendencies to get help from others or  to offer it to those who appear to need it. The irony of this con ict 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   is that learning how to help others is a standard goal of the popular character trait programs proliferating across the United States  Fallona  Richardson, 2006; Lee, 2005. Unless teachers make explicit their rules for helping, and unless  they begin to understand and then to use the full capacity of helping as a service for learning, teaching, and classroom organization,  students with collectivistic values will continue to be confused or  punished for misconduct. However, for teachers to accept the kind  of helping that some students naturally engage in, they may have to  alter their ideas of how learning takes place and how knowledge is  constructed. An individualistic orientation to knowledge and learning  implicitly holds that both of these are the purview of the individual.  The notion that knowledge is group-held which is the prevailing  belief in many cultures or that learning is not necessarily an individual process is likely quite alien to most U.S. teachers. TEACHERS CHANGED PERSPECTIVES ON HELPING  The Bridging Cultures teachers changed their perspectives on helping  and sharing as a result of understanding the cultural values of individualism and collectivism. For Mr. Mercado, it was just being aware of  the differences. You know, so many times where were doing things  in the classroom already, and suddenly its been given a name. And  youre like, Oh, well, I was doing that, but now it has a name. The following example  rst described in Trumbull, Green eld,  Rothstein-Fisch, and Maynard, 1999 illustrates how Mr. Mercado  used a history lesson to support the meaning of helping in students collectivistic cultures. THE VILLAGE  A presenter from the Museum of Science and Industry came to visit a  4th5th grade classroom to share items representing the colonial period  in American history. The beginning of her talk emphasized how important 

H e l p i n g  a n d  S h a r i n g  D o i n g  W h a t  C o m e s  N a t u r a l l y   83 the concept of village was to the colonists, specifi cally, how everybody  worked in the village and everyone contributed to the village. With that  in mind, Mr. Mercado began using the concept of village to identify times  when helpfulness was either observed or needed, such as with classroom  chores like cleaning the chalkboard trays or organizing the classroom library  into fi ction and nonfi ction. Mr. Mercado reported that the visitors use of  the word and description of the colonial village was an important marker  because . . . if I hadnt had that initial awareness of Bridging Cultures, I really  wouldnt have tied it into the present-day classroom situation. In Mrs. Eylers kindergarten classroom, she noticed that her students had a strong desire to help each other, but she didnt understand the depth of their commitment. Once she understood how the  childrens cultural values affected their orientation toward helping,  she found that her job became easier because students could support  classmates, perhaps even better than she could. The children are  always wanting to help their friends, she said. Academically or in  cleaning up, it was always there. I was conscious of not telling them  dont, but I didnt respect it or understand it. I was kind of stepping  over themnot in a mean way, but not in an understanding way.  Once she understood the cultural value of helping, she encouraged  it. Instead of me getting up to help a student, I get the students to  do itto speak to them. Maybe you can explain it better. Then they  help, step-by-step; instead of my doing it or another teacher, they  can help someone else. Helping as a Priority Soon after returning from winter break, Mrs. Hernandez gathered  her class of kindergartners and 1st and 2nd graders and began discussing the concept of New Years resolutions that people make to  improve themselves. She started the conversation by describing what  she wanted to achieve for the following year. She had three goals,  including visiting her brother and spending more time with friends. 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   She asked the children to share their resolutions for themselves on  how to be a better student. Here are the top seven responses: 1. Help others. 2. Listen to the teacher. 3. Learn numbers. 4. Pay more attention to the calendar. 5. Do homework. 6. Listen to the teacher when she explains assignments. 7. Pay attention to the class during computer time. The  rst item on the list, Help others, was students overwhelming priority. They apparently believed the best and most important  thing to do was assist others. This was seemingly more important  and fundamental to their own academic progress than their subsequent suggestions, such as improved attention and listening, which  are more readily associated with improved learning. The students  perceived that their  rst responsibility was to attend to the needs of  others, even before they focused on their own learning. The sincerity  of their intent was demonstrated by the fact that no discipline problems occurred in the class during six hours of observation. Did the resolution to help others emanate more from the students collectivistic backgrounds very likely, the teachers understanding and support of collectivistic values with the potential to  use that understanding and support to increase helpfulness, or the  mixed-age group and the possibility of 1st and 2nd grade children  helping the kindergartners in their class? Its impossible to know the  causes for the childrens emphasis on helping, but it is striking that  in an already cooperative and harmonious classroom, the children  wanted to help even more. As an aside, we should mention that the  multiage classroom is probably a more natural learning environment  for children who have siblings and cousins helping younger family  members at home. During an interview with Mrs. Hernandez, she described some  of the other instances of helping among her students. They help tie  each others shoes, help  gure out answers to problems, and help 

H e l p i n g  a n d  S h a r i n g  D o i n g  W h a t  C o m e s  N a t u r a l l y   85 put away backpacks; they help new students adjust, especially if they  dont speak any English. These children took the initiative to help each other, showing that  students can organize themselves to solve problems without direction from the teacher. Rather than undermining this process in favor  of promoting behaviors, such as let her do it herself, the teacher  sanctioned the value of helping others. CLASSROOM MONITORS Monitors are students who help with a wide variety of classroom  chores, such as passing out papers, distributing balls for recess, helping the group line up for lunch, and cleaning the chalkboard. The  usual arrangement is one person per job, and frequently the names  of monitors and their duties are displayed in classrooms to minimize  disputes over whose job it is to do any number of tasks. Bridging  Cultures teachers began to rethink the assumption of one student,  one job. Speaking of the evolution of practice in his own classroom,  Mr. Mercado said, I had individual monitors, and now I have group  monitors, and that works more smoothly than what I had before. I am  just more conscious about why certain things work. I have very good  management; everyone has responsibilities. He noted that even after  being absent and leaving the class with a substitute teacher, he can  walk in the next day and everything will look wonderful. Mr. Mercados successful use of group monitors comes about  because he discusses the need for classroom helpers at the beginning of the school year, asking children, Why do I need help in the  classroom? The children answer that his job is to teach. When he  asks them what kinds of assistance they can provide, they offer to  manage the books, clean the rooms, erase the chalkboard, and do  other chores. He engages the students in discussing why two people  are more ef cient than one, particularly if one is absent. He makes  his thinking transparent to his students because he believes that they  will help in appropriate ways if they help construct those ideas and  understand why they are important.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Mrs. Prez also made a change in her use of monitors. I used to  be very resistant to having more than one child out of the classroom  at once. It would bother me when they asked for a friend to go with  them to do an errand, she said. After her involvement in Bridging  Cultures, she began to let students leave the classroom with a friend,  and, she reported, it has never been a problem. Students almost  always ask if they can take a friend, Mrs. Prez noted, and she now  accepts their preference. Yeah, of course, it is much better to have  someone with you. I had never thought of that before, and I was  just resistant to it. They just go and do their thing and come back. It  has been consistent; they never go alone except to the bathroom. Similarly, Mrs. Prez changed her policy about class leaders, with  co-of cers  lling each position, instead of one student per of ce.  Thus the class has two presidentsone boy and one girl. The of cers function somewhat like monitors. One walks in the front of the  line and one in the back when the class goes somewhere as a group.  They also accompany students to the of ce, if needed. A slightly different picture emerged in Ms. Daleys 2nd grade  class. About two years after the initial Bridging Cultures workshops,  she reported in a meeting with other project teachers and the core  researchers that she had given up the whole idea of monitors. In the  beginning she told her students, If someone is done, help someone  else. Were not done until everyone is done. She reported that her  students asked for certain jobs, and her response was to open the  process of distributing classroom chores to the whole class. At the  time, that system seemed to work well. However, two years later with different students, her approach  to monitors had to be modi ed. During an in-depth interview, she  reported that her students acculturation toward increasing individualismeither from their experience in school or from their lives in a  densely populated urban areaseemed to have led them to expect  individual monitors. Her students now seemed to identify with the  one student, one job rule. In the following example, Ms. Daley  describes what happened.

H e l p i n g  a n d  S h a r i n g  D o i n g  W h a t  C o m e s  N a t u r a l l y   87 IN SEARCH OF A PERFECT SYSTEM I had a problem with monitors. It was hard for me to remember who they  were. If someone was unable to do their job, they became very insistent  to be the only ones to do the job. They were very territorial . . . I have  resolved itno more monitors. Everyone can help as long as they want to.  Some kids always want to be the one to pass out papers. Some kids have  been in the country longer, and they are the leaders and want to be in  charge. Everyone wants to pass out papers and pencils, but nobody likes to  do the menial jobserase the board or put down the chairs. But when I ask  them, then they all want to do it. Well, everybody can help. I give them the freedom to say, I did my part.  Im aware of the children who think, Let someone else do the work. Those  are the kids that are asked, Can you please take the chairs down? Then  other kids will offer to help. I pray that kids like that will see it isnt an awful  chore and think, Thank goodness, someone else helped me. This example demonstrates the in uence of mainstream individualism, perhaps as a result of previous teachers telling students that  they cannot help each other, or that once a single task is completed,  the student is not responsible for any other classroom chore but his  own. Both of these approaches can work against classroom harmony  and cooperation. However, when the whole group is seen as potential helpers, then it may be that the power of the group is still at  work, because when the other kids will offer to help, those who are  reluctant can be motivated by their peers. In a two-year span of time,  the problem with monitors seemed to recur in Ms. Daleys classroom,  indicating that something as simple as identifying the whole class as  helpers might still be confusing for some students. However, in her class of kindergartners and 1st and 2nd graders,  Mrs. Hernandez reported that the children all clean up and everybody helps. Its not just job speci c. This approach seemed to solve  any problems with classroom monitors in Mrs. Hernandezs class.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   The discussion of whole-class monitorswith everyone responsible for everythingis a good place to stop and re ect on the fact that  what may work well in one classroom may fail miserably in another.  As we have said all along, the Bridging Cultures teachers have generated their own practices, and these keep changing on the basis of  many variables, not the least of which is having a new group of students every year and having new immigrants arrive at various times  in the academic year. In general, teachers have shifted from a one  person, one job approach to having the whole class work together to  complete classroom jobs or to assigning multiple monitors. We offer a  nal note on Ms. Daleys own development as a  teacher. During one observation, she asked a student to get the beanbags for a physical education assessment, and the student requested  that a friend go with him. Before her involvement in the Bridging  Cultures Project, she may have construed the students request as  inappropriate because it would deprive two children of the lesson  that was underway instead of just one, or she may have thought that  a second helper could become a catalyst for fooling around in the  hallways or in an unsupervised classroom. Instead, she understood  that the student simply preferred to get help even when it wasnt  necessarily required, and she quickly gave permission to allow him  to select a friend to go along. The two children returned promptly  with the beanbags for the class. LEARNING PARTNERS  Establishing learning partners is a good way to promote helping  McLeod, Fisher,  Hoover, 2003, while simultaneously freeing up  the teacher to assist others. Establishing the partnerships is usually  accomplished by carefully organizing seating arrangements for optimal  matches Jones  Jones, 2007. In Ms. Altchechs 4th grade class, seat  partners are available for help when she is busy teaching. There are  other people to helpthe people nearbyand they can suggest how  to  nd words in the dictionary or share homework, she explained.  This action was observed frequently in her classroom. In one instance, 

H e l p i n g  a n d  S h a r i n g  D o i n g  W h a t  C o m e s  N a t u r a l l y   89 she had just read a story about kiwi birds and instructed her students  to fold their paper like a book and write, in full sentences, the evidence from the story that indicated that the kiwi was a funny bird.  The students were to work in teams to complete the task. Circulating around the room, the observer noticed variations in  how the students worked in pairs. In some cases, one child did the  talking and one did the writing. In other pairs, the students appeared  to work independently but occasionally checked to see what their  partner had written. Other pairs discussed whether or not a particular concept such as the fact that the kiwi is the size of a hen  t the  category of funny. During recess immediately following the kiwi story task, Ms.  Altchech was asked about the impact of the Bridging Cultures Project  on teaching and learning in her class. I always believed in childrens  need to work together and share their answers because it validates  their thinking. However, she was quick to report that the framework  of individualism and collectivism had provided theoretical support  for group work, especially with the Hispanic students. It makes sense  because they do that in class anyway. Learning partners are also very common in Ms. Daleys 2nd grade  class. In one instance, the children were working on preparing a  globe of the world. She showed one child how to do it and then  told him, Now you will do it to help your partners. When a student asked her, Who is my partner? she responded by saying, All  the children in the room. Describing the incident, Ms. Daley said,  I do that constantly with my students. I will teach one child, and  from then on, it is up to them to work well together. I tell them,  You cannot work alone in the real world. You have to help others.  Although Ms. Daleys de nition of partners is not as formalized as  two students assigned by the teacher or self-chosen to work together,  the underlying idea is the same. Partners in the class are essential as  learning and teaching resources. Each child has the potential to be  the partner of every other child. Learning partners are also prevalent in Mrs. Prezs classroom.  On one occasion, she was previewing some math worksheets for 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   her 3rd grade students. She referred to the problems as story problems rather than word problems, consciously or unconsciously  using a term re ecting students inclinations to tell family stories. She  also shared her own personal experience in solving story problems  and described being nervous when she was confronted with such  problems. She had dif culty with them, she said, but she offered her  students a way to address the challenge: Wouldnt it feel better if  someone could help you? she asked. The children responded in unison: Yes. She then said, Put your name on the paper and the name  of the person helping you on the paper. Put a circle around your  name, but put your helpers name on it too. In this way, she honored  the partnership by documenting the relationship. In addition, with  this kind of record keeping, she could troubleshoot problems if both  students were unable to solve the problems successfully as a team. The use of partners is so routine in Mr. Mercados class that it is  virtually automatic. During one observation, a child was seen working on an assignment intended for pairs. Because her partner was  absent, she worked collaboratively with the other two students in her  table cluster. However, when she was writing up her contribution,  she put both her name and her partners name on the book, although  the partner was absent throughout the entire assignment. When the  observer asked why she did that, she replied, Because she is the one  that is always my partner. Thus the importance of acknowledging  ones partner as a helper was evident even when the partner was  absent. The perspective revealed in this example parallels the perspective of family members toward each other: though a member is  absent, he or she is still present in everyones concept of the family. Buddies in the Classroom Several teachers have begun using class buddiesa variant of  learning partners. What is the difference between a buddy and a  partner? In some cases the terms are interchangeable. Whereas partners are often determined by seating assignment, in the case of buddies, stronger students may be identi ed to help those most in need 

H e l p i n g  a n d  S h a r i n g  D o i n g  W h a t  C o m e s  N a t u r a l l y   91 of extra support. At other times, buddies are older children from  upper grades who come to help. However, in practice this distinction  may be moot, as some teachers may always refer to helpers as partners or as buddies, regardless of the task or relationship between  students. In addition, the terms can refer to both the helping partner  and the partner being helped. In Chapter 7 we explore in detail the use of math buddies in the  context of an assessment example from Mrs. Prezs classroom. We  describe it brie y here because it so effectively demonstrates the  importance of helping. Mrs. Prez was disappointed in her students pro ciency with  timed multiplication facts; many had not mastered facts at the level  expected in 3rd grade. She asked the class what could be done about  this problem. The students volunteered to help their peers who were  having dif culty. Their goal was to have everyone know the facts,  so they established math buddies to practice the timed facts and to  support each other albeit silently during individualized testing.  Earlier in the project, Mrs. Prez used the same concept of allowing students to help each other. At that time, she was referring to  helpers as tutors rather than buddies. As she gathered students on  the  oor, she said, Some of you are going to have to share books.  Who is going to be Brendas tutor? Who is going to be Sauls tutor?  This pairing was for three distinct buddy pairs, and the students were  eager to share their materials with their classmates. Older Buddies Several Bridging Cultures classes developed buddy relationships  with other classes in their schools. Mrs. Eylers kindergartners enjoyed  the help of two 5th graders who worked in her classroom every day  when they were off-track. The 5th grade students bene ted from the  structure of being back in school, and their desire to help others was  met. In addition, Mrs. Eyler reported that the families supported the  concept of their children serving as helpers with a safe, regular place  to go when they were off-track. The older students, several of whom 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   stopped by during an observation, seemed to occupy a special place  in the classroom. Once they arrived, they immediately helped clean  up the art and writing-supply areas. As a reward for all their work  during the semester, Mrs. Eyler and her coteacher took the older  students out for an evening of fun that included dinner and a movie.  Mrs. Eyler commented, It was expensive, but I felt good about taking them out for an extravagant evening to thank them for helping  in the classroom. Mrs. Hernandez also bene ted from the help of older students.  During one visit, observers watched the buddies from a 4th5th combination class arrive, eager to help with reading. Each child in Mrs.  Hernandezs class had a reading buddy who made monthly visits  to the public library to collect books for their little buddies. Mrs.  Hernandez explained that, according to their teacher, the 4th and  5th graders still stumbled in their oral reading, so the relationship  bene ted them as well: the older students could read without fear of  embarrassment and model their determination to achieve mastery in  oral reading pro ciency. In addition, older siblings or cousins could  be the buddies of the younger students. At least two family pairs  read a lot togetherone was a set of siblings, and the others were  cousins. They read together for 15 minutes twice a week. The older  buddies were trained to keep their younger buddies story interest  high and to relate the topics from the book to their own experiences.  In many cases, younger children read chorally with their buddies. This cross-class buddy system offers many advantages. First, older  buddies have a vested interest in going to the library for the purpose  of helping someone and this interest may be even greater when their  little buddy is a relative. Second, the practice bene ts both students  in the pair by providing increased time to practice reading together.  Third, the practice frees up more time for the teacher to help those  who may need special attention or to coordinate common buddy  activities with the other teacher. Mrs. Hernandez reported a fourth  bene t: the buddies may continue to work together beyond the allotted classroom timesuch as at home, in the case of relatives.

H e l p i n g  a n d  S h a r i n g  D o i n g  W h a t  C o m e s  N a t u r a l l y   93 HELPING IN MODERATION Like all classroom activities, helping has to be closely monitored.  Sometimes partners can become crutches for students who fear making an effort on their own. As we have said, students need skills to  work well within groups and independently. Ms. Daley pointed out  how too much helping can become a problem as she described a  boy in her class who was constantly looking for help from other  students, particularly a student named Bryan. I have told Bryan that  he can share with the other boy, because he is learning, and we do  work together much of the time, she said. When Bryan says that his  classmate is copying, the other boy says, No, we are sharing, Ms.  Daley reported. But she added that there are times when she says,  Now I want to know what is in your brain by yourself. SHARING AMONG STUDENTS  Teachers often emphasize rules about where and how students can  keep personal items. It is not uncommon for teachers, particularly  in the lower elementary grades, to place a small box or bin in the  middle of each table for materials to be used by everyone in the  group. This strategy eliminates the need for students to borrow  these supplies from one another, and it reduces the need for a trip  to out-of-group storage areas Evertson, Emmer,  Worsham, 2006,  p. 115. This arrangement seems motivated by the need to eliminate  problems that occur as a result of con ict over personal property.  However, many students may actually prefer to share materials in the   rst place, when that practice is culturally harmonious with expectations in the home environment. In our discussion of sharing within  the Bridging Cultures teachers classrooms, we include the sharing of  objects as well as the sharing of knowledge and experiences. As with some other collectivistic practices we discuss, many teachers no doubt had a norm of sharing in their classrooms before their  encounter with the Bridging Cultures Project. For them, the project  has given them greater faith in their intuitive knowledge and led to an  expansion of existing collectivistic practices related to sharing. Other 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   teachers have consciously revised ways of responding to students  culture-based proclivities. Mrs. Eyler discussed how her views and  strategies changed. There is one propeller in the Legos. I used to  say, He had it  rst, and then tell them to take turns. Now I say, You  need to  nd a way to share it. Mrs. Eylers emphasis on sharing is  particularly notable because, as a kindergarten teacher, she represents  the childrens  rst contact with elementary school culture, and homeschool con ict is likely to be most pronounced at this time Pianta,  Cox, Tylor,  Early, 1999. According to Ms. Daley, sharing is non-negotiable. I refuse to  have anyone say this is my desk or my crayon . . . It belongs to all of  us, because it is part of the school. We are all responsible. The children in her class demonstrate their desire to share in ways similar to  those of their home environment, as evidenced, for example, in how  they view food. Here is how Ms. Daley described snack time: When my kids bring snacks, it is a banquet. They dont bring  three cookies; they bring the entire package. They bring  econo-size chips. When the kids need to share, they take  what is in the home that they have in the largest size possible . . . They bring the large sizes intentionally to share with  others . . . It is expected. You brought the snack; Ill help  you eat it. I have never had a child complain about sharing.  I have had children say, I had so many friends around me, I  had only two chips. I have to say, Be sure the person sharing gets their share too. Sharing is evident even among 4th graders who have received  all their education in the United States. During an observation in Ms.  Altchechs class, a student had borrowed a pencil from his friend.  The lending friend sat unoccupied as others began their writing task.  When the observer asked why he wasnt working, he said he didnt  have a pencil because he had lent it out to someone in need. Then  the student who had the borrowed pencil asked yet another student  for a pencil for the  rst student, and the problem was solved.

H e l p i n g  a n d  S h a r i n g  D o i n g  W h a t  C o m e s  N a t u r a l l y   95 Although sharing the pencil delayed the students ability to work  on the academic task at hand, the gesture illustrates how readily students share and get help in doing so from others. In total, the entire  sharing incident occurred over less than two minutes. According to Ms.  Altchech, As the children get older, the kids want their property. They  have their individual supply boxes, but they are very quick to share  when someone else needs something. I never see a problem with This  is my box, my pen. You cant use it. The boxes are just a physical place  to keep things. She noted that she never had to ask the students to  share. It is automatic. It is part of their mode of thinking. Likewise, Mr. Mercado reported that students in his 4th5th grade  combination class still share materials, even though they are becoming more accustomed to having their own possessions. My kids  bring their own pencil cases with stickers. They dont want to use the  group cardboard ones. They will de nitely share their own boxes,  but not like, It is mine, not yours. SHARING WITH THE TEACHER Ms. Daleys students are eager to share with adults as well as classmates. According to Ms. Daley, they want to bring her things, and  although initially she resisted these gifts, she has found that it is  important to accept them graciously. When the school started to sell  snack foods, the students would typically buy something, such as  juice or a cookie, and offer it to her. She would suggest that the students share it with their friends, or, realizing how important sharing  is for the children, she would make a point to eat their offerings in  front of them after making certain they had enough to eat themselves.  During a visit to her classroom, the observer noted how eager the  children were to share. Just before class, she received a gift from one  of the students, a stuffed animal, which she told the children would  remain in the classroom. Then, just moments later, she received a  Disney-character bank. She gave the gift giver a big hug and said,  This will be our of cial class piggy bank.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   In both instances, Ms. Daley was aware of the importance of  sharing for the children, and yet she herself did not want to be singled out. Her strategy was to accept the gifts graciously and then to  be sure that they were shared among the whole class. In this way she  honored the childrens need to share while reinserting the objects  into the group for the whole class to enjoy. Incidentally, the children also wanted to share something with  the observer. When two girls returned from recess, they brought the  visitor a pink plastic pencil box. The observer, the  rst author, keeps  that pencil box as a symbol of their generosity and kindness. It is a  constant reminder of how ingrained sharing and inclusiveness is for  children from collectivistic homes. Sometimes children share materials that may be intended for a  single person or a special use, but Ms. Daley reported that she does  not have any problems with theft in her class. She commented that  her students know what belongs to the school, so if someone tries  to take something belonging to the school home, others will help  and intervene. This is an excellent example of how the group regulates the use of what is intended for sharing school materials and  what may be a personal item. Weinstein and Mignano 2003 cite  cultural variation as a possible source of confusion about the meanings of sharing and generosity compared to private ownership p.  341. As in other situations, we recommend a teacher-led discussion  to clarify mattersin this case, a discussion in which the students  talk about the differences between sharing and stealing, providing  personal examples and cases from their own experience. Making  assumptions about even temporary property, such as materials that  belong to the school but are used for a period of time by one child,  can lead to problems and disruptions in the classroom. SHARING AS PART OF A REWARD SYSTEM  Students desire to share objects can supersede the signi cance of the  object to the individual. Mrs. Hernandez described how some other  classrooms at her school set up a reward system:

H e l p i n g  a n d  S h a r i n g  D o i n g  W h a t  C o m e s  N a t u r a l l y   97 Students could earn fake money with the teachers face on  the money, with 500 or 1,000 for older children and 1,  5, and 10 for younger children. The children save their  money, and then they bid for things at the end of the week.  One group said, Lets put our money together, but they  would only get one toy. They always gave the money to their  banker. When they purchased something, they thought about  what they could buy to share. In the case of a coloring book,  they wondered about ripping out the pages and thus turning  the book into worksheets and not a book at all. What would happen if the teacher required the children to keep  their own money and did not allow them to share? This would suggest a very individualistic orientation. Teachers with this orientation  would not subscribe to the described practice of sharing, particularly  if one of their goals was to encourage individual motivation or competition. They might reason that students need to keep their own  reward money for themselvesthus learning a lesson in capitalism  and private enterprise; or perhaps the notion of destroying a book in  order to share it might cause a teacher to intervene and halt the idea  of pooling funds. Conversely, thinking of ways to motivate students  who have the desire and skills to share and help would create a  more congruent learning environment for students with collectivistic  backgrounds. Rewards and motivation are explained in more detail  in Chapter 5, but for now, we will simply state that we have found  that extrinsic objects may be less effective motivators for collectivistic  students, and, moreover, the use of objects as rewards could undermine their inclination to share as well as learn. SHARING NONMATERIAL THINGS Sharing goes beyond objects. It also encompasses sharing of time,  skills, knowledge, and experiences. According to Mrs. Prez, she  allots more time to share information, skills, and objects from outside  of school as part of her English language learners curriculum as a 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   result of the Bridging Cultures Project. She reported that she is making more time for sharing and not feeling guilty about it. Instead of  incorporating sharing as an afterthought or a once-in-a-while thing,  now it is a regular part of the real curriculum. Seeing the connections . . . and being more aware of the theoretical framework support  my decision for choosing certain activities. During one observation in Mrs. Prezs 3rd grade classroom, the  whole group sat on the rug for an hour as students shared objects  from home. They had been organized into groups before the observation, and it was the share day designated for one particular group.  The following example describes the activity in this class with many  English language learners. SHARING EXPERIENCES Mrs. Prez organizes her share days by dividing the class into groups of  about four students each. On the designated share day, students from certain groups are encouraged to bring something to discuss with the whole  class. It is intended to be a rich language arts experience that engages students in asking and answering questions about their special objects. During  one observation, a student was sharing an art box, and the teacher prompted the children with the English words for wite-out and oil pastel. At the  end of the lesson, the teacher said, I have two things to share; tell me what  you want me to share. I have pictures with Ms. Singer in the desert. How  many want me to share the desert fi rst? I also have pictures of my favorite  people in the whole world. The students recognized that the album she  was referring to contained pictures of them. Its us!  they exclaimed. Nevertheless, they decided they wanted to see the pictures of their teacher rather  than photos of themselves. The desire to hear about the teachers trip and  to learn from her experience relates to what we described in Chapter 2  regarding the inclusion of adults as part of the classroom community.

H e l p i n g  a n d  S h a r i n g  D o i n g  W h a t  C o m e s  N a t u r a l l y   99 Like Mrs. Prez, Mr. Mercado has found that sharing experiences  in class requires some organization. Storytelling can become enormously time-consuming if not planned for properly. Whereas Mrs.  Prez organized her class into groups that shared on a speci c day,  Mr. Mercado found that sharing in small groups was a viable alternative to whole-group sharing. In one case, the students were very  eager to share their stories about their grandmothers described in  Chapter 2. When I did the grandmother stories, it got way out of  hand, he commented. I used something I learned from our Bridging Cultures meetings. I had them talk with the people at their table  for  ve minutes. I rotated round the classroom and listened to each  group. Carter and Doyle 2006 point out that sharing time typically  means giving the  oor to a single student at a time with the task  of spontaneously composing and telling a personal narrative about  his or her out-of-school life p. 387. They cite three dif culties  associated with this practice. First, the discussion can meander, and  the demands on a teachers ingenuity in guiding the conversation  and his or her knowledge of the content increase accordingly. Moreover, bidding for turns and turn allocation can demand considerable  teacher concentration as well as student skill in gaining the  oor,  though there are sociocultural differences here. Second, there is fear  that only a few students will be concerned with what the speaker is  saying, allowing the rest of the class to lose focus. Third, the content  of the sharing may not be germane to the topic. As a result of these  things, teachers often take control of the content Carter  Doyle,  2006. What we have seen in the Bridging Cultures classrooms is a  variety of harmonious ways to allow students to voice their ideas,  sometimes with the whole group, sometimes in smaller groups, and  sometimes in pairs. No single way is best, and, overall, using a variety  of strategies may be the best course to follow. In every case, some  kind of structure and organization is helpful, as the Bridging Cultures  teachers have found out. 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s  

Unless teachers understand how much students from collectivistic families value helping and sharing, they may waste a lot of time  and energy attempting to prevent students from helping each other,  rather than turning the inclination to everyones advantage. Based  on our observations in Bridging Cultures classrooms, we believe it is  possible to marshal the values of helping and sharing to the bene t  of the entire classroom. When students must work independently,  the teacher can explain how to do so and why it is desirable. The  necessary classroom management strategy is to be explicit and to  discuss the contexts for each type of taskwhen it is appropriate to  help and share and when it is appropriate to work independently. In Chapter 5 we present more examples of helping and sharing,  but the applications are directly linked to the concept of classroom  orchestration, including rule setting and discipline.
C H A P T E R 5 CULTURALLY RESPONSIVE  CLASSROOM ORCHESTRATION Traditionally, strategies for classroom management have been derived from  an individualistic psychological orientation. As such, classroom management is about correcting and preventing disruptions caused by the difcult students and about reinforcing positive comportment of the welladjusted ones. Such defensive reactions re ect a conception of classroom  relationships as single and frequently unidirectional interactions between  the teacher and individual students. Rachel A. Lotan, Managing Groupwork in the Heterogeneous Classroom,  in Handbook of Classroom Management In this chapter, we explore how Bridging Cultures teachers have  used their understanding of students culture-based values and  strengths to choose strategies that result in smooth orchestration of  their classrooms. We use the term orchestration rather than management throughout this chapter because it denotes bringing about  harmonywith all the members of the classroom orchestra in synchrony. In contrast to the individualistic and control-oriented approach  identi ed by Lotan in the epigraph that opens this chapter, we  describe an approach to students as a group that takes advantage of  its sense of community and desire for group harmony. The teachers  strategies for classroom orchestration range from traditional ones, 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   such as transitional activities to help students move from one activity  to another, to relying on students group skills to carry on an activity during a teachers temporary absence. We discuss the concept of  community in the classroom because it is implicit in how Bridging Cultures classrooms work. We also address the complex issue  of motivation because it is at the root of all classroom orchestration  or management strategies. Motivation affects students engagement  in learning and classroom behavior, and both are predicated on not  only personality differences but also on cultural values. STRATEGIES FOR HARMONY Bridging Cultures teachers use a variety of strategies to ensure the  smooth running of their classrooms and to minimize interference  with learning activities. Our observations revealed overwhelmingly  harmonious and productive classrooms: We saw only nine cases  of overt discipline in 40 hours of observation! We believe that the  extremely low incidence of disruptions or misbehavior resulted from  the strategies the teachers constructed with consideration for students cultural values. These approaches to orchestration proved to  be effective because they produced a minimum of con ict between  home and school values. Bridging Cultures teachers use relatively few observable management strategies, such as reminding students of class rules. Here  is where management and organization merge: in well-selected,  culturally-harmonious organization of classroom activity that precludes the need for explicit management or discipline. Harmony in  the classroom is accomplished much more through choices in the  types of activities and in how those activities are organized. Nevertheless, during observations we did keep a tally of four strategies:  redirection, transition activities, nonresponse, and direct discipline.  Although these general strategies are likely to be observed in many  classrooms, the ways teachers choose to carry them out may look  different once culture is considered. For example, an activity that is  intended to help students make a transition from one academic focus 

C u l t u r a l l y  R e s p o n s i ve  C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n   103 to another is more likely to involve all students as a group rather than  as individuals see transition activities below. Figure 5.1 shows the  number of instances of each type of strategy recorded during about  40 hours of classroom observation. F I G U R E  5 . 1 Instances of Classroom Management Strategies  Used by Bridging Cultures Teachers Teacher Strategy Number of  Instances Redirectionshifting a students focus from one thing to another 5 Transition Activitiesa break to switch to a new activity 6 Nonresponseteachers apparent ignoring of a students behavior 2 Disciplinereprimand or threat 9 Redirection We use the term redirection to indicate the shifting of a students attention from one thing, such as an off-task activity, to something else, often accomplished by changing the topic of interaction  or engaging a student in a new activity to avoid a looming problem. Examples include asking a student, What do we not do? as a  reminder of what counts as unacceptable behavior, according to Mrs.  Eyler or, Juan, tell him how you want to be treated to help a child  gain reentry into the group, according to Ms. Daley. Transition Activities Transition activities serve two purposes. They may be used 1 as  a break within a period of instruction that requires a lot of concentration, such as listening to a lengthy explanation, or 2 to get children  to move from one activity to another. For example, to give students  a break from an extended activity, Mrs. Prez uses stretching games. 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   To move children from one activity to another, Mrs. Hernandez has  them gather on the rug and sing the song Open, Shut Them, which  uses hand gestures. The children clap, put their hands on their laps,  and then creep them into their mouths. She has them silently mouth  the words to the same hand movements when they come in from  recess and need to settle into an academic activity. Likewise, Mrs.  Eyler uses songs to get students attention and to segue to another  activity. On one occasion, she led the children in the singing and   nger play of Eensy-Weensy Spider in Spanish. One child asked to  lead the song and was granted her wish. The children clapped for  their classmate when she was  nished. Nonresponse We use the term nonresponse to refer to a teachers ignoring of  a behavior in an apparent effort to avoid reinforcing it. At one point,  Ms. Daley ignored a child who was chanting another students name  during a physical education activity, although she had previously  suggested to the group that such chanting might be distracting to the  student who was trying to perform a task. Direct Discipline In our more than 40 hours of observation we documented very  few instances of Bridging Cultures teachers directly disciplining students. Five teachers never engaged in any overt discipline during our  visits. In fact, we observed only nine instances of direct discipline,  and eight of these occurred in one classroom on the last day of  school before an extended break. Bridging Cultures teachers do regulate students behavior as  they deem necessary. And it is certainly possible that teachers may  soften efforts to control students when observers are present. During  a debrie ng interview, one teacher re ected, perhaps ruefully, that  elements of her disciplinary style may have been captured by some  of her young students as they engaged in free play one afternoon.  According to the teacher, the children were mimicking her, saying, 

C u l t u r a l l y  R e s p o n s i ve  C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n   105 Dont move, Be quiet, Sit down, I only want to call your name  one time, Diego. This disclosure by the teacher demonstrates that  even in the best cases, teachers use a variety of old and new strategies, and they face dif cult challenges when the needs of one child  eclipse the learning of others, which may have been the case with  Diego. Yet in the Bridging Cultures classrooms, we observed children also being encouraged to help each other focus on the work of  school and take responsibility for many aspects of classroom functioning, as described in earlier chapters. PUNISHMENT Bridging Cultures teachers use a minimum of punishment, though  it is not completely absent from their classrooms. One form of punishment used when students are not working well with peers is to  offer them the opportunity to work or perform alone. This strategy  can help to avoid a problem. For example, during an activity, Ms.  Daley asked students to cover their faces but to project an emotion underneath. Instead of following directions, the students  rst  looked around to see what others were doing. One boy immediately  broke into a punching and  ghting persona. Most of the others did  hide their faces but did not project an emotion, or they uncovered  their faces perhaps to look around. Four girls conferred with each  other about which emotion to express. The teacher seemed unhappy  with the responses of some of the students and asked, Would you  rather do it out here by yourself? She was standing apart from the  group. The threat of standing apart from the whole group was an  apparent punishment for children who did not want to be separate  from their group, and their behavior improved. When Punishment May Be Undeserved  Sometimes cultural differences can lead to undeserved punishment. Ms. Daley described the following incident during a Bridging 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Cultures meeting, and it illustrates how both school staff and students need to learn about and be sensitive to cultural differences. GUILTY EYES Two children were accused of a minor school crime and were called into  the principals offi ce. While the principal was interrogating them, one child  looked down at the fl oor, and the other looked directly at the principal. The  principal presumed that the child looking down must be guilty, and the child  was expelled for a few days. Ms. Daley knew the expelled boy and did not believe he was likely to  have committed the crime. But she also knew that he would be looking  down as a sign of respectnot guilt. With that in mind, Ms. Daley decided to  make looking into eyes an explicit lesson with her class. She had a discussion with her 3rd graders about eye contact. She told the children that different people and different situations required different kinds of looking. She  said, If you are with a Latino, look down, and when you are with a typical  American, you must look at them in the eyes. Ms. Daley wanted to be very  clear that culture affects how different people interpret the same behavior. Following the discussion, she took the children on a fi eld trip around  the school to identify which adults they should lower their eyes for and  which they should look at eye to eye. In addition, she cautioned students  not to overgeneralize or make too many assumptions by telling them, If the  other person is not getting the right message, try switching the eye contact.  Rothstein-Fisch, 2003, pp. 5455  When Punishment May Be a Reward At times, teachers have kept students in from recess to complete homework ostensibly as a punishment, but sometimes that  practice has not functioned as intended. One child in Ms. Altchechs  classroom explained to the observer that she hated recess and 

C u l t u r a l l y  R e s p o n s i ve  C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n   107 actually preferred to stay in the classroom. She may have also enjoyed  being close to her teacher. Another Bridging Cultures teacher withheld recess as a punishment for failure to turn in homework, but over  time she decided the approach was not constructive. She replaced  it with a system in which volunteer students helped their classmates  successfully complete missing homework. Thus, the teachers solution for the infraction shifted from a punitive reaction to a problemsolving strategy. OTHER ORCHESTRATION STRATEGIES Pre-emptive Action At times, it was quite clear that teachers were anticipating potential discipline problems and giving students explicit guidelines about  how they could control themselves and thereby prevent an incident.  Of course, some students present greater potential for interpersonal  problems than others do. For example, one teacher had a student who  was prone to disrupting others. She tried to help him think before he  acted. Kenny, are you going to mess him up or are you going to help  him? she asked when she saw Kenny approaching another child who  was struggling to check for spelling errors in a paragraph she had just  completed. In this way, she was showcasing the option of helping  rather than hindering a fellow students progress. Tapping Students Sense of Shared Responsibility  Whereas the emphasis of many discipline programs is on individual responsibility see Canter  Canter, 1992; Edwards, 2004,  the emphasis in Bridging Cultures classrooms is often on group  responsibility. Each student is still responsible for his or her own  actions, but, in addition, students are expected to help each other  remain focused on a task and behave appropriately. For example,  during a visit to Mrs. Hernandezs class, we observed a group discussion of the story The River. A few children began to chatter during  an exchange between Mrs. Hernandez and one student, who was 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   discussing his  shing experiences, but children nearby said Shh,  and the chattering stopped. Ms. Saitzyk described a situation in which she had to leave her  bilingual English-Spanish 1st grade classroom for a few minutes to  confer with another teacher. As she stood outside in the hallway,  she heard her students continuing the lesson she had begun. Not  a moment was lost, and no one misbehaved. Simultaneously, the  monolingual English students of the other 1st grade teacher erupted  into noisy commotion. Ms. Saitzyk wondered at the time whether the  difference was due to students differences in culture-based socialization practices. Her students appeared to automatically take responsibility for the continuing activity of the group, whereas the students  in her colleagues class did no such thing. One explanation for her  students response would be that the children had a culturally rooted  notion that working together is rewarding and motivating in itself.  This notion allowed them to stay focused on the learning task without external motivators such as rewards for doing the work or punishments for not doing it. CLASSROOM RULES All Bridging Cultures classrooms have a short set of rules that are  posted in a prominent spot. In most cases, students have been  involved in framing the rules, although teachers may shape their   nal form. Describing her process, Ms. Daley said, My rules are  generic enough that I am able to ask the students what theyd like  our rules to be, and afterward we discuss and group them into their  appropriate categories such as affecting others, being a prepared  student. Then I use the titles of the categories as our rules. Here is  a recent set of rules, or guidelines, for her classroom: I am the best student I can be.

I follow directions the  rst time I hear them.

I respect others as I wish to be respected.

C u l t u r a l l y  R e s p o n s i ve  C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n   109 In the following account, Mrs. Prez described the process she  uses to generate classroom rules, along with the main kinds of rules  that tend to result. MRS. PREZS RULES PROCESS Ive used this method very successfully with 3rd and 5th graders for many  years. On the fi rst or second day of school, we brainstorm rules all together, and I write them on butcher paper where I have drawn a Venn  diagram. The left side is for Students; the right side is for Teachers including classroom aides; and the middle section where the circles intersect  is for Everybody students and teachers. I put the headings up as we go  along, beginning with Students. Everything the students come up with is  included . . . Then I explain that teachers also need rules, if we are to  have a democratic classroom, and that they can also contribute rules they  believe the teachers should follow. They are so surprised to be asked to  do this! They usually begin with, No yelling, screaming, or running. They  also believe that teachers should not drink coffee in the classroom. When  they are fi nished listing these rules, we read them all aloud together and  vote on which ones are the most important in both lists and underline  or circle them. Next, we decide which are the common rules that come  up for both students and teachers. We select three to six rules to put in  the center section of the Venn diagram. Usually, the main rule is simply  Respect each other. Others that come up often every year are Do all  your homework and turn it in on time and Help each other. Next, the students select the best writers in the class to make a large  poster or class chart with their rules under the heading OUR RULES.  Finally, everybody signs at the bottom including teacher and assistant, and it  goes up on the wall in a very prominent place. Every morning after the fl ag and world pledges, our rules are recited  until they are learned by heart, respected, and followed. There are consequences for breaking the rules set up by the school, but our class rules are  different than the school rules.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Mr. Mercado also involves all of his 4th grade students in the formation of rules. The following is his account of the process. MR. MERCADOS RULES PROCESS In regard to the classroom rules, I begin the lesson with a make-believe scenario of a place with no rules. I ask the kids what they think would happen.  They come up with all the right answers i.e., total chaos. I then bring it to a  smaller scale and ask them to think about a schoolyard with no rules. Again  they come up with the answers that I was hoping for. Then I bring it to the  classroom level. After we discuss what a classroom with no rules looks like  and, yes, someone always says murder in addition to noise, hitting, etc.,  they generate three or four rules that they think our classroom should have.  Generally each group comes up with similar rules, so when I chart them, all  are happy and feel validated. The rules this year 20022003 are Try to do your best work.

Treat others with respect.

Do not get out of your seat unnecessarily or talk unnecessarily, especially when the teacher is talking. This last rule allows students to go to the water fountain, work collaboratively, and the like. If you allow them to generate too many rules, they tend to  come up with silly ones or redundant ones. The respect word covers a lot. Mrs. Hernandez believes it is more realistic and practical to frame  a small set of rules for her kindergarten and 1st grade students herself.  My students dont really know what a rule is, she said. She explains  the idea of rules by reading them the story Marty the Monkey during  the  rst week of school. In the story, Marty goes to school and does  a series of things hes not supposed to do. He has to learn basically  the same rules we use, she explained, such as not disturbing other 

C u l t u r a l l y  R e s p o n s i ve  C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n   111 students when they are trying to get their schoolwork done and keeping his hands to himself. After she reads the story, she reviews some  of the rules with her students. She role-plays with them, and then she  puts the rules on a chart. Here is a recent set of rules for her classroom: No running in class.

Raise your hand and wait for your turn to speak.

Work quietly.

Share and take turns.

Be polite, be nice.

Mrs. Hernandezs approach is probably more re ective of the  culture of the school than are the approaches of some of the other  teachers. Raising ones hand to speak individually is typical of expectations in U.S. classrooms. In the classroom discussion about rules  just described, Mrs. Hernandez regulated childrens participation one child at a time. Yet observations showed that she does express a  group orientation in other interactions with children and encourages  them to help each other see Chapter 2. She holds out a model of  keeping ones hands to oneself, but she allows a great deal of physical proximity among children in actuality. It was in her classroom  that children were observed to be stroking a friends hair, touching  feet, or sitting shoulder to shoulder.  Ms. Altchechs rules for her 4th grade classroom posted in English and Spanish were documented during a visit about 18 months  after the project began: I will follow directions the  rst time they are given.

I will raise my hand for permission to speak or leave my seat.

I will keep my hands, feet, and objects to myself.

I will pay attention.

I will show respect to all.

Five years later, her rules had become much broader and less behavioral. She displayed only two, which are broad expectations rather 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   than explicit rules see the distinction made by Johns  Espinoza,  1996: Be respectful. 

Be serious about learning.

Some educators believe that rules shaped by the teacher should  not be passed off as student-created rules. They argue that the process is a sham Johns  Espinoza, 1996. The term rules suggest a  compliance orientation to classroom management Jones  Jones,  2007, p. 197. In this way, they reinforce the power of the teacher  and its coinciding opposite, the disempowerment of students. Some  teachers have advocated alternative terms such as rights Weinstein   Mignano, 2003, p. 72. Regardless of the term, most teachers would  agree that norms, standards, or rules are important for keeping classrooms safe and for promoting optimal learning environments. The processes that Bridging Cultures teachers described appear  to engage students in an authentic way in thinking about the kinds  of classrooms they want to have. One can see some variety in the  rules and how they are arrived at, but the common denominator is  the notion of respect, which appears over and over in Bridging Cultures classrooms. Respect is a high priority in collectivistic families,  and the Bridging Cultures teachers explicitly recognize this priority. THE MEANING OF RESPECT IN  BRIDGING CULTURES CLASSROOMS Respect respeto, in Spanish is highly valued in many cultures. In  Latino cultures it assumes a broad de nition and is perhaps more  important than in other cultures that encourage asserting ones own  needs and thoughts. In her book, Con Respeto, Mexican American  researcher Dr. Guadalupe Valds 1996 explains: The notion of respeto . . . goes much beyond the meaning  of the English term respect. The English notion of respect  suggests some of the elements of the concept of respeto, 

C u l t u r a l l y  R e s p o n s i ve  C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n   113 but excludes many others. Respeto in its broadest sense is a  set of attitudes toward individuals andor the roles that they  occupy. It is believed that certain roles demand or require  particular types of behavior . . . Having respeto for ones family involves functioning according to speci c views about the  nature of the roles  lled by the various members of the family. . . . It also involves demonstrating personal regard for the  individual who happens to occupy that role. p. 130 Mr. Mercados classroom rule about not interrupting the teacher  is reminiscent of the expectations held by the Mexican American parents with whom Dr. Valds conducted her ethnographic research: Respeto for the mothers role was very much in evidence  in what the children did not do. . . . Even children under  two years old did not interrupt conversations between their  mother and other adults . . . Out of respeto, children were  expected to wait until their mother was  nished with whatever activity she was involved in before they asked for her  attention. p. 120 The word respect comes up often in Bridging Cultures classrooms. We have seen it in classroom rules, as well as in reminders  to students and in discussions whose purpose is to resolve con icts.  For example, Ms. Daley reminded her students of the need to be  respectful to one of their classmates who was reading aloud from a  lengthy composition. Ryan is writing the longest novel. We will give  him the respect he gives to us. Ryan read the book he had written  with his face buried behind the large pages. When he  nished, the  class applauded. MOTIVATION Motivation, in the classroom context, can be de ned as whatever it  takes to get students interested and engaged in learning. Motivation 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   is said to be strongly affected by the degree to which basic human  needs are met, such as the need for food, safety, a sense of belonging, or self-esteem Maslow, 1970. Arguments about the importance  of intrinsic versus extrinsic motivation have raged in the educational  psychology literature. Some, such as well-known educator Al e Kohn  1993, insist that the only important motivators for students to learn  and achieve come from within. He cites studies showing that both  adults and children are more likely to persevere with a dif cult task  if they are not rewarded by anything more than their own satisfaction  at completing it see, for example, Deci, Koestner,  Ryan, 1999. Academic motivation comes from a variety of sources. It may  arise from social needs. With social motivation, students are said to  seek peer acceptance and approval and to avoid social rejection.  According to a review of the literature, The positive academic effects  of emotional support from peers are well documented. Students who  perceive that their peers support and care about them also tend to be  more engaged in positive aspects of classroom life than are students  who do not perceive such support Wentzel, 2006, p. 633. However, this perspective does not necessarily take into account how  important these social motivators are for collectivistic students, who  may be driven more by the desire to help others than to gain personal popularity. Research suggests that positive interpersonal relationships take  on heightened importance for Latino students, particularly their relationships with teachers. Latino students, more than students from  other groups, say that a positive and personal relationship with a  teacher is important to them Antrop-Gonzlez, Vlez,  Garrett,  2003; Nieto, 1998; Valenzuela, 1999. This makes sense, given the  view of educationeducacin held by many Latino families. But we  are quick to say that it is not only Latino students who bene t from  personal relationships in school. A sense of belongingness or connectedness is fundamental to motivation to learn for students in  general Osterman, 2000; Schaps, 2003. Most teachers quite likely seek to tap intrinsic motivationfor  example, by encouraging students to pursue their own interests when 

C u l t u r a l l y  R e s p o n s i ve  C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n   115 possible through choices of the books they read or projects they  do for science or social studies. But we would be surprised to  nd  a teacher who did not attempt to provide any extrinsic motivation,  whether through the use of rewards, praise, recognition, or the lure  of a good grade. Bridging Cultures teachers are no different, but their  strategies are distinctly colored by their cultural knowledge of the  students they teach. REWARDSINDIVIDUAL AND GROUP Rewards do not appear to be a large part of the classroom repertoire  of the Bridging Cultures teachers, but they do use them on occasion.  Nevertheless, the rewards take on different forms and meanings, as  is made evident by the examples that follow. Intangible Rewards One intrinsic reward of engagement in learning activities is the  relationship one can have with others, whether through the sense  of belonging to a classroom group or through collaboration among  a small group of peers. Ms. Altchech discovered that spending time  with her, alone or in a small group, was considered a valuable reward  by her students. In the following account, she explained her perspective on rewards. THE BIG REWARDLUNCH WITH THE TEACHER First of all, I have never believed, except for an occasional stamp or sticker,  in extrinsic rewards. I have never in 25 years of teaching given out rewards.  How did this come about? I let them make the decision, and the students  said they wanted free time or art as a reward. Once I suggested maybe  lunch with me as an option, and the children wanted that above all else.  Eventually, they all earned the points to have lunch, so every day I sit with  different tables outside during lunch, and I can see their table manners and 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   chit-chat. Now I dont require points for any reason; I just enjoy listening to  them during lunchtime. In her approach, Ms. Altchech created a homelike environment  by having lunch with the students and in the process was able to  gain an understanding of her students interests and concerns in an  informal way. She took something that was essentially a reward for  the children and found it to be a reward for herself as wellso much  so, in fact, that she stopped requiring that students earn points to  have lunch with her. It became a two-way rewardand her action  in giving up a quiet, private lunch break says volumes about her  priorities. As this example suggests, the most potent reward may be the  teachers attention and how that is skillfully used as a source of motivation. If given a choice explicitly, would students be more likely  to hold up a sign that says Will Work for a Pizza Party or Will  Work for Special Time with the Teacher? Surely, the response would  depend upon the caring nature of the teacher see, for example,  Pianta, 2006. Sharing Rewards Among the Group When given the option, students will often choose to share a  reward, or they  nd a way that the whole group can be rewarded.  Bridging Cultures teachers also re ect the group orientation at times  by creating a reward scheme that gives rewards for behavior to the  group as a whole rather than to individuals. For example, on some  occasions, when Mrs. Hernandez is particularly pleased with how  students have been behaving, she puts a small prize in a jar. After the  students have earned 20 prizes or a number equaling the number  of students in the class, the prizes are distributed to all members of  the class. There is no one-to-one relationship between the earning  and the distribution of prizes. Students are recognized as a group and  rewarded as a group. This treatment of rewards is natural in cultures 

C u l t u r a l l y  R e s p o n s i ve  C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n   117 that consider success to be a group-level phenomenon and that routinely share many forms of property. We also want to highlight two other relevant examples described  more fully in other chapters. In Chapter 4 we described the example  of students pooling their fake money, earned for good behavior, to  buy a coloring book to share. In Chapter 7, we describe how a star  chart, intended to motivate students to attain individual mastery of  the times tables, became a tool for documenting progress of an entire  3rd grade classroom toward that goal. Schoolwide Awards Although a focus on individual achievement causes discomfort  for some students, one cannot assume that students and parents from  collectivistic backgrounds will not respond positively to individual  awards. Mrs. Hernandez reports that she has found many parents and  children motivated by rewards and incentives offered by the school.  She noted that she had talked with parent volunteers about one such  award. I told them how the awards worked, she explained. The  easiest award is the attendance award. It is a medal. If they are late  to school, no medal. Parents are so psyched about the new awards  their children can earn. They dont want their children to miss out  because parents can ensure that their children are in attendance on  their own. It is signi cant that in this case it is possible for more than one student to achieve perfect attendance and thus receive an award. Students  are not competing for a single award, as they often are when awards  such as Best Writer or Top Student are handed out. Some Bridging  Cultures teachers, whenever they have control over awards, insist on  a system in which each student or the whole group is recognized in  some way, so that no one is left out. In an interview, Ms. Saitzyk discussed her feelings about awards assemblies. Awards assemblies made  me uncomfortable, she said, explaining that teachers were required to  give speci c awards to a few children in categories designated by the  school, such as academic achievement, most improved, citizenship, 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   and peer tutoring. She said she became even more uncomfortable  after working with the Bridging Cultures framework. Before, I used to  give the assigned number of awards. Then we would have our own  award ceremony in our class to include everyone. But the year that I  gave my whole class the awards, I really liked that. Certainly, in a standards-based system of instruction and grading,  there is no reason that many students cannot be recognized for meeting academic standards. However, many students from cultures that  emphasize the group may be quite uncomfortable with being singled  out for praise in these ways. PRAISE AND CRITICISM AS MOTIVATORS Ways of using praise and criticism, with the intention of motivating children in and out of school, are in uenced by peoples culture-based values. Praise is widely thought to provide an effective  preventative and nonintrusive practice to encourage appropriate  behavior . . . and it has been associated with increases of appropriate student behavior and task engagement Lewis, Newcomer,  Trussell,  Richter, 2006, pp. 846847. Under the assumption that  students self-esteem 1 is important to nourish and 2 will be supported by frequent praise, teachers often praise studentsalone and  in front of their peers. And the standard wisdom is that teachers,  when reporting to parents about their childrens progress in school,  should sandwich a small amount of criticism in-between a lot of  praise, according to Bridging Cultures teachers description of the  norm. This perception is consonant with what many authorities recommend for how to work with parents see, for example, Moles,  1996 and is in line with a dominant-culture value of promoting individual achievement and self-esteem. The recommended approach to praise may not seem genuine  to children from collectivistic backgrounds. They may actually mock  the teachers comments of Beautifully done! or Good job Geary,  2000; Rothstein-Fisch, 2003. Their parents, who quite likely want to  hear what they can do to help their children meet the expectations 

C u l t u r a l l y  R e s p o n s i ve  C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n   119 of the teacher and the school, may be mysti ed by or uncomfortable  with the kind and amount of praise heaped upon their children. We  have heard many stories from teachers and graduate students who  work with immigrant Latino students that re ect students and parents discomfort with praise or even scorn for it. Tempering praise and evaluating its impact on students and parents is not tantamount to totally eliminating praise in the classroom  or during parent-teacher conferences. The meaning, form, and context of praise need to be examined. We have observed that when  praise is given privately, so that it does not risk making other students feel left out, it may be more accepted. When students are  praised as a group for their accomplishments, they may receive the  praise happily. Praising individual students accomplishments when  they are recognized as contributing to a group goal may also be an  acceptable approach. Children reared in a collectivistic culture base their sense of self  more on group af liation than on personal achievement Markus   Kitayama, 1991. The reverse tends to be true of children reared  in an individualistic culture. Although teachers cannot assume how  praise or criticism will affect a given student, these guidelines can  help teachers to anticipate the kind of information they will need in  order to understand the variation in the motivational value of praise  or criticism. An example from Mr. Mercados class shows how praise can be  used effectively. Students were working in collaborative groups to  write poems. He pulled the group together for re ection on their  work. This poem has something I like very much. It is the part  that is repeated, he said. He read the poem, emphasizing the two  repeated phrases. Why does it sound OK to repeat it? he asked.  Here, Mr. Mercado praised something a group had done and used it  as a springboard for discussion of a common feature of poetry, the  repetition of words or phrases. Once again, it is the way in which  praise is used that needs to be considered if it is to be effective across  cultures.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   When teachers praise students by saying, You are so smart, or,  Youre great, they are not doing the students any favors; they would  do far better to encourage effort. It is important to help students  understand that a poor grade is a re ection not of who they are or  their innate ability but nearly always of their effort. So, although  choices about the use of praise need to be made with cultural understanding, teachers also need to factor in what they know more generally about the effects of praise of different types. In fact, focusing on  the task performance rather than the individual may make the praise  more acceptable to a student from a collectivistic culture who has  been taught to be modest.

We have seen Bridging Cultures teachers use a considerable  range of strategies to manage the moment-to-moment  ow of classroom activities and personal interactions. Although many of these  strategies could readily be applied to almost any classroom, it is  evident that cultural knowledge is factored into teachers choices of  strategies. These teachers are obviously aware of using their students  natural inclinationsto cooperate to solve problems, to take responsibility when the teacher is unavailable, and to want to help each  other behave appropriatelyfor positive ends in the classroom. In some ways, the group orientation and the home value of respeto may make the teachers job in managing the classroom easier.  But this is only the case, we believe, when a teacher understands students home values and can design classroom practices accordingly.  Other research has shown that classroom management in the same  cultural context as that of the Bridging Cultures classrooms may be  time consuming and fraught with con ict when a teacher does not  know how to tap cultural resources. For example, in a study comparing a Bridging Cultures 2nd grade class with another 2nd grade class  also composed of Latino immigrant students, Isaac 1999 found  that the non-Bridging-Cultures teacher spent an inordinate amount  of time regulating students behavior. Her reprimands often took the 

C u l t u r a l l y  R e s p o n s i ve  C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n   121 form of discouraging students from helping each other. Had she  known how to capitalize on her students collaborative and helping  skills, she could have greatly increased their time spent on academic  tasks. As a  nal note, we should say that we and the Bridging Cultures  teachers recognize that students sometimes need to work independently. This is a goal of U.S. schooling, and teachers would be doing  students no favor by eliminating individual work. However, equipped  with cultural knowledge and tools for acquiring it, teachers can  consciously draw on students skills to foster classroom harmony and  teach them how to negotiate the expectations of dominant-culture  schooling. The notion of orchestration may be useful as educators  seek solo and group performances in sync with the students home  and school values.
C H A P T E R A major concern of teachers is organization and management of their language arts programs. Teachers are able with appropriate professional development to integrate cutting-edge strategies into their literacy curriculum,  but have a dif cult time putting the different pieces of the program together  in their school day. Lesley M. Morrow, D. Ray Reutzel, and Heather Casey,  Organization and Management of Language Arts Teaching: Classroom Environments,  Grouping Practices, and Exemplary Instruction, in Handbook of Classroom Management  Classroom organization and learning activities are inseparable. In  fact, according to Doyle 2006, the basic unit of classroom organization is the activity p. 101. In this chapter, we examine how  learning and instructional activities can be organized in ways that are  culturally congruent, thus minimizing the need to redirect off-task  behavior. We provide an array of examples from Bridging Cultures  classrooms to demonstrate how knowledge of the individualism collectivism framework has shaped instructional activities in language arts and mathematics in particular. The activity is the fundamental unit of analysis for understanding  peoples learning in a social context Cole, Engestrm,  Vasquez,  1997; Gutirrez, 1994; Vygotsky, 1986. Teachers are often encouraged  by administrators to specify activity components for each day and to  THE ORGANIZATION  OF LEARNING IN THE  CONTENT AREAS 6

T h e  O r g a n i z a t i o n  o f  L e a r n i n g  i n  t h e  C o n t e n t  A r e a s   123 allocate the time required for these activities Santrock, 2004. Activities occupy relatively short blocks of classroom timetypically 10 to  20 minutesduring which students are arranged in a particular way  . . . such as seatwork, recitation, presentations, small groups Doyle,  2006, p. 101. In terms of standard classroom organization, activities can be  thought of as having two interrelated dimensions: the social and the  physical. The social dimension has to do with how activities and  interactions are structured to promote learning and development. It  includes the ways language is used; the ways roles and relationships  are shapedin part, through grouping and behavioral expectations;  the ways time is allocated and activities sequenced; and the ways  students are asked to show what they have learned. Examples presented in earlier chapters highlight the cultural nature of many of  these aspects of organization. The physical dimension of organization has to do with how  the space and all the materials and equipment of the classroom are  structured to promote learning. Of course, the social and physical  dimensions are not independent; if teachers want to encourage peer  interactions, they may form small groups of tables or push desks  together in clusters. In this case, the arrangement of students and  furniture could be considered a physical strategy with a social goal  see Doyle, 2006, p. 100. A teacher may arrange the setting to facilitate traf c  ow, communication, supplies and equipment access,  private space, and the monitoring of classroom behavior Carter   Doyle, 2006, p. 379. Cultural values affect decisions about all of  these elements of physical organization. Because we have discussed  the physical dimension of classroom organization in Chapter 2, here  we focus exclusively on the social dimension. Bridging Cultures teachers consciously use cultural knowledge  to help them organize their instructional activities to maximize student engagement and learning. The strategies we have documented  that clearly draw upon cultural knowledge fall into two broad categories: 1 collaborative learning and 2 inclusive discourse as  it relates to how language is used to communicate at home and 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   school. Although the two categories are conceptually distinct, in  reality, many of the instructional activities we describe capitalize on  both kinds of strategies. COLLABORATIVE LEARNING We de ne collaborative learning as students working together to  help each other learn. We prefer the term collaborative learning  to cooperative learning for the following reason. Even though collaborative and cooperative overlap in their dictionary de nitions, the  term cooperative learning has been associated in the research and  practice literature with speci c de nitions and criteria for implementation, some of which do not apply here Cohen, 1994; Johnson   Johnson, 1994; Slavin, 1990, 2006. Hollins 1996 describes the distinction as follows:  In the collaborative learning community, relationships and  collaboration among the students are naturally occurring and  purposefully focused on learning while minimizing individual and group competition. In contrast, in cooperative learning, relationships are structured, manipulated, and controlled  by the teacher with group competition replacing individual  competition in many cases. p. 119 The kind of working together we are talking about is different  from notions of cooperative learning in which each student takes  or is assigned a particular role in the group, and individual as well  as group grades are awarded. Cooperative learning, as we have  observed it in many U.S. classrooms, entails a task focus. Students  may work quite independently of each other and come together only  to plan how to carry out tasks and monitor progress toward completion. In Bridging Cultures classrooms, the social and task goals are  inseparable. In collaborative learning, the group enforces individual  efforts to achieve common goals that represent both social and taskrelated outcomes Wentzel, 2003, p. 324. And, as Sheets 2005 has 

T h e  O r g a n i z a t i o n  o f  L e a r n i n g  i n  t h e  C o n t e n t  A r e a s   125 said, In collaborative learning groups, interpersonal interactions are  at a higher level of personal involvement. Group responsibility is  enhanced; participation is more focused on learning and sharing,  and the process takes place in a more natural learning context p.  156. A common denominator of the instances of successful collaborative work as we characterize it and of the most successful forms of  cooperative work described elsewhere is what has been called positive interdependence Johnson, Johnson,  Holubec, 1994. This  means that everyones participation is perceived as contributing to  the groups goals, whether the goals are social, academic, or both. Collaborative learning, in our use of the term, entails genuine  working together at a substantive level. As we have typically observed  it in Bridging Cultures classrooms, it often involves all students working on all aspects of a task; each student seems to consider it his  or her responsibility to solve problems that arise and to ensure that  the group accomplishes what is expected of it. When grades are  involved, they are often group grades, although teachers make it  clear that individual accountability is important as well.  In the remainder of this chapter, we set the scene with a general  discussion of the links between collaborative learning and students  home-culture values. Then we turn to the content areas of language  arts and mathematics for examples of how collaborative learning  takes place in Bridging Cultures classrooms. Bridging Cultures teachers also use collaborative group work in social studies and science  instruction, as well as in other subjects such as physical education,  music, and health. Cultural Congruence Small-group collaborative work is a staple of Bridging Cultures classrooms, in part because it is so compatible with students culture-based  strengths. Because working together for the good of the group begins  in early childhood within the family, the immigrant Latino students in  Bridging Cultures classrooms have well-developed collaborative skills. 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Delgado-Gaitans 1994 research in an immigrant Mexican community  in Southern California showed how children taking individual responsibility as early as age 7 expressed itself as responsibility for othersnot  simply the ability to do things for oneself. Individual capacity is marshaled in support of the group. There is a natural, organic quality for lack of a better term to  the collaborative learning we have observed in Bridging Cultures  classrooms. Students huddle together, planning and discussing as  a group. Rarely does a student physically separate from the group  to work alone on some aspect of the task; rather, students seem to  prefer to work in proximity to each other and to ensure that everyone is included. Although teachers monitor the work of collaborative groups, very little disciplinary intervention is necessary because  students have been socialized at home to help each other notwithstanding their previous experiences in school. Students in Bridging  Cultures classrooms need little or no instruction on how to form  groups or function in groups see Chapter 2, and therefore teachers  can focus on instructional interventions designed to facilitate highlevel cognitive activity. The collaborative approach applies not only to small-group work  but also to large-group and whole-class activities, a fact that becomes  clear in the classroom examples that follow. The elements of collaboration may not be immediately apparent, however. At times they are  more in the nature of students orientation to each others achievement; an activity that actually promotes competition in individualistic  settings can engender cooperation in a collectivistic group. Collaborating in Language Arts Bridging Cultures teachers have described many strategies to  maximize collaboration in language arts instruction. These strategies  can be applied across a wide range of grade levels, with minor adaptations. As mentioned, collaboration and certain forms of cooperative  learning have been shown to have positive academic, personal, and 

T h e  O r g a n i z a t i o n  o f  L e a r n i n g  i n  t h e  C o n t e n t  A r e a s   127 interpersonal impact Atwell, 1987; Gambrell, Mazzoni,  Almasi,  2000; Johnson  Johnson, 1994. Vocabulary pairs. Mrs. Prez allows students to help each other  study vocabulary. Students with greater English pro ciency help  those with lesser pro ciency, though pro ciency is not a consistently predictable state. Sometimes it is the less pro cient student  who is seen to be explaining something to a more pro cient student because he or she has certain expertise. This kind of heterogeneous grouping is re ective of Mrs. Prezs beliefs about what helps  students learn, and it parallels the pattern of older siblings helping  younger ones in many collectivistic families Delgado-Gaitan, 1994;  Maynard, 2002; Nsamenang  Lamb, 1994. She avoids ability grouping in general, seeking activities in which students can learn from  each other. She believes that those who serve as tutors for their peers  also bene t from making their own knowledge explicit. Her beliefs  are born out by research see Antil, Jenkins,  Wayne, 1998. Group writing. All Bridging Cultures teachers use some form of  process writing instruction, in which students go through steps of  brainstorming, drafting pieces of writing, and engaging in peer review  and editing Calkins, 1983. At one of our Bridging Cultures meetings, Ms. Altchech said, I go one step further. Many students arent  there for writing in English, so teams are writing stories together.  . . . Students can choose to write individually and illustrate and type  together. For assessment, I have them alternate so I can see individual performance. But, she noted, they do not always write in a  group. I have done scripted poetry, journal writing, and other kinds  of individual writing. Class books. In this activity, individual work leads to a group  product that is shared by the whole class. Mrs. Prez had children  create posters about themselves on 11-by-17-inch paper as a homework assignment. When the students brought their creations to class,  she interviewed each child, and the children learned about each  other. The collectivistic part is putting the posters together as a  class book, she said, citing this activity as an example of how the 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   individualismcollectivism framework had transformed what she did  in the classroom. Mrs. Prez laminated the pages so that they would stand up to  ongoing handling by more than 20 students, who appeared to take  great pride in their joint product. By joining their narratives, they  created a book that they could all read. In this case, the support for  group learning came after the original activity, but the seeds of collaboration were there. On another occasion, she paired her 3rd graders with 1st graders,  with whom they had a buddy arrangement. They were to collaborate  on a single book based on a story they had heard called If. Mrs. Prez  described what happened: They drew on paper and cut out their drawings. They wrote  a sentence on the computersome in English, some in Spanish. Some of their pages illustrated things like If people could  smell wind . . . , If tables could have faces . . . , If grass  could be eyebrows . . . , If my heart were a butter y . . . ,  If a whale could run in the park . . . , If apples could eat  trees . . . . Reading the whole  nished product as a group,  they were in awe of each others work. Ms. Altchech described a similar experience, in which an individual writing activity culminated in a group product. After a  eld  trip, Ms. Altchechs students wrote thank-you notes to the Audubon  Society. The notes were gathered into a book and sent to the docents  who had helped the class learn about the wetlands they visited. Choral reading. Choral reading refers to children reading aloud  as a group. Bridging Cultures teachers recommend this practice as  well as individual reading as a regular part of daily language arts  instruction. One particular bene t of choral reading is that it allows  students with limited English pro ciency to practice the rhythm and  sound of English without being spotlighted, and thus it is compatible  with the collectivist value of not standing out.

T h e  O r g a n i z a t i o n  o f  L e a r n i n g  i n  t h e  C o n t e n t  A r e a s   129 Mr. Mercado uses a variation on choral reading called popcorn.  He has modi ed what was originally designed as an individual reading activity and uses it with pairs. Sitting with two children at a table,  he reads a little, and then taps the table to signal the children to  begin reading chorally. He reports that popcorn and choral reading  are popular even with children who are normally hesitant to read  aloud. Extending the choral approach to other aspects of the classroom,  teachers may allow children to answer chorally instead of individually. Choral reading and choral response have been shown to be  successful in such different environments as Alaska native villages,  native Hawaiian communities, and other Paci c Island communities,  all of which share similar norms of collaboration Au  Jordan, 1981;  Lipka et al., 1998; Nelson-Barber, Trumbull,  Wenn, 2000. Literature circles. In literature circles, small groups of students  discuss the same piece of literature, asking each other questions and  critically analyzing various facets of the reading. Literature circles  have been shown to increase students engagement in reading and to  expand their understanding of texts Daniels, 2002; Fox Wilkinson,  1997; Noll, 1994. Fall, Webb,  Chudowsky 2000 found that 10th  grade students who were allowed to have a 10-minute collaborative  discussion about a story they had read before taking a 90-minute test  demonstrated signi cantly greater comprehension than peers who  had not participated in such discussions. In Ms. Altchechs classroom, each group that makes up a circle  selects its own literature to read, and each student has a particular responsibility that bene ts the whole group. These circles help  develop vocabulary, reading  uency, comprehension, oral language,  and critical interpretation, according to Ms. Altchech. Each reading of  a piece of literature leads to a benchmarksome form of presentation of the book to the rest of the class. The scores depend upon  the collaborative group, she explained. They love it. . . . They do  the work together and do the tasks together. The groups are heterogeneous in terms of reading ability. Students help the ones in the  group that have more problems, Ms. Altchech said.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Unleveled drama activities. Mrs. Prezs 3rd grade students tend  to be at three levels of reading pro ciency: 1st, 2nd, and 3rd grade.  She uses drama as a way to get the children involved in literacy  activities in which they can all participate and that do not require that  they be at the same level of pro ciency. The students work with partners to read together and learn their parts for the drama. They make  costumes and invite others to attend the performance. The activity  promotes a group feeling and draws on collectivistic values, Mrs.  Prez said. No one knows who is a 1st-grade-level or 3rd-gradelevel reader. . . . All students are the same age. The less pro cient  readers arent behind socially. She said the activity has empowered  groups to move to the next level in reading ability. Whole-group Zoo Phonics. Ms. Daleys 2nd grade uses a commercial program called Zoo Phonics that relies heavily on kinesthetic  and visual cues to help students make sound-letter associations. Each  letter-sound has an associated story, and each letter has an associated  character, such as Ellie Elephant or Ana Ardilla ardilla is the Spanish  word for squirrel. The characters motivate the children, Ms. Daley  explained. For Ana Ardilla, every time she wants to crack a nut, she  slaps her  st into her paw; the kids imitate the movement and associate the sound . . . All of the characters have personalities, and all  mean something. Ms. Daley reported that the program is effective for  Latino children because its so group-oriented. They chant in unison,  do the movements together, and remember it easily. Collaborating in Mathematics Historically, math practice has involved considerable independent study. Students may prepare  ash cards, practice alone, and test  themselves for accuracy. Preparing for timed tests of math facts is  often a form of drudgery for students, who have to rehearse in isolation until they are ready for testing. The process of solitary studying  and self-testing may seem like a good idea to teachers who work  with children of immigrant parents. Teachers may assume that parents have limited time and perhaps do not have the skills necessary 

T h e  O r g a n i z a t i o n  o f  L e a r n i n g  i n  t h e  C o n t e n t  A r e a s   131 to guide homework practice. They may also reason that the more  independent the children can become in studying, the more likely  they are to become successful students. However, this individualistic  approach may seriously undercut the power of the groupboth in  homework and in classroom-based learning. Although students must  attain automaticity with basic math facts, there is no reason that this  goal cannot be met through a group orientation. Mastering math facts. Mrs. Prez was observed applying her  knowledge of both collectivistic and individualistic values to develop  a number of group-based activities to improve math skills. She draws  upon students inclination to help each other and promotes individual mastery of math facts through several strategies. In the activity  described here, even when the emphasis is on individual mastery of  facts, a group process supports such mastery. MATH FACT FRIENDS The students had each produced a set of cards with math facts addition,  subtraction, multiplication, division, which they kept in small plastic zipped  bags. At the beginning of the day, Mrs. Prez asked the students to select one  fact from their bag and study it from time to time throughout the day specifi cally, to look at it, think about it, practice it, and then put it away. Mrs.  Prez suggested that this fact card was like their math friend for the day. Immediately following morning recess, Mrs. Prez instructed the students to sit on the rug. She asked each student to hold up his or her fact that  had been chosen as the math friend of the day e.g., 4  3  7. With very  little direction from the teacher, one student came to the front of the class  to lead the others in demonstrating knowledge of their math facts. As the student began to lead the group, Mrs. Prez moved to her desk  nearby to work on some papers. The student leader began calling on fellow  students, one at a time, to share their memorized math fact. Once selected,  each volunteer came to the front of the class, handed the math fact to the  self-appointed class leader, and recited the math fact by heart, as the student  leader checked for accuracy. If a student did not remember the fact cor132  M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   rectly, the leader gave the card back as a prompt. When the fact was recited  correctly, the leader offered the student a plush toy with a pull-string that,  when stretched and released, created a vibration. As soon as the vibration  stopped, the student handed it back to the student leader, and the next  student was called on for recitation of a new math fact. This activity lasted  until all the children who wanted to share their fact had a turn, for a total  duration of about 15 minutes. Students were remarkably attentive and focused respectfully on each  fellow students presentation of a fact. There was no disruptive behavior and  no evidence of boredom or lack of interest on the part of the students.  Later, in a conversation with the observer, Mrs. Prez noted that  typically an elected class of cer leads the math activity, but this time  another child self-selected. She just took the leadership role, and the  children are so used to sharing the leadership that it doesnt matter  who leads. They just  gure it out. They also decide when to stop. In  other classrooms, children might be inclined to become tired of an  activity like this if it wasnt their turn, but with these students and  this teacher, this was not the case. Why? First, it is likely that children were taught to be respectful by their  parents and families, and they demonstrated what they had learned  by respecting each other in the classroom. The observation occurred  in the third month of the school year, so it is likely that ample time  had been spent on establishing a classroom setting that supported  respectfulness. Second, students were able to get support when needed, because  they could get their math fact back if they needed to prompt their  memory. The opportunity for a second chance led to success for  each student, but because of the atmosphere of respect and support,  there was no real risk of shame or embarrassment if a student did  not remember the fact. Despite the expectation for individual performance, the activity was not framed as a competition. There was  no apparent tension, as there often is when students are explicitly or  implicitly pitted against each other see Isaac, 1999.

T h e  O r g a n i z a t i o n  o f  L e a r n i n g  i n  t h e  C o n t e n t  A r e a s   133 Third, using the vibrating toy seemed like a clever way to put  some fun into the learning experience. The brief action of pulling  the string to make the toy vibrate wasnt belabored, and no students  asked for extra turns. They knew that one answer led to exactly one  turn with the toy, and they seemed to feel satis ed, whether they  remembered the fact or had to use a prompt to get the right answer.  Each students engagement with the toy appeared to bring vicarious  pleasure to the onlookers. Fourth, the activity encouraged both individual and group orientations to learning. Each student had to demonstrate learning but had  the support of the group to do so. The group could also practice the  fact along with the student. For example, if the student recited or  read the fact nine minus four equals . . . , then the children could  be thinking about their answer along with the student at the front of  the class. It could also be argued that Mrs. Prezs casting of the math  fact card as a friend was an effort to recognize students valuing of  social relationships. Math teams. An account by Mrs. Hernandez shows how students  transform an apparently competitive, individualistic activity into a  collaborative one: I make two rows of students, and, depending upon their  level, I have two sets of  ashcards. They score a point for  their team if they can read the  ashcard. It is not competition  but helping your team get a point. They really encourage  each other. They say, You can do it! Even the kids from the  other team cheer on their friends. Students clap for the winning teams. There are no real extrinsic rewards.  This simple example is a powerful demonstration of how events are  interpreted through a cultural lens. The students do not construe  the activity as necessarily competitive, and because Mrs. Hernandez  understands her students and their values, she does not force it into  a competitive frame. Here, collaboration is not overtly structured in  the activity, but it takes place naturally.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   The following example from Mrs. Prezs class illustrates another  instance of group support. EXPLORING THE CONCEPT OF 1,000 The children in Mrs. Prezs class were studying the concept of 1,000. She  began the lesson by constructing a number line on the white board: 10   100  1,000  10,000. She asked the class to remember what the less than  symbol  meant. Organized into tables of four children each, the groups  were charged with collecting 1,000 items. Each group had to decide what to  collect. But how were they going to collect 1,000 objects? Mrs. Prez asked  the students how they could help other tables. Ten children responded, saying things such as, I can bring pennies to help Table 3; I can bring in rocks;  I can bring in plastic bags. Other items the students planned to gather  included nails, marbles, and crayons. When Mrs. Prez asked them what they  were going to do next, the children said, Get our stuff out, help each other,  and count. In her instructions, she reminded students that the most important thing is to work together. While the groups collaborated, Mrs. Prez  selected children individually to be tested on their multiplication facts. Students worked together to decide how to group their objects for  counting. One group decided to group by 100s, but as they began counting,  they realized that they were having problems remembering how many they  had counted out. They discussed what would be the best number for each  grouping of objects, settling on 25. Other groups used groupings of 10, 20,  50, and 100. During a debriefi ng following the group work, the groups reported on  how many objects they had gathered and how many more they needed. They  also described the method they used to count their objects. This activity let  other students know how many more pennies, rocks, or nails to gather identifying which group needed the most help, while allowing the children to see  the many different ways that objects could be grouped. Discussion centered  on why certain objects were easier to count in larger or smaller groups,  making explicit the strategies behind the choices the children had made. For  instance, children counting pennies made stacks of 10 pennies each and could  check their work or accuracy by looking at the height of the stacks.

T h e  O r g a n i z a t i o n  o f  L e a r n i n g  i n  t h e  C o n t e n t  A r e a s   135 In learning about the concept of 1,000, the children worked in  small groups and then as a whole group, without the kind of competition that one might see if the teacher had set up a classroom contest  to see which student could collect his or her own objects  rst, or  which small group could complete the task  rst. When asked about  the lesson during a short interview following this observation, Mrs.  Prez said she uses the power of the group to let go and trust the  collective result. There was no reward for the  rst group to get to 1,000 but  rather a sense of shared accomplishment and helping. Teachers who  think that they need to provide incentives such as a reward for success in a competition may be undermining the possibility of students  engaging in a much more collaborative experience that helps each  group succeed. INCLUSIVE DISCOURSE An important social aspect of classroom organization involves the  ways that linguistic communicationreferred to as classroom discourse Cazden, 2001; Morine-Dershimer, 2006is carried out. Of  course, discourse communication of thought through words is part  of all of the activities described in the earlier section on collaboration, but here we present examples explicitly focused on discourse. Inclusive discourse refers to the practice of incorporating students home-grown ways of using language in instruction and the  life of the classroom. Most classrooms have rules about who can  talk when, about what, and in what manner, and predictable communication routines are established early in the school year MorineDershimer, 2006. We have found that Bridging Cultures teachers  create learning environments that not only tolerate but encourage  the discourse styles based on the students home culture. The ability  to participate in the discourse of the classroom is important not only  because teachers often evaluate and grade students on participation  but also because students apparently learn more when they participate verbally Morine-Dershimer, 2006. A good classroom manager 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   working with primary grade minority children may spend extra time  directly teaching the rules and routines pertaining to traditional classroom communication and greatly improve student achievement as  a result Morine-Dershimer, 1985, cited in Morine-Dershimer, 2006,  p. 133. But teachers need to recognize that differences in students  discourse do not necessarily signal de ciencies in language development or learning ability. They also need to acknowledge that home  discourse does not need to be displaced by new discourse. Valuing Students Ways with Words The phrase ways with words, which we purposefully use in  the heading for this section, evokes Heaths 1983 book of the same  name based on her ethnographic study of several speech communities in the Piedmont Carolinas. The term incorporates not only the  actual vocabulary and syntax used by a particular group, but also the  purposes intellectual, social, religious, and other language is used  for; how conversation, stories, and formal talk are structured; how  topics are chosen, maintained, and changed; and more. In addition to the turn-taking aspect of discourse, the matters  of how topics are selected, introduced, and developed in conversation have a cultural foundation and need to be examined. Teachers  generally have particular expectations for how students should participate in discussions about science or social studies, mathematics  or literature. Whether it is made explicit or not, the expectation is  usually that academic knowledge is treated as something separate  from ones personal experience. A question such as, What have you  learned about the desert? is not intended, ordinarily, to elicit tales of  family outings. The teacher is looking for logical-scienti c thinking  and the appropriate discourse to express it, not a narrative incorporating social experience Bruner, 1996. These two types of discourselogical-scienti c and social  narrativediffer in content and vocabulary, and they also are structured quite differently. The following example illustrates what can  happen when a young child responds with a social narrative when 

T h e  O r g a n i z a t i o n  o f  L e a r n i n g  i n  t h e  C o n t e n t  A r e a s   137 the teacher is trying to elicit early logical-scienti c discourse. Note  that the teachers question appears to call for a social narrative, yet  some children correctly understand her to be calling for logicalscienti c discourse. DESCRIBING AN EGG During one of our observations of a Los Angeles prekindergarten class made  up of mostly Latino children, the teacher was showing a real chicken egg that  would soon hatch. . . She asked children to describe the eggs by thinking  about the times they had cooked and eaten them. One child tried three  times to talk about how she had cooked eggs with her grandmother, but the  teacher disregarded these comments in favor of a child who explained that  the insides of eggs are white and yellow. A Latina member of our research  team noted that the fi rst childs answer was typical of the associations that  her invisible home culture encourages. That is, objects are most meaningful  when they mediate social interactions. But in this case, the teacher expected  students to describe eggs as isolated physical entities. Eggs as mediators of  social relationships and social behavior were irrelevant. Trumbull, Greenfi eld,  Quiroz, 2003, p. 75, based on Greenfi eld, Raeff,  Quiroz, 1996 Bridging Between Stories and Academic Discourse The Bridging Cultures teachers reported that their students love  to tell stories, particularly about their experiences with their families.  All of the teachers consciously encouraged childrens stories for selfexpression, for tapping prior knowledge, and for bridging to classroom discourse. Stories nearly always involve family members and  re ect the importance of integrating the social dimension of life with  the cognitive or academic. It is important to emphasize that in the  case of Bridging Cultures teachers instruction, inclusion of childrens  stories was not just an entre to classroom discourse but was perceived as an opportunity to acknowledge other forms of discourse as 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   valid in their own right. The inclusion was also a recognition of the  values underlying the discourse. This personal kind of discourse is  valued and natural to many students, particularly from collectivistic  cultures Martinez-Roldan  Lopez-Robertson, 2000, cited in Chen,  2006; Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch, et al., 2000.  The T-chart. Elsewhere we have written about how Ms. Altchech  consciously showed her students how to bridge from their storybased, narrative knowledge to what might be termed scienti c discourse Rothstein-Fisch, 2003; Trumbull, Diaz-Meza,  Hasan, 2000.  As part of Ms. Altchechs classs preparation for a  eld trip to some  local wetlands, a docent from the Audubon Society was visiting the  classroom. He asked the students what they knew about birds of the  wetlands, and many students offered personal stories of birds they  had seen, usually with family members. Stories of family trips and  interactions with grandmothers and aunties abounded. Frustrated,  the docent admonished the students, No more stories! Of course,  his next question was met with dead silence. Ms. Altchech remembered the story of the egg, discussed at one of the Bridging Cultures  meetings. After he left, Ms. Altchech tried to pick up the pieces of the discussion. She drew a T-chart on the board, writing in key phrases from  students stories on the left side and coaching them to extract the scienti c information for the right side of the chart see Figure 6.1. On re ection, Ms. Altchech noted that even before taking part in  the Bridging Cultures Project she had always tapped childrens prior  knowledgesocial or cognitive. What is new, though, after the Audubon experience, was how to get to the science information. The development of the T-chart . . . I wanted them to see the connection. Teachers can tap students culture-based ways of knowing and  talking and introduce them to new forms of discourse, as we see in  the T-chart example. Why should a single way of communicating,  learning, and interacting dominate in the classroom, particularly when  students bring a different set of skills to that context? The examples  show that there are ways to organize classroom interaction that differ from the ones we often take for granted. By using the T-chart, Ms. 

T h e  O r g a n i z a t i o n  o f  L e a r n i n g  i n  t h e  C o n t e n t  A r e a s   139 Altchech created a sort of hybrid discourse, which incorporated features of both students and traditional discourse Gutirrez, BaquedanoLpez,  Tejeda, 1999. F I G U R E  6 . 1  Bridging Stories with Science Information Student Experience Scientifi c Information I was playing in the garden with my  grandmother. I saw a hummingbird near  the cherry tree. It was really pretty. The bird stood in the air. I tried to go  close to the little bird, but it kept darting away. Hummingbird Bird is brownish with bright 

iridescent green and red coloring  around head and neck. Wings beat rapidly.

Bird can hover and fl y in any 

direction. Has to eat frequently because 

of using so much energy in its  movements high metabolism. Source: From Bridging Cultures Teacher Education Module, by C. Rothstein-Fisch, 2003, Mahwah, NJ:  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Adapted with permission.  Expanding Opportunities to Participate in Different Kinds of Discourse Mrs. Hernandez discussed how the Bridging Cultures Project  affected her approach to classroom organization by promoting new  forms of discourse: The class was organized by ability groups; now  the whole group gets support from each other. According to Mrs.  Hernandez, this allows her to free up her sense of control, both  with children now used as collaborators and parents used as classroom volunteers. Commenting on the importance of having children talk more, she said, Children need to communicate at school  because they dont get this at home. She went on to discuss how,  in the home setting, where the cultural value of respect for elders  may prevail, children are not necessarily encouraged to engage in  either public speaking or in exchanges with adults. Mrs. Hernandez is consciously attempting to use organizational structures that 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   promote students engagement in forms of discourse that they do  not use at home. One such structure, heterogeneous grouping, has  been shown to support wider participation of previously quiet students Antil, Jenkins,  Wayne, 1998; Cohen, 1994. Mrs. Hernandez  believes strongly that her students need to acquire new ways of  using language in addition to the ones they have learned at home, if  they want to succeed in school and in life in the United States. THE CONTENT OF DISCOURSE  Closely related to the organization of discourse in the classroom  is the content of discourse. Personal experience and familyrelated themes can serve as an important source of content for students from collectivistic cultures. Family Experience It is not uncommon for Bridging Cultures teachers to make efforts  to link instruction to students personal experience, and sometimes to  their own, in order to make instruction more meaningful. This strategy  of connecting with what students already know is compatible with  constructivist notions of learning Bransford, Brown,  Cocking, 2000.  With students who consider the personal and social aspects of life to  be a natural part of academic life, this strategy becomes all the more  important. In fact, Bridging Cultures teachers routinely use students  experiences as a basis for instruction. The personal becomes part of  the discourse of the classroomnot something relegated to portions  of circle time or recess. For example, mathematics word problems are  likely to be about real or hypothetical family experiences a trip to  Mexico, shopping for a holiday dinner, or about an experience the  class has shared a  eld trip, planning a class party. The following  excerpt from an observation in Mr. Mercados classroom depicts him  trying to get his students to think about how to solve a cost-pricing  problem in a context they know.

T h e  O r g a n i z a t i o n  o f  L e a r n i n g  i n  t h e  C o n t e n t  A r e a s   141 HOW TO PRICE TAMALES Mr. M: You are going to sell tamales with your mom. You make special  tamales . . . What do you use to make them?  Students: Meat, masa corn meal, chili, bread, peppers, and banana  leaves. Mr. M: How much will you sell them for?  Students: Two dollars.  Mr. M: How much does it cost to make them?  Students: Three dollars.  Mr. M: Is it too expensive to make tamales?  Students: Cut them in half . . . Raise the price of the tamales . . . Use less  breadmeal.  In addition to providing a meaningful way for students to consider a mathematical situation, incorporating tamales into the lesson  was interesting because the children mentioned distinctly different  tamale ingredients, depending upon their families region of origin.  They seemed proud to say what their families tamales would be  made of, but they quickly returned to the primary idea of how to  make cost-effective tamales. Without this knowledge or interest, the  teacher might have constructed the word problem around something completely foreign to the students. Instead, he used his cultural  knowledge to situate the problem in a meaningful context. Sometimes personalizing instruction can entail teachers sharing  their own experiences as well as drawing upon students experiences.  For example, Ms. Daley taught her students about the moon and the  vocabulary word crescent by telling them about how, as a little girl,  she went with her grandmother to the bakery to get a crescent roll.  The students could remember the concept and the word by recalling  Ms. Daleys account of her trips to the bakery.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Family-Related Themes Social studies curriculum in the elementary grades often relates  to the local community. Mr. Mercado, teaching 4th grade, has consciously made more links to students most immediate community their family. The stories and bulletin board display about grandmothers described in Chapter 2 is one example. Another unit that  Mr. Mercado used required students to conduct interviews with family members about family traditions, foods, and activities; construct  genealogies; and create anthologies of family stories. Mr. Mercado  said that using a writing prompt incorporating something the children  are knowledgeable about motivates students to be more involved  and more on task. A corollary bene t is good behavior: If a child is  more interested, there are naturally less problems. That leads to good  classroom management and good cooperation. In another example of using family themes, Mrs. Hernandez recognized the importance of a students family-oriented discourse. GRANDMOTHERS CLOCK I try to listen to everybody and not discourage them from relating family  experiences as they relate to the concepts being taught. I started to teach  time this week, and one of the kindergartners raised her hand and said,  We bought a clock for my grandmothers room, and her name is Magdalena. And then she became much more interested in the clock and everything  since she could say her grandmothers name with pride. Trumbull, DiazMeza, Hasan,  Rothstein-Fisch, 2001, p. 26 

It is clear that there are many ways to bring students culture-based  strengths into the classroom. We have seen how Bridging Cultures  teachers choose strategies in grouping, structures for participation, and 

T h e  O r g a n i z a t i o n  o f  L e a r n i n g  i n  t h e  C o n t e n t  A r e a s   143 use of discourse to promote student engagement, thus minimizing the  need to use classroom management strategies such as redirection or  behavioral reinforcement. When students are engaged, teachers spend  less time reprimanding them for being off task. Of course, many of the practices we have described are used  in classrooms of all kinds, but what may distinguish Bridging Cultures classrooms is the depth and breadth of such practices and the  consciousness with which teachers engage in them. These teachers  continue to invent new ways of aligning classroom norms with those  of students homes and of introducing new forms of participation so  that students will be successful in school. In Chapter 7, we take on the question of how assessment practices are related to classroom orchestration, and how there, too, culture plays an important role. We explore both formal and informal  assessment and then turn our attention to issues of what constitutes  helping versus cheating.
C H A P T E R 7 Teachers who understand how . . . culture must be considered in assessments can play a strong role in ensuring that assessment practices are more  fair, valid, and ethical. 1 Elise Trumbull and Maria Pacheco,  The Teachers Guide to Diversity: Building a Knowledge Base Classroom orchestration is as much a part of the assessment process  as it is of other aspects of instruction. Thus culture is implicated  in the ways assessment is designed and carried out. In this chapter, we show how Bridging Cultures teachers have incorporated a  group orientation in their assessment practices, with positive results  for their students. Their innovations re ect an understanding that it  is not just the content and language of assessment that need to be  considered to make assessment culturally appropriate for students  but also the processes surrounding assessment itself Abedi, Leon,   Mirocha, 2001; August  Hakuta, 1997; Durn, 1985; Solano-Flores   Trumbull, 2003; Valds  Figueroa, 1994. We describe how teachers  harnessed the value that students place on helping and on group  Authors note: This chapter is adapted from When Helping Someone Else Is the Right  Answer: Bridging Cultures in Assessment, by Carrie Rothstein-Fisch, Elise Trumbull,  Adrienne Isaac, Catherine Daley, and Amada Irma Prez, 2003, Journal of Latinos and  Education, 23, pp. 123140. Copyright 2003 by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. All rights  reserved. Adapted with permission. CLASSROOM ORCHESTRATION  OF THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS

C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n  o f  t h e  A s s e s s m e n t  P r o c e s s   145 success to prepare them for standardized tests and to promote test  wiseness. We show how teachers have made both assessment and  the grading process sensible to students, as well as how they have  helped students distinguish between helping and cheatingnot a  trivial concern when assessment crosses cultures. THE NATURE OF ASSESSMENT IN U.S. CLASSROOMS Assessment is usually a lonely enterprise in U.S. classrooms, with  students expected to demonstrate what they have learned without  assistance from others. Assessment may take many forms, including  1 questioning during discussions assessment embedded in instruction; 2 teacher-constructed activities such as weekly tests, oral presentations, or written assignments; 3 publishers end-of-unit tests;  or 4 large-scale standardized tests. Sometimes alternative methods  such as portfolios or exhibitions in front of a panel of judges are  used. Tacit assumptions about how these forms of assessment should  be carried out and how students should participate in them underlie  teachers approaches to all types of assessment. These assumptions are situated in a particular cultural perspective. For instance, a teacher from the dominant U.S. culture or one  educated in U.S. schools may expect that when she asks a question  as an informal index of student learning, only one student should  reply at a time. A student from a group-oriented culture may assume  no such thing and  nd it awkward to be singled out to respond  individually; it may also seem unnatural to students to refrain from  helping each other see Chapter 4. Classroom assessment and large-scale formal testing are frequent  and ongoing in U.S. classrooms see Popham, 2003; Stiggins, 1997.  Teachers complain about the amount of time spent on mandated  district and state testing Ohanian, 2001; Popham, 2003, which has  increased since the passage of the No Child Left Behind Act in 2001.  In particular, large-scale testing has implications for classroom organization and orchestration because it is separate from instruction  and must be carried out in ways that may not parallel classroom 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   approaches to assessment. This discontinuity potentially affects all  students; however, it may have an even greater impact on students  from nondominant cultures who may have less experience with  decontextualized examination of their knowledge and learning see,  for example, Beaumont, de Valenzuela,  Trumbull, 2002; Farr   Trumbull, 1997. In other words, students from collectivistic cultures  may have an especially hard time with concepts that do not have  any connection to something familiar or are not presented within a  social context. Practices that reduce the discontinuity between students experiences and the approach to assessment stand to improve the assessment process and likely the outcome as well. Bridging Cultures  teachers and their students designed many such practices. PREPARATION FOR TESTING In this section, we explore how two Bridging Cultures teachers used  their students cultural strengths to prepare for or participate in various types of assessment. We look at examples in three contexts:  informal classroom assessment, formal classroom assessment linked  to grade-level standards, and standardized assessment. Helping in the Context of Informal Assessment  The following examples illustrate different reactions to the same  behavior during informal assessment activities in two classrooms.  The  rst example is from the 2nd grade classroom of a teacher who  is not part of the Bridging Cultures Project; the second example is  from Mrs. Prezs classroom. In the  rst classroom, the teacher was conducting a dis cussion  and calling on students for answers to her questions. The children  were whispering answers among themselves after one student was  called on to respond to the teacher. The teacher said, I have heard  people whispering, and I really dont like it, because why? They need 

C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n  o f  t h e  A s s e s s m e n t  P r o c e s s   147 to learn by themselves, and you really arent helping them learn.  See Isaac, 1999, p. 34. In this example, the teacher took the individualistic perspective  that children need to learn by themselves. By whispering a practice  the children would perceive as helping their friends, they were, in  the teachers mind, interfering with their own learning as well as that  of their peers. Moreover, the teacher chastised the children directly,  stating I dont like it and quite likely undermining their belief that  helping others is a valuable thing to do. Her stance put the children  in the position of having to choose consciously or unconsciously  between a value of home and a value of school. In contrast, an observation in Mrs. Prezs class revealed a different take on whispering. Seven 3rd grade students were sitting on  the rug, discussing the material they had just read. Mrs. Prez noticed  that one child seemed to be answering most of the questions. She  encouraged him to whisper the answer to a friend so that the other  child could answer. According to Mrs. Prez, this practice lets both  children feel successful and work cooperatively. Her knowledge of  the collectivistic orientation of her students allowed her to take a different view of peers helping each other. Thus, Mrs. Prez not only  sanctioned whispering, she actively encouraged it as a means of  helping others. Helping in the Context of Formal Assessment  Linked to Grade-Level Standards  A Bridging Cultures example. This example of modi cation to  the assessment process shows how childrens group orientation and  eagerness to help can result in improved math performance relative to grade-level standards. On a visit to Mrs. Prezs classroom,  the observer noticed a star chart displaying childrens names and  corresponding stars next to them, indicating the level of memorized  multiplication facts they had mastered. The star chart was a curious object of individ ual achievement in an otherwise group-oriented  classroom, and the teacher was asked about her rationale for using  it. Mrs. Prez responded:
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   For many years I had known about having charts where childrens names are up, and they collect stars when they pass different things, especially . . . in math. I had tried using them as  a new and young teacher, but I always felt bad because it just  seemed like the children who didnt do well would feel really  bad because they would not have as many stars as the other  ones. So I felt the emphasis was on failure rather than success. I went ahead and tried it, but I was never happy with it . . . For a while, I put it on the inside of the closet door. It was  a struggle for me, but I didnt know why. Mrs. Prezs original use of the star chart seems to re ect a typical motivational practice, anchored to beliefs about the need to support individual achievement. Mrs. Prez continued to describe her experience: As time passed, I just quit using the charts completely. Then  years passed, and I went to Bridging Cultures meetings. I  started learning an other way of thinking, and I started learning about the success of groups collectively. Something  clicked inside of me, and I decided that I still had children  that needed to learn their multiplication tables, so I decided  to try bringing it out again, to use the power of the group to  help everybody succeed. So I posed the question to the students in a class meeting;  we all looked at the chart together and talked about it. The  students said, Wouldnt it be neat if it would be a solid block  of stars, and the whole chart was  lled in? and everybody  said, Yeah, yeah, that would be so neat. The students . . .  wanted to help each other. Everyone who needed help got  adopted by stu dents who had already mastered the work.  They started helping each other pass, and they seemed to  move ahead. The buddies put their own learning on hold in  order to help their buddies, not for individual suc cess, but for  the success of the group. 

C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n  o f  t h e  A s s e s s m e n t  P r o c e s s   149 The star chart didnt click for Mrs. Prez until it was reconceptualized as a tool for re ecting the achievement of the class as a whole.  Achievement was not about acquiring a star for any particular child  which might, in collectivistic terms, make the child uncomfortable  about standing out from the whole group. Rather, each star would  be an important contribution to the whole lling in part of the  entire grid to re ect the groups progress. The children, empowered  by their own tendency to think and act col lec tively, were highly  motivated to achieve group success. And the new star chart strategy  allowed them to act on the cultural value of helping others. Mrs.  Prez noticed that the buddies watched vigilantly as their partners  were tested:  When the children felt that they were ready and the buddy  was con  dent that they were ready for the oral timed test  with the teacher, they would come up for test ing. Ac cording  to the order in which they signed up, I would call them up,  and they were allowed to bring their buddy up for moral support. While the buddy watchedand they werent allowed to  say anythingthe person being tested experienced success  most of the time. If they were successful, they would ring a  bell and re ceive applause from everyone. Rothstein-Fisch,  Trumbull, Isaac, Daley,  Prez, 2003, pp. 132134 In this case, students buddies not only promoted memorization  of multiplication facts, they also played a role in the assessment process. When the student achieved successdemonstrating mastery of  a new level of timed math factshe or she would ring a bell. The  bell was a signal to the whole class that another star was being added  to their group chart. For a moment, students stopped working to recognize and applaud the achievement of their classmatesboth the  student who had achieved the next level of math accomplishment  and the buddy who had helped. This procedure did not single out  the student being tested but rather highlighted the team that worked  together for the bene t of the whole group. Without any disruption, 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   the students clapped and then immediately re turned to their work.  This same process was observed on several occasions. According to  Mrs. Prez, If they were not successful, then they felt bad, but their buddy  was right there with them, saying, Well work more and Ill  help you. The buddies gave them so much con dence to  help them again. They would go back and practice more and  in different ways until they were ready to take the test again.  They never got discouraged because they had their buddy.  Eventually they passed. This went on until we achieved 100  percent up to a certain point. The kids were ecstatic. They  achieved a whole block of stars! It was a day of cele bration.  They were even more encouraged to go on. In 3rd grade,  they only have to go up to the 5s tables, but many went to  the 12s! All got to the 6s . . . They went beyond the requirement. It was extremely exciting. Re ecting months later, Mrs. Prez commented, How could I have  not done that all these years? I didnt have the clear knowledge of the  framework of individualism and collectivism. I continue to use that  Rothstein-Fisch et al., 2003, pp. 133134. A non-Bridging Cultures example. The use of math teams in  a nonBridging Cultures classroom provides a contrasting example  and shows how what appears to be a collaborative learning activity  can be, in fact, highly individualized and competitive. In a videotaped observation of a math assessment activity in a classroom composed mainly of immigrant Latino students, Isaac 1999 recorded  one such activity:  The classroom was divided into two groups, and a representative from each group came up to the board to answer the same  addition problem. Even though the class was organized into  two groups, the students were not allowed to help their teammates. As each student representative approached the board, 

C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n  o f  t h e  A s s e s s m e n t  P r o c e s s   151 the children shouted, Ooooh, indicative of the pressure this  activity evoked. Some of the children even positioned themselves as if praying. The two children at the board were actually competing with each other without any help or support  from their group members. Isaac reports that the children showed signs of great stress. What a  difference compared to the students in Mrs. Prezs class! Helping in the Context of Standardized Assessment Testing has become an increasingly important factor in highstakes decision making in education Ercikan, 2006, and Bridging  Cultures teachers, like other teachers, spend time preparing their  students for standardized assessments. But test preparation in Bridging Cultures classrooms may seem quite different from traditional  preparation. Mrs. Prez and Ms. Daley have capitalized on their students culture-based value of helping as they prepare their classes for  stan dardized tests.  Test prep in Mrs. Prezs class. Here is how Mrs. Prez articulated her experiences with helping students prepare for standardized  tests: I also use a lot of collectivistic activities to prepare the students for individual, standardized testing. When we practice  multiple-choice tests . . . all the children take the tests individually in silence, with privacy screens. They take their tests,  and then we correct them in a group, orally. Each table or  cooperative group is responsible for one question. So they  can discuss it to gether . . . what the best answer is. Then all  the members of the table stand, and everyone has a role.  Person 1 reads the question; Person 2 reads all the possible  answers; Person 3 selects the worst answer or answersthe  throw-away itemsand explains why, to reduce the options  to two. Person 4 selects the right answer and says why. 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   When the right answer comes outand it almost always  is the right answer . . . because they have had the power of  the groupeverybody applauds for the whole table. They  tackled it to gether. They leave with good positive feelings,  almost like its been a game show, so they look forward to  taking an individual test because they have associated the  experience with the group. We sit on the  oor in a circle with the test and debrief  it . . . most of the time in groups. Nobody gets bored, and  everyone is completely attentive. . . If someone got it wrong,  they now understand why they got it wrong. They say why  they selected that answer. . . . If they say there are three tossaway questions and only one makes sense, they say why. So  they are developing some test savvy. Through her approach to practice tests, Mrs. Prez simulates the  actual individual test-taking method, knowing that her students must  develop particular skills. But she incorporates a group process during the practice-test debrie ng. As the group analyzes how to answer  questions, students are helping each other gain metacognitive awareness about how to take tests. The process used in Mrs. Prezs classroom addresses several  of the pitfalls students commonly face: inaccurate reading of the  question, failure to critically choose one of two remaining potential answers rather than just pick one, and failure to check ones  answers see Calkins, Montgomery,  Santman, 1999. Although students do not routinely paraphrase each question a recommended  strategy, according to Calkins and her colleagues, the meaning of  the question is quite likely clari ed as the students reread it and discuss rationales for various answers. Misunderstandings that remain  are cleared up when students present to the class in their small  groups. Although the debrie ng method entails checking answers,  it does not address the problem that students face when they have  to check their answers on the actual test by themselvessomething  many students apparently  nd daunting. See Calkins, Montgomery, 

C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n  o f  t h e  A s s e s s m e n t  P r o c e s s   153  Santman,1999, for some excellent suggestions for dealing with this  issue. Test prep in Ms. Daleys class. Ms. Daleys re ections on standardized testing show how her own experience as a student in uenced how she administered tests initiallyand how she developed  a more group-oriented approach later on: The only way that I could give the test was how I remember  taking the test when I was in school. You couldnt talk or  look at another persons paper. It was extremely individualistic. If you didnt understand the question, the teacher would  say, Do the best you can. We were on our own. Yet when I  gave the test, every day I came out feeling absolutely awful,  and the other teach ers would say, They will never do very  well on the test. Its not a complete re  ection on you; the kids  naturally forget half of the stuff you teach them. I felt very  frus trated by it. Every year at that time I was frustrated, and  year after year, the tests be came more and more important in  student as well as teacher assessment. Bridging Cultures began at that time. We had just gotten  the  rst set of practice-test booklets to prepare students for  the standardized test. Both Bridging Cultures and the new  test materials together put such a focus on testing for me . . .  When it came time to prepare for the test, I had the materials  I needed and the format. All I needed was a style or a pro cess  I would use. I thought that a lot of the classes I had taken on  cooperative learning worked so well with Bridging Cultures.  It would be easy to have groups for test preparation! We would put the question on the board or overhead and  work on it as a group, or we would just work out of one  bookletbut always in a group. I still do this. I prefer to work  my class in small or whole groups. Little by little, we move  away from the whole group, as we get ready for the actual  test. I make sure to explain to the students what changes are  going to occur regarding group and individual work. 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Isaac 1999 documented an instance of test preparation in Ms.  Daleys classroom. The children in her class were taking a Stanford-9  practice exam. The children were seated in groups and were reading  the questions aloud at their own pace. At one table, four children  were pointing to the test and discussing the correct answer. The  teacher left the classroom and said, If you need help, help each  other. A boy in the class doesnt know where to read and says this  aloud. A student, Derek, comes to this boy to show him where the  class is on the practice exam. Another boy from across the room  comes to show the same boy where the class is on the exam as well  Isaac, 1999, p. 39. Test prep in a non-Bridging Cultures class. The incident does  not seem especially remarkable until it is contrasted with a test practice session in another nonBridging Cultures 2nd grade classroom,  composed primarily of immigrant Latino students. During a Stanford-9 practice session, Gloria tries to hide her  answers on her worksheet from Brent by folding the top of her paper  up. On that same worksheet, Gloria says, I only need  ve more.  Brent says, I have one, two, three, four more. Lourdes says, I am  on the second page Isaac, 1999, p. 37. The competitive nature of  behavior in the second classroom contrasts with the collaborative  nature of behavior in Ms. Daleys classroom. The power of the group. Ms. Daley observed that students not  only achieved higher test scores, they did not feel dumb, and they  perceived the testing as more fun. They understood the skill needed  to be successful on the test. They had explored it in groups until they  were able to do it alone. They stayed on task longer. Both Mrs. Prez and Ms. Daley used the power of the group to  support students success on stan dardized tests, whether in preparing  them for the test or through debrie ngs on the answers to practice  tests. Given the same cultural framework and professional development opportunities, these two teachers focused on different ends of  the testing processone on understanding the questions, the other  on answersbut both used the students cultural value orientation 

C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n  o f  t h e  A s s e s s m e n t  P r o c e s s   155 of helping as a tool for group preparation to support individual test  performance. ASSIGNING GRADES Grades are sometimes touted as motivators to students. Grades may  be equated with rewards or pay for work well done see Brookhart,  2004; Hiner, 1973. But grades do not always function as motivators,  particularly for low-performing students. Perhaps of most interest in  the context of this book is the question of how Bridging Cultures  teachers award grades when students are working collaboratively.  Do they give individual grades? Do they give a group grade? Mr.  Mercado explained how he grades students in groups: In terms of correcting collaborative work, I usually give all  members the same number grade based on a scale of 1 to 4.  The scoring rubric is always posted on the board alongside a  speci c criteria chart mandated by the Los Angeles Uni ed  School District so there is no ambiguity. If the assignment  involves writing, illustrating, presenting orally, etc., students  will generally assign those tasks to those who they feel are  best suited to do those speci c jobs. You have to be very  careful sometimes of who is asked to do what when you  have special education students or new English language  learners. Sometimes I may have to assign jobs to certain students  at the beginning of the year, but later on everyone is chosen  readily. Usually they work with the students found closest to  them. Every Friday, my students have the option of changing  their seats so no one sits in the same cluster for too long.  Every so often you will get someone who prefers to work  alone. If the assignment can be completed either way, I will  allow this. 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   An example of an activity for which Mr. Mercado gives a group  grade is the found poem, created in 15 minutes by groups of  ve  students. In this activity, students search through their literature  books for a phrase that appeals to them. Then each member of the  group writes a sentence in reaction to the phrase. As a group, the  students agree on how to arrange their sentences in a certain order  to create the found poem. Reminding the students that they would  get a group grade for their effort, Mr. Mercado asked a student, What  would a 4 look like on this? The student replied, Neat and getting  along. Another student added, Spelling and punctuation. When  Mr. Mercado asked what might account for a 2, a student said, Bad  spelling. In explaining how she grades group work on a project, Ms. Daley  said she gives the group an overall grade based on effort and product. I very rarely grade students individually on group projects. Normally, when they work in groups, they still have to complete the  same kind of task individually as well. The investigation or exploration was the group work. So Ms. Daley has other opportunities to  evaluate students progress individually. However, she does not feel  the need to determine individual grades for students engaged in  group work. When Mrs. Prezs students work in groups, she sometimes gives  individual grades as well as a group grade. She has used the individualgroup grade approach with students ranging from 3rd graders  to university graduate students. As she explained, Everybody contributes to the project and must be accountable. Their work must be visible and gradable. For example, if they are to make some kind of chart, map, or poster,  they must divide the material fairly and demonstrate that  they know it and can teach it. Each member of a cooperative group uses a different color marker to contribute hisher  info on the project . . . A rubric is developed together, and  the projectand each persons performanceis evaluated  according to the agreed-upon rubric.

C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n  o f  t h e  A s s e s s m e n t  P r o c e s s   157 We can see that each of these three teachers has worked out  ways to grade groups of students. Mrs. Prez has the most elaborate  system for ensuring individual as well as group accountability. All  Bridging Cultures teachers address both individual and group performance. However, they have found different ways of doing so. Group Grades as Motivators  Whether grades are actually motivators for students is a question we have not investigated in the Bridging Cultures Project. However, the issue of giving group or individual grades for group work  deserves some thought. If students are group-oriented, then giving  group grades for selected group work will likely be more motivating than giving individual grades. Group-oriented students may not  be so interested in individual grades until they have been socialized  to believe that those individual grades are important, based on their  experiences in U.S. classrooms. Emphasizing grades has associated  risks: the practice may unnecessarily put students in competition with  each other, sometimes inadvertently prompting what would generally  be recognized as cheating presenting others work as ones own; as  students progress through school, they may come to focus on grades  over learningeliminating challenging courses or projects in order  to maintain a desired grade-point average see Trumbull, 2000. In deciding which type of grades are motivatingindividual or  groupit would probably be best to ask the students from time to  time if they would like to be evaluated for group work as individuals  or as a group. This would allow the teacher to know explicitly what  kind of grading seems more motivating. It would also be interesting for teachers to ask students the reason for their choice. In some  cases, a hybrid evaluation might be appropriate. Students could get  a certain percentage for the group grade and then explain in writing  exactly what their contributions were to the groups product for the  remaining percentage of the total grade. In our experience, this has  worked successfully in higher education, though it has not, to our  knowledge, been tried with younger students.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   HELPING VERSUS CHEATING Discussion of students helping each other prepare for standardized  tests evokes questions about what counts as helping versus cheating. A long-standing tradition in education holds that knowledge  is valuable. . . Cheating can be seen as an at tempt, by deceptive or  fraudulent means, to represent oneself as possessing knowledge. In  testing speci cally, cheating is violating the rules Cizek, 1999, p. 3.  Usual characterizations of cheating entail copying anothers work,  communicating an answer to another student, obtaining unauthorized information about a test, or taking unauthorized information  into a testing situation. Copying material from a book and failing to  acknowledge the source i.e., plagiarizing is also typically considered cheating Cizek, 1999.  Learning all of the rules about what counts as cheating in U.S.  classrooms is a developmental process, something no doubt more  dif cult for students from nonmainstream cultures. In the meantime, moral judgments may often be made about students who try to  help others based on the values they learned at home. Words such as  lying, dishonesty, misrepresenting, deception, and morality appear in  the literature on cheating and may be applied to situations in which  students are engaged in behaviors they do not realize are wrong  in school terms Athanasou  Olasehinde, 2002. The line between  helping an ethical behavior and cheating an unethical behavior is  culturally inscribed and variable. Where the line is drawn is related  to cultural differences in conceptions of the purposes of schooling,  notions of how knowledge is constructed, the nature and meaning of assessment, and the relationship between the individual and  the group Fleck, 2000; Green eld, 1994; Nelson-LeGall  Resnick,  1998. Bridging Cultures teachers are likely to answer questions  about what constitutes help ing versus cheating differently from their  nonBridging Cultures colleagues. In an interview, Ms. Daley discussed cheating and how the children behaved when she wasnt  looking:

C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n  o f  t h e  A s s e s s m e n t  P r o c e s s   159 When I  rst started teaching at this school, there was, No  cheating. Nobody can help. You are doing your own work, so  I know what you are capable of doing. As it was, nobody  appeared capable of doing anything. So, it seemed to me that  this was because I didnt even let them use the skills that  make them the best learners: each other. So I got rid of the  whole idea of cheating except when I introduce the tests. But  aside from that, when were learning how to take the test, I  encourage them to Help each other please, help each other  out. Isaac, 1999, p. 39 Ms. Daley makes the rules about helping explicit including when  helping is not allowed; hence the question of what is cheating is not  left to students imagination or chance. As a result, misinterpretation  of behaviors and unfair punishments are avoided. And although Mrs.  Prez does not talk about cheating per se, like Ms. Daley, she heads  off possible misunderstandings by making very clear what kinds of  helping are permitted in various contexts. Whereas teachers may believe that it is perfectly clear what constitutes cheating in their classrooms, in reality there is considerable  ambiguity, and the same behaviors may mean different things at different times. Some researchers have addressed the fact that the difference between helping and cheating is not absolute but has to do  with the context in which behaviors are happening: In cooperative learning, where students work together to  achieve common goals, knowledge is the property of the  group; no misrepresentation or deprivation has taken place.  Further, no rules are violated; in fact, quite the opposite. In  cooperative learning contexts, the rules explicitly encourage  collaboration and sharing information. Cizek, 1999, p. 3 According to Cizek, a teacher who fails to enforce distinctions  between these two sets of expectations demon strating individual  knowledge versus cooperating to pro duce shared knowledge is 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   exhibiting behavior that is reprehens ible and antithetical to the ethical values all teachers should knowingly or unknowingly inculcate  1999, p. 5. But teachers ideas about the role of helping in cooperative learning situations may differ from those of many of their  students. The Importance of Being Explicit About Helping Versus Cheating Examples in the literature on cheating suggest that teachers generally make tacit assumptions about what counts as cheating and  expect their students to know those assumptions see Cizek, 1999;  Fleck, 2000. What happens when a teacher interprets a students  helping behavior as cheating? First, the interpretation excludes  important opportunities for a student to use his or her culture-based  strengths and reduces potential learning opportunities for the student  being helpedand for the student doing the helping. Second, it may  also cause internal con ict for a student who has been brought up  to be unsel sh and help others, whereas the teacher is admonishing  the student for that same behavior in school. Third, if behaviors are  mistakenly labeled cheating, the accusation can create long-lasting  resentment or feelings of injustice that in uence students classroom  participation and educational choices in the future. We should point out that it is not only immigrant students whose  norms about helping vary from those of the mainstream. Research  suggests that American Indian and Alaska native students from intact  communities tend to have a highly collaborative approach to learning  and expectations that differ from those of dominant-culture students  about when helping is appropriate Edgewater, 1981; McAlpine   Taylor, 1993; Nelson-Barber  Dull, 1998. Some research has shown  that African American students are more likely to want to help each  other in the classroom and quite likely do not understand why such  behavior is often prohibited Gillies, 1999; Nelson-LeGall  Resnick,  1998. So the cross-cultural con ict around helping versus cheating  may be more widespread than generally believed.

C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n  o f  t h e  A s s e s s m e n t  P r o c e s s   161 Benefi ts of Using the Power of the Group We believe that using the power of the group, particularly among  students from collectivistic cultures, makes great sense in preparing  students for assessment. When possible, it would undoubtedly be  bene cial to students to participate in debrie ng discussions about  actual assessments in the ways discussed in this chapter. In addition, occasional teacher interviews of students, probing why students  responded as they did to test questions they may have found difcult, can reveal how cultural differences in uence students cognition Solano-Flores, Trumbull,  Nelson-Barber, 2002. Substantial  research supports the belief that allowing students to help each other  learn is a good thing see, for example, ODonnell, 2006; Palincsar   Brown, 1984; Webb, 1991. Those who receive information perform  better, and those who give it may clarify their own understanding  Gillies, 1999; ODonnell, 2006. But students may not offer or ask for  help from each other when they perceive that classroom expectations  run to the contrary. In such cases, important cognitive resources are  closed to students. Attitudes toward helping are somewhat schizophrenic: helping is often embraced as a source of student success,  but the manner of providing it and the degree to which it is permitted are commonly constrained in order to conform to expectations  of the dominant culture. Hence students may be getting mixed messages, and those from nondominant cultures may have more trouble  sorting them out than their dominant-culture peers.  Bridging Cultures teachers know that their students home culture values helping. The teachers applications of that knowledge to  assessment practices are important not only because they are culturally compatible for many students but also because they are sound  practices that support learning and the ability to show what one has  learned. As we observed earlier, these teachers are creating with  their students a hybrid culture in the classroom that is constituted of  home-culture practices and values as well as mainstream schooling  practices and values Gutirrez, Baquedano-Lopez,  Tejeda, 1999.  It could be argued that after a few years in the U.S. educational system, students adapt to school-culture norms, including rules about 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   helping and cheating. This is quite likely true to some degree but is  not always the case. On the other hand, increasing harmony between  home and school may result in improved student performance and  prevent immigrant and other students from opting out of the educational system see Lipka, 1998; Nieto, 1999; Tharp, Estrada, Dalton,   Yamauchi, 2000.

Given the diversity of values represented in classrooms, it is  clear that rules about helping and cheating must be established and  made explicit to everyone in the school community: to teachers, to  students, and to families. Unfortunately, because it is assumed that  everybody knows what it is, most treatments of cheating begin at the  level of how to eliminate it rather than coming to a consensus on a  de nition. Research on cheating is not as helpful as one might hope. The  preponderance of it is concerned with college-age students, and  when it addresses culture, it usually focuses on how to teach foreign students U.S. norms. Many college and university Web sites list  campus policies on cheating. On occasion, they address problems  with foreign students and cheating. With the exception of a few  researchers, the education community does not seem to realize that  the same cultural variability is an issue in the K12 arena. Hayner  and Bartzis 2005 note that universities need to understand that  cheating is not a universally agreed-upon concept. Students from  countries that value sharing and collaboration encounter dif culties  when they come to the United States to study. They note that academic honesty must be considered as a cultural construct p. 4 and  that educators can do better by students when they understand common areas of con ict such as when helping is allowed and when it  is not. For instance, in countries as diverse as Burma, Costa Rica, and  Russia, learning is seen as a group task, and emphasis is placed on  supporting the success of the group.

C l a s s r o o m  O r c h e s t r a t i o n  o f  t h e  A s s e s s m e n t  P r o c e s s   163 Without an understanding of cultural variation in what is considered cheating, teachers risk attributing incorrect motives to many  immigrant students as well as other nonmainstream students whose  implicit de  nitions of learning include helping each other. Cultural  understanding should be brought to bear in the earliest stages of a  students education, before the student is implicitly labeled morally deviant by a teacher. In fact, students are sometimes referred  for counseling or evaluation on the basis of behavior that is judged  deviant rather than recognized as simply different from behavior  accepted by the dominant culture Hoover  Collier, 1985. The examples in this chapter suggest possible ways teachers might  make assessment practices culturally harmonious, but more research  in this area is clearly needed. Research on various approaches to  organizing test preparation and practice with students from different  backgrounds could contribute to our understanding of what works  for whom. It would be interesting to study the practice of group test  preparation versus individual test preparation systematically, with  different populations of students, to determine if there are differences in test outcomes.
The ultimate goal of classroom management is not to achieve compliance or  control, but to provide all students with equitable opportunities for learning. Carol Weinstein, Mary Curran, and Saundra Tomlinson-Clarke, Culturally Responsive  Classroom Management: Awareness into Action, in Theory into Practice An analysis of 50 years of research concluded that classroom management is the single greatest in uence on student learninggreater  than students cognitive processes such as general intelligence, prior  knowledge, home environment, motivation, and socioeconomic  status Weinstein  Mignano, 2003, p. 6, citing Wang, Haertel,   Wahlberg, 19931994. What are we to make of this  nding? Our  rst  reaction is likely to be shock and disbelief. Yet upon re ection, it is  not so amazing. After all, positive management practices, or what we  call classroom orchestration, are necessary for classroom harmony  and productivityessential conditions for student success. Because  classroom management practices establish and maintain the quality  and ef ciency of the learning environment, they can either support  or impede learning at every level.  WHERE HAVE WE BEEN AND WHERE ARE WE GOING?  One of the most notable changes in recent years is the move away  from behavioristic approaches to classroom organization and management toward approaches that are more in line with developmental and  constructivist perspectives see, for example, Carter  Doyle, 2006;  CONCLUSION
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Elias  Schwab, 2006; Freiberg  Lapointe, 2006; Kohn, 1996; Nucci,  2006; Watson  Battistich, 2006.1 Many of these new ways of thinking  about classroom management cast it as a social and moral curriculum  Evertson  Weinstein, 2006, p. 12, in which relationships between  teachers and students are key. For example, Freiberg 1999 offers a  person-centered classroom management model that includes a focus  on caring, guidance, cooperation, and the building of self-discipline  p. 13. Freiberg and Lapointe 2006 cite evidence that classroom  management models are moving in the direction of recognizing the  importance of creating an environment of shared responsibility and  learning p. 773. An emphasis on students self-discipline and self-regulation of  learning re ects a developmental outlook. From this point of view,  the teachers role is not to control but to facilitate students increasing  ability to take responsibility for their actions as they mature. Another  example of the shift away from behaviorism is called developmental discipline, a child-centered approach to classroom management  that views children as active, willing partners in their own socialization, and is oriented toward the development of self-control and  the internalization of prosocial values Battistich, Watson, Solomon,  Schaps,  Solomon, 1991, p. 12. Although we applaud the shift in thinking about classroom management toward developmental and constructivist perspectives, we  lament the fact that most of the theory, research, and literature about  classroom organization and management continue to largely ignore  the role of culture. This lack of attention is probably not a result of  disregard for the importance of culture, but a consequence of being  overwhelmed by the nuances of so many cultures coming together  in many classrooms in the United States. Knowing about all the  cultural backgrounds of students even in one class can be daunting,  as expressed so well by Mrs. Eyler in Chapter 1 and worth repeating  1 Behavioral techniques for managing behavior may be necessary for students with  developmental problems in special education settings or in inclusive classrooms Lane, Falk,   Wehby, 2006. There are ethical and effective ways for shaping desired social behaviors of  such students Landrum  Kauffman, 2006. However, a generalized behavioristic approach  to organization and management is not consonant with current understandings of how  children learn best. 

C o n c l u s i o n   167 here: The children in my class came from so many distinct regions of  Mexico and Central and South America, each with differing histories  and traditions. I knew that I would never know enough. I had to give  up trying. The task of understanding many cultures can seem almost  impossible to teachers. We hope it is evident to readers that, although  it is challenging, learning about students cultures is worth the effort,  and such learning can be greatly facilitated by frameworks such as  the individualismcollectivism framework presented in this book that  help to explain clusters of characteristics of many cultures. CULTURE AND THE INSIDERS PERSPECTIVES  Fries and Cochran-Smith 2006 suggest that until we have rich  insiders perspectives on the daily work of managing to teach, we  will not have an adequate understanding of how teachers negotiate  the complexities of the classroom p. 947. In this regard, we have  been very fortunate to have the insiders perspectives of our Bridging Cultures teachers. As a team, we have been able to consider the  teachers in action and have them describe, explain, and re ect on  their classroom orchestration immediately after an observation. We  have also had the luxury of meeting with the teachers over a  veyear period and conducting in-depth interviews to see which practices have endured, which have been modi ed, which have been  jettisoned altogether andabove allwhy these modi cations have  occurred. The why of the teachers changed classroom practices is perhaps  the most signi cant contribution of the Bridging Cultures Project.  Among the most important beliefs teachers have about students are  beliefs about the causes of their behavior and misbehavior Fries   Cochran-Smith, 2006, p. 959. If teachers have only one lens through  which to see student behavior in this case, the individualistic one  espoused by schools, they are likely to unconsciously perceive helping as cheating or looking down as a sign of guilt rather than respectfulness. This is why an understanding of differing belief or value  systems can be so generative for educators as they try to understand 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   and plan for classroom management and why a two-part framework  as an organizing starting point can be highly valuable in efforts to  improve classroom orchestration. As we have seen in Bridging Cultures classrooms, teachers practices can promote students sense of belonging and competence  when they actively draw upon students culture-based strengths.  McCarthy and Benallys 2003 study of classroom management in  a Navajo middle school, one of the few actual studies that address  the relations between classroom management and culture, reached  similar conclusions. In fact, many of the same strategies Bridging Cultures teachers used were also successful with Navajo students, whose  culture is highly collectivistic. PROCEEDING CAUTIOUSLY IN THE CULTURAL DOMAIN BUT PROCEEDING NONETHELESS  We caution readers to bear in mind that the approach we present in  this book has limitations. First, the cultural individualismcollectivism  framework is a heuristic, or tool, for cultural exploration. As they say,  The map is not the territory, and neither is the framework a full  representation of the values of any one person or group of people.  Second, cultures are not fully distinct,  xed entities. Cultures overlap  in their values; they simply vary in the degree of emphasis placed  on different values. Third, the cultural patterns of human existence  we examine constitute only one piece of a complex tapestry that  includes peoples economic situation, their personal and group histories over generations, their home language and its status in the larger  society, and the power relations between the group they identify  with and the dominant cultural group in the society. However, if we give up trying to understand culture, we have lost  a powerful source of knowledge about how children learn and how  classrooms can be orchestrated. Understanding how the collectivistic values that are espoused at home are often in con ict with the  individualistic values of schools is germane to more than teachers of  immigrant Latino students. According to Triandis 1989, 70 percent 

C o n c l u s i o n   169 of cultures fall on the collectivistic side of the individualistic and collectivistic spectrum. Families with African, Asian, Central and South  American, American Indian, Alaska Native, and Paci c Islander roots  are all likely to rear their children more toward a collectivistic orientation than an individualistic one Green eld, 1994; Lipka et. al.,  1998; Nelson-Barber, Trumbull,  Wenn, 2000. CURRENT THREATS TO CLASSROOM ORCHESTRATION The national desperation to improve educational outcomes for students, particularly those from ethnic and linguistic minority groups,  has led to some positive and some unfortunate moves by states and  districts. It can be argued that the establishment of content-area standards what students should know and be able to do in various subject areas and performance standards what counts as doing well in  a content area has been a good step toward quality control in education. Of course, in the absence of equitable opportunities to learn  and equitable testing, holding students to uniform standards can be  unfair see Meier 2000 for a scathing critique of the standards movement. In addition, the high-stakes testing that has resulted from federal efforts to assess districts and states educational outcomes has  driven some districts to make choices that have some distinctly negative and unwanted outcomes see, for example, Abedi, 2004; McNeil,  2000. In an effort to boost students state test scores, some districts have  turned to packaged curriculum and reform programs. For example,  the Los Angeles Uni ed School District LAUSD, where most of the  Bridging Cultures teachers teach, adopted the highly scripted Open  Court reading program during the 20002001 school year. This program, which is only marginally adapted for English language learners  who constitute a large percentage of students in LAUSD, virtually  forecloses teacher creativity in the organization of lessons or units  Girard, 2003; Trumbull, Rothstein-Fisch,  Hernandez, 2003. It also  shuts parents out of the classroomat least during the hours devoted  to the programbecause there is no way they can participate.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Many LAUSD teachers decry the near robotic behaviors associated with Open Court and the lack of opportunity to use their  professional knowledge in instruction Girard, 2003. Shortly after  mandating Open Court, the district layered on the latest version of  Lee and Marlene Canters Assertive Discipline program. As a result,  not only teachers judgments about how to organize a key area of  instruction but also their judgments about how to manage their classrooms were being challenged. These programs re ect a move back  toward behavioristic methods and away from developmental, constructivist, and sociocultural approaches to teaching and learning. Challenging the old, standard approaches to classroom organization and management is no small feat. Behavioristic notions, particularly the belief that children need to be controlled, are pervasive and  tenacious in the teaching profession. During an assessment project  meeting in New York City that Elise attended, teachers were lamenting the classroom management challenges of having a substitute  teacher in their classes. The context was an informal discussion, and  the teachers agreed that establishing who is boss and instilling in  students an awareness of consequences for misbehavior were keys  to being a successful teacher. I really laid down the law and got  them straightened out, said one 5th grade teacher of his students.  We would venture to say that this is standard wisdom.  Clearly, our Bridging Cultures teachers are the authority in their  classrooms, but the threat of punishment is not imminent. Somehow, these teachers have managed not only to command enormous  respect but also to bring out the best in their students by going  with the cultural  ow, or working with, rather than against, student  nature Charles, 2000, p. 8, cited in Gay, 2006, p. 345. WHAT CAN TEACHERS DO? There is nothing quite so educationally powerful as an informed  teacher, and this is particularly true when it comes to promoting  good classroom practice. It is our experience, within the Bridging  Cultures Project as well as other teacher research projects we have 

C o n c l u s i o n   171 participated in, that when teachers have the opportunity to make  their own knowledge explicit in the company of other professionals  and to expand that knowledge, they  nd themselves empowered to  carry out meaningful innovations in their classrooms and schools. So  our answer to the question What can teachers do? is A great deal.  The Bridging Cultures teachers who teach in the Los Angeles Uni ed  School District have found ways to adapt the Open Court activities  and make time for the collaborative instruction they know works  best for their students. Because they do not have discipline problems  in their classes, they may regard the Assertive Discipline approach as  unnecessary and avoid it without consequences. By working closely with families, teachers can help put district  mandates in perspective and collaborate to devise strategies for  collectively addressing students best interests. When teachers feel  con dent in using their professional knowledge, they can interpret  policies intelligently for themselves, colleagues, and parents; working  together they can marshal the resources to challenge ill-advised policies. We have seen this phenomenon among the Bridging Cultures  teachers when school rules con ict with cultural values of students  families. Recall the example from Chapter 3, in which Mr. Mercado  realized that parents whose children were bused to school faced  dif culties in getting transportation to come to the school for parent  conferences. Rather than ignore the problem, he went to the childrens home neighborhoods to conduct the conferences there; the  school eventually provided a bus to enable the parents to come to the  school. Another example comes from bilingual educators who have  identi ed assessment policies that unfairly penalize their students  and succeded in changing them Trumbull  Koelsch, in press. EXPANDING ON WHAT WE KNOW:  FUTURE RESEARCH QUESTIONS Future research can add to what we know about cultural values and  classroom management and explore effective ways to expand the 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   use of successful practices. Here we suggest a few research questions  to begin the process. What would be the effectsif anyof incorporating Bridging Cultures into preservice teacher education programs? It is one thing to  collaborate intensively with seven experienced and talented teachers  and follow their processes of change closely over a period of several years. It is another to reach signi cant numbers of teachers and  teachers-in-training. Quite naturally, we wonder whether incorporating Bridging Cultures as an integrated body of content in courses  and  eld-based experiences would help teachers begin their careers  with a cultural perspective that would permeate their thinking and  practice. Would such teachers examine accepted practice related to  organization and management with a view to tailoring it to tap the  culture-based strengths of their students? If new teachers working  in Latino and other collectivistic communities knew where to begin  in exploring the values and expectations of families, would they be  able to reduce disharmony and the amount of time wasted in trying  to shape behaviors that do not come naturally and, perhaps, are not  even necessary? This question has not been asked in terms of classroom management, but the appeal and apparent utility of the Bridging Cultures approach and classroom examples to prospective teachers has  been demonstrated. Education students at California State University,  Northridge, have had a very positive response to the individualism collectivism framework. Graduate students have examined the framework as it relates to parent-teacher conferences Hernandez, 2003  and parent-involvement workshops Beckley, 2002; Chaparro, 2001;  Gar o, 2002; Guzman  Martinez, 2002 and in terms of innovations for school counselors Geary, 2000; Roman, 2006. In this book  we have demonstrated how understanding culture affected classroom orchestration though that was not an expressed intent of the  project as well as organization of subject matter content areas and  assessment. Bridging Cultures as a theoretical model of development, based on research and  eld-tested by teachers, can permeate  many kinds of teacher education courses, not just those dedicated to 

C o n c l u s i o n   173 classroom management. For example, courses in educational psychology, methods courses in the content areas, or courses on assessment might also make use of the framework for organizing thinking  about student learning. Through multiple exposures to the notions  of individualism and collectivism, students could explore the impact  of culture on education in a fashion somewhat like our Bridging Cultures teachersthat is, over time.  What effects might Bridging Cultures have in culturally heterogeneous classrooms or in monocultural classrooms with dominantculture students? Different kinds of student populations suggest  another set of research questions. What might teachers trained in  Bridging Cultures concepts do in heterogeneous classrooms, where  students come from diverse cultural backgroundssome very collectivistic and others very individualistic? How would teachers make  choices about organization and management? What might the results  be, socially and academically? How would cultural knowledge be  useful to teachers in monocultural classrooms of dominant-culture  students? We speculate that understanding the role of culture in classroom organization and management and in education in general  would prepare teachers to be more  exible and context-sensitive  in their strategies and relationships with students and familiesno  matter what the cultural constitution of their classrooms in this multicultural society. How can families be supported to come to the forefront? An  equally important arena for research on the usefulness of the Bridging Cultures approach is the family-community realm. In relation to  organization and management, researchers might convene groups of  parents and family members to discuss classroom organization and  management topics, using the individualismcollectivism framework  as a way to organize discussion topics and questions. Teachers themselves could carry out such activities in the form of action research. If  families were approached as equals in a process of exploration, their  voices might be heard and heeded more than is often the case, and  valuable data could be added to the literature on classroom organization and management. One way to move the parent-school 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   dialogue forward in a meaningful manner for all involved is to allow  parents life experiences and cultural capital to inform schools cultural worlds Carren, Drake,  Barton, 2005, p. 494. If the goal  is to have a classroom in which a hybrid culture develops, built on  home and school cultural models, then families must be included in  this way. THE BEST OF BOTH WORLDS: OPERATING WITH  KNOWLEDGE, UNDERSTANDING,  AND FLEXIBILITY Although the majority of our examples have indicated a shift from conventional individualistic approaches to more collectivistic approaches  to classroom organization, the idea that both kinds of practices are  needed is worth repeating. With their knowledge of individualism  and collectivism, Bridging Cultures teachers came to understand  themselves, their students and their families, and their schools much  better. Their new knowledge provided them with the  exibility to  reconceptualize and reorganize their classrooms in innovative ways  that promoted student learning. The teachers never adopted a set  of strategies suggested by researchers; they simply noticed areas for  potential change and modi ed their classrooms accordingly. The  choice between a collectivistic and an individualistic classroom is not  an eitheror decision, but rather a bothand decision, with the caveat  that classroom rules, procedures, and activities need to be explicit  as to their intention. Making intentions explicit might include a demonstration or discussion of getting help with achievement such as  the buddy system and the star chart mentioned in Chapter 7 or, as  in the case of standardized testing, an explanation of when and how  to work alone. With regard to the implementation of collectivistic strategies with  students from more individualistic cultures, we would argue that creating a village, as Mr. Mercado calls it, would be bene cial to those  students as well. The proliferation of literature on classrooms as learning communities attests to the recognition that a group orientation 

C o n c l u s i o n   175 has advantages. In their inspiring and thought-provoking book The  Good Society 1991, Robert Bellah and his coauthors say this: It should be obvious that learning is never the result of the  efforts of isolated, competitive individuals alone, and that the  evident weakness in American schools has much to do with  the weakening of their community context. The weakening  of community and the erosion of the cultural endowment  upon which a viable community is based go hand and hand.  p. 172 Teachers who have learned about the individualismcollectivism  framework and its potential application to classroom organization  and management are likely to be in a far better position to nurture learning communities, where the cooperative and interactional  nature of learning Bellah et al., 1991, p. 172 is emphasized. We  would like to see research that explores whether that is the case. Another aspect of knowledge, understanding, and  exibility is  how teachers came to know what kinds of classroom strategies were  most needed by their particular students. To illustrate this point,  we contrast two Bridging Cultures teachers. One teacher, working  with the most rural families, produced the most collectivistic classroom. On the other hand, one teacher moved to a more middle-class  neighborhood during the project, and her collectivistic strategies for  engaging parent volunteers did not work nearly as well as they had  in her previous school. The lesson learned is that strategies must be  adapted for the context.  FINAL THOUGHTS In 1971, Seymour Sarason wrote an in uential book on school reform  titled The Culture of the School and the Problem of Change. In it, Sarason argued that reforms that focus on curriculum, instruction, or school  organization without regard for the culture of the school cannot be 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   expected to succeed. Sarasons premise was that the schools culture,  the very fabric of its existence is what must be changed Gallimore   Goldenberg, 2001, p. 46. We are, in essence, arguing for the same  thing more than 35 years laterfor awareness of school culture and  how it does or does not support student access to equitable education. Echoing Weinstein and colleagues 2003, we urge our readers  to remember that the main goal of classroom organization and management is to provide all students with equitable opportunities for  learning p. 275. Classroom management and organization are a function not only  of teachers values, beliefs, and expectations, but also of their knowledge about possibilities. A single cultural point of view can blind  teachers to the potential right before their eyes. If teachers do not  even see the different skills that students have, but only gaps in the  expected skills, they will waste or damage precious human resources.  This is why learning about cultureones own culture, the culture of  school, and the culture of homeis essential. Some have expressed concern about the risks of oversimplifying  the concept of culture and of misapplying generalizations about  different cultural groups see Gutirrez  Rogoff, 2003, with regrettable outcomes. However, such concern should not prevent us from  making the effort to learn about culture. Cultural differences do exist  and are relevant. The concept of culture provides us with the only  way we know to speak about the differences between peoples of the  world, differences that persist Kuper, 1999 cited in Paradise, 2002,  p. 238. The greater risk is, thus, ignoring culture. As we have said  before, to ignore culture is to hobble schooling.
Abedi, J. 2004. The No Child Left Behind Act and English language learners: Assessment and  accountability issues. Educational Researcher, 331, 114. Abedi, J., Courtney, M., Mirocha, J.,  Leon, S. 2005. Language accommodations for English  language learners in large-scale assessments: Bilingual dictionaries and linguistic modication, CSE Report 666. Los Angeles: National Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing CRESST. Graduate School of Education and Information  Studies GSEIS, University of California. Abedi, J., Leon, S.,  Mirocha, J. 2001, April. Validity of standardized achievement: Tests for  English language learners. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association. Seattle, WA.  Antil, L. R., Jenkins, J. R.,  Wayne, S. K. 1998. Cooperative learning: Prevalence, conceptualizations, and the relation between research and practice. American Educational Research  Journal, 353, 419454. Antrop-Gonzlez, R., Vlez, W.,  Garrett, T. 2003. Where are the academically successful  Puerto Rican students? Five success factors of high achieving Puerto Rican high school  students. JSRI Working Paper 61. East Lansing, MI: Julian Samora Research Institute,  Michigan State University. Retrieved September 9, 2006, from http:www.jsri.msu.edu RandSresearchwpswp61.html Athanasou, J. A.,  Olasehinde, O. 2002. Male and female differences in self-report cheating.  Practical Assessment, Research  Evaluation, 85. Retrieved June 2, 2007, from http: PAREonline.netgetvn.asp?v8n5 Atwell, N. 1987. In the middle: Writing, reading, and learning with adolescents. Portsmouth,  NH: Heinemann.  Au, K.,  Jordan, C. 1981. Teaching reading to Hawaiian children: Analysis of a culturally  appropriate instructional event. Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 11, 91115. August, D.,  Hakuta, K. 1997. Improving schooling for language-minority children. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. Battistich, V., Watson, M., Solomon, D., Schaps, E.,  Solomon, J. 1991. The child development project: A comprehensive program for the development of prosocial character. In  W. M. Kurtines  J. L. Gerwitz Eds., Handbook of moral behavior and development Vol.  3, pp. 133. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Beaumont, C., de Valenzuela, J.,  Trumbull, E. 2002. Alternative assessment for transitional  readers. Bilingual Research Journal, 262, 241268. Beckley, L. 2002. Bridging cultures between home and school literacy: Spanish speaking   rst graders and their families. Unpublished masters thesis, California State University,  Northridge. Bellah, R., Madsen, R., Sullivan, W. M., Swidler, A.,  Tipton, S. M. 1991. The good society.  New York: Alfred A. Knopf. Benard, B. 2004. Resiliency: What we have learned. San Francisco: WestEd. REFERENCES
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Ben-Peretz, M., Eilam, B.,  Yankelevitch, E. 2006. Classroom management in multicultural  classes in an immigrant country: The case of Israel. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein  Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues  pp. 11211139. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Betts, G. 2004. Fostering autonomous learners through levels of differentiation. Roeper Review,  264. Retrieved August 16, 2006, from http:www.apa.orgedtblofcontents53.html Bowers, C. A.,  Flinders, D. J. 1990. Responsive teaching: An ecological approach to classroom patterns of language, culture, and thought. New York: Teachers College Press.  Boykin, A. W.,  Bailey, C. T. 2000. The role of cultural factors in school relevant cognitive  functioning Report No. 43. Baltimore: Center for Research on the Education of Students  Placed at Risk CRESPAR. Retrieved April 4, 2005, from http:www.csos.jhu.educrespar techReportsReport43.pdf Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L.,  Cocking, R. R. Eds. 2000. How people learn: Brain, mind,  experience and school. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. Bredekamp, S.,  Copple, C. Eds. 1997. Developmentally appropriate practice in early  childhood education Rev. ed. Washington, DC: National Association for the Education  of Young Children. Brookhart, S. M. 2004. Grading. Upper Saddle River, NJ: PearsonMerrill Prentice Hall. Bruner, J. S. 1996. The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Cabello, B.,  Burstein, N. 1995. Examining teachers beliefs about teaching in culturally  diverse classrooms. Journal of Teacher Education, 464, 285294. Calkins, L. M. 1983. Lessons from a child: On the teaching and learning of writing. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. Calkins, L., Montgomery, K.,  Santman, D. 1999. Helping children master the tricks and  avoid the traps of standardized tests. Practical Assessment, Research  Evaluation, 68.  Retrieved June 28, 2007, from http:PAREonline.netgetvn.asp?v6n8 Canter, L.,  Canter, M. 1992. Lee Canters assertive discipline: Positive behavior management  for todays classroom Rev. ed. Santa Monica, CA: Lee Canter  Associates. Carlson, F. M. 2006. Essential touch: Meeting the needs of young children. Washington, DC:  National Association for the Education of Young Children.  Carren, G. P., Drake, C.,  Barton, A. C. 2005. The importance of presence: Immigrant parents school engagement experiences. American Educational Research Journal, 423,  465498. Carter, K.,  Doyle, W. 2006. Classroom management in early childhood and elementary  classrooms. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 373406. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence  Erlbaum Associates. Caspe, M. S. 2003. How teachers come to understand families. School Community Journal,  131, 115131. Cazden, C. 2001. Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning 2nd ed.  Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. Centre for Promoting Learner Autonomy. 2006, February. Promoting learner autonomy  through assessment Brie ng paper. Retrieved August 16, 2006, from http:www.shu. ac.ukcetlautonomyprojectbriefschristines.pdf Chaparro, P. 2001. Empowering parents of kindergarten students with strategies and skills for  understanding school: Focus on reading readiness. Unpublished masters thesis, California State University, Northridge. Chen, X. 2006. Struggling readers at the middle level: A cross-cultural study of the social aspect  of their reading. Unpublished dissertation, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.  Cizek, G. J. 1999. Cheating on tests: How to do it, detect it and prevent it. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Cohen, E. 1994. Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups. Review  of Educational Research, 64, 135. Cole, M., Engestrm, Y.,  Vasquez, O. 1997. Mind, culture, and activity. Cambridge, UK:  Cambridge University Press. Connors, L. J.,  Epstein, J. L. 1995. Parent and school partnerships. In M. H. Bornstein Ed.,  Handbook of parenting Vol. 4, Applied and practical parenting, pp. 437458. Mahwah,  NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

R e fe r e n c e s   179 Cooper, H. 2001, April. Homework for allin moderation. Educational Leadership, 587,  3438.  Daniels, H. 2002. Literature circles: Voice and choice in the student-centered classroom. York,  ME: Stenhouse. Deci, E. L., Koestner, R.,  Ryan, R. M. 1999. A meta-analytic review of experiments examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 125,  627668. Deci, E. L., Koestner, R.,  Ryan, R. M. 2001. Extrinsic rewards and intrinsic motivation in  education: Reconsidered once again. Review of Educational Research, 711, 127.  Delgado-Gaitan, C. 1992. School matters in the Mexican-American home: Socializing children  to education. American Educational Research Journal, 293, 495513.  Delgado-Gaitan, C. 1994. Socializing young children in Mexican-American families: An intergenerational perspective. In P. M. Green eld  R. R. Cocking Eds., Cross-cultural roots  of minority child development pp. 5586. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Delgado-Gaitan, C. 1996. Protean literacy: Extending the discourse on empowerment. Washington, DC: Falmer Press. Doyle, W. 2006. Ecological approaches to classroom management. In C. M. Evertson  C. S.  Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 97125. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Durn, R. P. 1985. In uences of language skills on bilinguals problem solving. In S. F. Chipman, J.W. Segal,  R. Glaser Eds., Thinking and learning skills pp. 187207. Hillsdale,  NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Edgewater, L. I. 1981. Stress and the Navajo university student. Journal of American Indian  Education, 20 3, 2531. Edwards, C. H. 2004. Classroom discipline and management 4th ed. New York: Wiley.  Elias, M. J.,  Schwab, Y. 2006. From compliance to responsibility: Social and emotional learning and classroom management. In C. M. Evertson,  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook  of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 309341.  Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Ercikan, K. 2006. Developments in assessment of student learning. In P. A. Alexander  P. H.  Winne Eds., Handbook of educational psychology 2nd ed., pp. 929952. Mahwah, NJ:  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Evertson, C. M., Emmer, E. T.,  Worsham, M. E. 2006. Classroom management for elementary  teachers 7th ed. Boston: Allyn  Bacon. Evertson, C. M.,  Randolph, C. H. 1995. Classroom management in the learning-centered  classroom. In A. C. Ornstein Ed., Teaching: Theory and practice. Boston: Allyn   Bacon. Evertson, C. M.,  Weinstein, C. S. 2006. Classroom management as a  eld of inquiry. In C. M.  Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 315. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Fall, R., Webb, N. M.,  Chudowsky, N. 2000. Group discussion and large-scale language  arts assessment: Effects on students comprehension. American Educational Research  Journal, 37, 911941. Fallona, C.,  Richardson, V. 2006. Classroom management as a moral activity. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice,  and contemporary issues pp. 10411062. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  Farr, B.,  Trumbull, E. 1997. Assessment alternatives for diverse classrooms. Norwood, MA:  Christopher-Gordon. Fetterman, D. M. 1989. Ethnography step by step. Applied Social Research Methods series Volume 17. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. Fleck, C. 2000. Understanding cheating in Nepal. Electronic Magazine of Multicultural Education, 2 1. Available http:www.eastern.edupublicationsemme2000spring eck.html. Fox, M.,  Wilkinson, L. 1997. No longer travelers in a strange country. Journal of Childrens  Literature, 231, 615. Freiberg, H. J., Ed. 1999. Beyond behaviorism: Changing the classroom management paradigm. Boston: Allyn  Bacon.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Freiberg, H. J.,  Lapointe, J. M. 2006. Research-based programs for preventing and solving  discipline problems. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom  management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 735786. Mahwah, NJ:  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Freire, P. 1970. Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Seabury Press.  Fries, K.,  Cochran-Smith, M. 2006. Teacher research and classroom management: What  questions do teachers ask? In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 945981. Mahwah,  NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Gallimore, R.,  Goldenberg, C. 2001. Analyzing cultural models and settings to connect  minority achievement and school improvement research. Educational Psychologist, 361,  4556. Gambrell, L. B., Mazzoni, S. A.,  Almasi, J. F. 2000. Promoting collaboration, social interaction, and engagement with text. In L. Baker, M. J. Dreher,  J. T. Guthrie Eds., Engaging young readers: Promoting achievement and motivation pp. 119139. New York:  Guilford Press. Gar o, M. 2002. Using the Bridging Cultures framework to empower the parents of second grade  Spanish readers. Unpublished masters thesis, California State University, Northridge. Gay, G. 2006. Connections between classroom management and culturally responsive teaching. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management:  Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 343370. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Geary, J. P. 2000. Bridging Cultures through school counseling: Theoretical understanding and  practical solutions. Unpublished masters thesis, California State University, Northridge. Gillies, R. M. 1999. Maintenance of cooperative and helping behaviors in reconstituted groups.  Journal of Educational Research, 92 6, 357370. Girard, K.,  Koch, S. J. 1996. Con ict resolution in the schools: A manual for educators. San  Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Girard, V. 2003, February 20. Open Court reading 2002: A practitioners perspective. Presentation to the Program Council of WestEd, San Francisco. Goldenberg, C.,  Gallimore, R. 1995. Immigrant Latino parents values and beliefs about  their childrens education: Continuities and discontinuities across cultures and generations. Advances in Motivation and Achievement, 9, 183228.  Green eld, P. M. 1994. Independence and interdependence as developmental scripts: Implications for theory, research, and practice. In P. M. Green eld  R. R. Cock ing Eds.,  Cross-cultural roots of minority child development pp. 137. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence  Erlbaum Associates. Green eld, P. M., Keller, H., Fuligni, A.,  Maynard, A. 2003. Cultural pathways through universal development. Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 461490. Green eld, P. M., Quiroz, B.,  Raeff, C. 2000, Spring. Cross-cultural con ict and harmony in  the social construction of the child. In S. Harkness, C. Raeff,  C. M. Super Eds., New  directions for child and adolescent development, 87. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Green eld, P. M., Raeff, C.,  Quiroz, B. 1996. Cultural values in learning and education. In  B. Williams Ed., Closing the achievement gap: A vision for changing beliefs and practices  pp. 3755. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Green eld, P. M., Suzuki, L.,  Rothstein-Fisch, C. 2006. Cultural pathways through human  development. In K. A. Renninger  I. E. Sigel Eds., Handbook of child psychology 6th  ed., Vol. 4: Child psychology in practice, pp. 655699. New York: Wiley.  Gutirrez, K. D. 1994. How talk, context, and script shape contexts for learning: A cross-case  comparison of journal sharing. Linguistics and Education, 5, 335365. Gutirrez, K., Baquedano-Lpez, P., Alvarez, H.,  Chiu, M. 1999. A cultural-historical  approach to collaboration: Building a culture of collaboration through hybrid language  practices. Theory into Practice, 382, 8793. Gutirrez, K., Baquedano-Lpez, P.,  Tejeda C. 1999. Rethinking diversity: Hybridity and  hybrid language practices in the third space. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 64, 286303.  Gutirrez, K.,  Rogoff, B. 2003. Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of  practice. Educational Researcher. 325, 1925.

R e fe r e n c e s   181 Guzman, B.,  Martinez, V. 2002. Empowering parents of migrant preschoolers using the  Bridging Cultures Framework. Unpublished masters thesis, California State University,  Northridge. Harry, B., Allen, N.,  McLaughlin, M. 1995. Communication versus compliance: AfricanAmerican parents involvement in special education. Exceptional Children, 614, 364 377. Hayner, A.,  Bartzis, O. L. 2005, November 7. Cheating or sharing: Academic ethics  across cultures. Paper presented at NAFSA Region VI Conference, Louisville, KY. Heath, S. B. 1983. Ways with words: Language, life, and work in communities and classrooms.  Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. Henderson, A. T.,  Mapp, K. L. 2002. A new wave of evidence: The impact of school, family,  and community connections on student achievement. Austin, TX: Southwest Educational  Development Laboratory, National Center for Family  Community Connections with  Schools. Hernandez, R. 2003. Reaching across the cultural bridge to collectivistic families: Kindergarten connections. Unpublished masters thesis, California State University, Northridge.  Hiner, R. 1973. The cultural function of grading. Clearing House, 47, 6, 356-61. Hofstede, G. 1991. Cultures consequences. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Hofstede, G. 2001. Cultures consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions and  organizations across nations 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Hollins, E. R. 1996. Culture in school learning: Revealing the deep meaning. Mahwah, NJ:  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Hoover, J. H.,  Collier, C. 1985. Referring culturally different children: Sociocultural considerations. Academic Therapy, 20 4, 503509. Hoover-Dempsey, K. V., Bassler, O. T.,  Burrow, R. 1995. Parents reported involvement  in students homework: Strategies and practices. The Elementary School Journal, 955,  435449. Hoover-Dempsey, K. V.,  Sandler, H. M. 1997. Why do parents become involved in their  childrens education? Review of Educational Research, 671, 342.  Isaac, A. R. 1999. How teachers cultural ideologies in uence childrens relations in side the  classroom: The effects of a cultural awareness teacher training program in two classrooms.  Unpublished psychology honors thesis, University of California, Los Angeles. Johns, K. M.,  Espinoza, C. 1996. Management strategies for culturally diverse classrooms.  Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta Kappa Educational Foundation. Johnson, D. W.,  Johnson, R. T. 1994. Learning together and alone: Cooperative, competitive,  and individualistic learning 4th ed. Boston: Allyn  Bacon.  Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T.,  Holubec, E. J. 1994. The new circles of learning. Alexandria,  VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Jones, V. F.,  Jones, L. S. 2007. Comprehensive classroom management: Creating communities of support and solving problems 8th ed. Boston: Allyn  Bacon.  Kim, U.,  Choi, S. 1994. Individualism, collectivism, and child development: A Korean perspective. In P. M. Green eld  R. R. Cocking Eds., Cross-cultural roots of minority child  development pp. 227258. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Kohn, A. 1993. Punished by rewards: The trouble with gold stars, incentive plans, As, praise,  and other bribes. Boston: Houghton Mif in. Kohn, A. 1996. Beyond discipline: From compliance to community. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Lambert, W. E., Hammers, J. F.,  Frasure-Smith, N. 1979. Child-rearing values: A cross-national  study. New York: Praeger. Landrum, T. J.,  Kauffman, J. M. 2006. Behavioral approaches to classroom management. In  C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds. Handbook of classroom management: Research,  practice, and contemporary issues pp. 4771. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc  ates. Lane, K., Falk, K.,  Wehby, J. 2006. Classroom management in special education classrooms  and resource rooms. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds. Handbook of classroom  management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 439460. Mahwah, NJ:  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Lee, A. R. 2005. Character education: Helping our children to develop good character. North  Carolina Family Policy Council. Retrieved August 23, 2005, from www.ncfamily.org PolicyPapersFindings200203-CharacterEd.pdf. Levin, J.,  Nolan, J. F. 2007. Principles of classroom management: A professional decisionmaking model 5th ed. Boston: Allyn  Bacon.  Lewis, C. C. 1995. Educating hearts and minds: Re ections on Japanese preschool and elementary education. New York: Cambridge University Press.  Lewis, T. J., Newcomer, L. L., Trussell, R.,  Richter, M. 2006. Schoolwide positive behavior  support: Building systems to develop and maintain appropriate social behavior. In C. M.  Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 833854. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Lipka, J. with Mohatt, G.,  Ciulistet Group. 1998. Transforming the culture of schools:  Yup'ik Eskimo examples. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Los Angeles Uni ed School District. n.d. Organizing and managing the classroom environment Ed 201 course syllabus. Retrieved September 18, 2006, from http:www.lausd.k12. ca.uslausdof cesdieledocsClassManagmentClassMgmtSyllabus.doc  Lotan, R. A. 2006. Managing groupwork in the heterogeneous classroom. In C. M. Evertson   C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice, and  contemporary issues pp. 525539. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  Markus, H.,  Kitayama, S. 1991. Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, emotion,  and motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224253.  Markus, H. R.,  Lin, L. R. 1999. Con ictways: Cultural diversity and the meanings and practices of con ict. In D. A. Prentice  D. T. Miller Eds., Cultural divides: Understanding  and overcoming group con ict. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Marzano, R. J. 2003. Classroom management that works: Research-based strategies for every  teacher. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Maslow, A. 1970. Motivation and personality. New York: Harper  Row. Maynard, A. E. 2002. Cultural teaching: The development of teaching skills in Zinacantec  Maya sibling interactions. Child Development, 733, 969982. McAlpine, L.,  Taylor, D. 1993. Instructional preferences of Cree, Inuit, and Mohawk teachers. Journal of American Indian Education, 33, 1, 120. McCaleb, S. P. 1995. Building communities of learners: A collaboration among teachers, students, families, and community. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. McCarthy, J.,  Benally, J. 2003. Classroom management in a Navajo middle school. Theory  into Practice, 42 4, 296-304. McCaslin, M., Bozack, A. R., Napoleon, L., Thomas, A., Vasquez, V., Wayman, V., et al. 2006.  Self-regulated learning and classroom management: Theory, research and considerations  for classroom practice. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom  management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 223252. Mahwah, NJ:  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. McLaughlin, H. J.,  Bryan, L. A. 2003, Autumn. Learning from rural Mexican schools about  commitment and work. Theory into Practice, 424, 289295. McLeod, J., Fisher, J.,  Hoover, G. 2003. The key elements of classroom management. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.  McNeil, L. M. 2000. Creating new inequalities: Contradictions of reform. Phi Delta Kappan,  8110, 729734.  Meier, D. 2000. Will standards save public education? Boston: Beacon Press. Moles, O. 1996. Reaching all families: Creating family-friendly schools. Washington, DC:  Of ce of Educational Research and Improvement.  Moll, L. C.,  Gonzalez, N. 2004. Engaging life: A funds-of-knowledge approach to multicultural education. In J. Banks  C. A. McGee Banks Eds., Handbook of research on  multicultural education pp. 699715. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Morine-Dershimer, G. 2006. Classroom management and classroom discourse. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice,  and contemporary issues pp. 127153. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  Morrow, L. M., Reutzel, D. R.,  Casey, H. 2006. Organization and management of language arts  teaching: Classroom environments, grouping practices, and exemplary instruction. In C. M.  Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice,  and contemporary issues pp. 559581. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

R e fe r e n c e s   183 Mosier, C. E.,  Rogoff, B. 2003. Privileged treatment of toddlers: Cultural aspects of individual choice and responsibility. Developmental Psychology, 396, 10471060. Nelson-Barber, S.,  Dull, V. 1998. Dont act like a teacher! Images of effective instruction in a  Yupik Eskimo classroom. In J. Lipka, with G. V. Mohatt  The Ciulistet Group. Transforming the culture of schools: Yupik Eskimo examples pp. 91105. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence  Erlbaum Associates. Nelson-Barber, S., Trumbull, E.,  Wenn, R. 2000. The coconut wireless project: Sharing culturally responsive pedagogy through the world wide web. Honolulu, HI: Paci c Resources  for Education and Learning. Nelson-LeGall, S.,  Resnick, L. 1998. Help seeking, achievement motivation, and the social  practice of intelligence in school. In S. A. Karabenick Ed. Strategic help seeking: Implications for learning and teaching pp. 3960. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  Nieto, S. 1998. Fact and  ction: Stories of Puerto Ricans in U.S. schools. Harvard Educational  Review, 682, 133163. Nieto, S. 1999. The light in their eyes: Creating multicultural learning communities. New  York: Teachers College Press. Noll, E. 1994. Social issues and literature circles with adolescents. Journal of Reading, 38,  8893. Nsamenang, A. B.,  Lamb, M. E. 1994. Socialization of Nso children in the Bamenda grasselds of Northwest Cameroon. In P. M. Green eld  R. R. Cocking Eds., Cross-cultural  roots of minority child development pp. 133146. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Nucci, L. 2006. Classroom management for moral and social development. In C. M. Evertson,   C. S. Weinstein, Eds. Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice, and  contemporary issues pp. 711731. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. ODonnell, A. M. 2006. The role of peers and group learning. In P. A. Alexander  P. H.  Winne Eds., Handbook of educational psychology 2nd ed., pp. 781802. Mahwah, NJ:  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Ohanian, S. 2001. News from the test resistance trail. Phi Delta Kappan, 825, 363366. Osterman, K. F. 2000. Students need for belonging in the school community. Review of Educational Research, 7023, 323367. Padilla, A. M. 2002. Hispanic psychology: A 25-year retrospective look. In W. J. Lonner, D. I.  Dinnel, S. A. Hayes,  D. N. Sattler Eds., Online readings in psychology and culture Unit  3, Chapter 3. Bellingham, WA: Center for Cross-Cultural Research, Western Washington  University. Palincsar, A. S.,  Brown, A. L. 1984. Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and  comprehension-monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117175. Paradise, R. 2002. Finding ways to study culture in context. Human Development, 45,4,  229236.  Pearson, P. D.,  Duke, N. K. 2002. Comprehension instruction in the primary grades. In C.  C. Block  M. Pressley Eds., Comprehension instruction: Research-based best practices  pp. 247258. New York: Guilford Press. Piaget, J. 1952. The origins of intelligence in children M. Cook, Trans. New York: International University Press.  Pianta, R. C. 2006. Classroom management and relationships between children and teachers: Implications for research and practice. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds.,  Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp.  685709. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Pianta, R. C.,  Cox, M. J. 1999. The transition to kindergarten. Baltimore: Paul Brooks Publishing. Pianta, R. C., Cox, M. J., Taylor, L.,  Early, D. 1999. Kindergarten teachers practices related  to the transition to school: Results from a national survey. The Elementary School Journal,  100 1 7186.  Popham, W. J. 2003. Preparing for the coming avalanche of accountability tests. In Editors  of the Harvard Education Letter Eds., Spotlight on high-stakes testing pp. 915. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press. Quiroz, B.,  Green eld, P. M. 1996. Cross-cultural value con ict: Removing a barrier to  Latino school achievement. Unpublished manuscript.
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Quiroz, B., Green eld, P. M.,  Altchech, M. 1999, April. Bridging cultures with a parentteacher conference. Educational Leadership, 567, 6970. Raeff, C. 1997. Individuals in relationships: Cultural values, childrens social interactions, and  the development of an American individualistic self. Developmental Review, 17, 205238. Raeff, C., Green eld, P. M.,  Quiroz, B. 2000. Conceptualizing interpersonal relation ships  in the cultural contexts of individualism and collectivism. In S. Harkness, C. Raeff,  C.  M. Super Eds., New directions for child and adolescent development, 87. San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass. Reese, L., Balzano, S., Gallimore, R.,  Goldenberg, C. 1995. The concept of educacin:  Latino family values and American schooling. International Journal of Educational  Research, 231, 5781.  Robinson, S. L.,  Ricord Griesemer, S. M. 2006. Helping individual students with problem  behavior. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 787802. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence  Erlbaum Associates. Rogoff, B. 2003. The cultural nature of human development. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. Roman, L. 2006. Bridging cultures: Taking a look at independence and interdependence  among high school students. Unpublished masters thesis, California State University,  Northridge. Rothstein-Fisch, C. 2003. Bridging Cultures teacher education module. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence  Erlbaum Associates. Rothstein-Fisch, C., Trumbull, E., Isaac, A., Daley, C.,  Prez, A. I. 2003. When helping  someone else is the right answer: Bridging Cultures in assessment. Journal of Latinos  and Education, 23, 123140. Salas, L. 2004. Individualized educational plan IEP meetings and Mexican American parents:  Lets talk about it. Journal of Latinos and Education, 33, 181192. Santrock, J. W. 2004. Educational psychology 2nd ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill. Sarason, S. 1971. The culture of school and the problem of change. Boston: Allyn  Bacon. Scarpaci, R. T. 2007. A case study approach to classroom management. Boston: PearsonAllyn   Bacon.  Schaps, E. 2003, March. Creating a school community. Educational Leadership, 606, 3133. Sergiovanni, T. 1994. Building community in our schools. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Sheets, R. 1999. Relating competence in an urban classroom to ethnic identity development.  In R. Sheets Ed., Racial and ethnic identity in school practices: Aspects of human development. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Sheets, R. H. 2005. Diversity pedagogy: Examining the role of culture in the teaching-learning  process. Boston: Pearson Education.  Shore, B. 2002. Taking culture seriously. Human Development, 454, 226228. Slavin, R. 1990. Cooperative learning: Theory, research, and practice. Boston: Allyn   Bacon. Slavin, R. E. 2006. Educational psychology: Theory and practice 8th ed. Boston: Pearson. Solano-Flores, G.,  Trumbull, E. 2003. Examining language in context: The need for new  research and practice paradigms in the testing of English language learners. Educational  Researcher, 322, 313. Solano-Flores, G., Trumbull, E.,  Nelson-Barber, S. 2002. Concurrent development of dual  language assessments: An alternative to translating tests for linguistic minorities. International Journal of Testing, 22, 107129.  Sosa, A. S. 1997. Involving Hispanic parents in educational activities through collaborative  relationships. Bilingual Research Journal, 2123, 18.  Stiggins, R. J. 1997. Student-centered classroom assessment 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River,  NJ: Merrill. Tapia Uribe, F. M., LeVine, R. A.,  LeVine, S. E. 1994. Maternal behavior in a Mexican community: The changing environments of children. In P. M. Green eld  R. R. Cocking  Eds., Cross-cultural roots of minority child development pp. 4154. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Tharp, R. G., Estrada, P., Dalton, S. S.,  Yamauchi, L. A. 2000. Teaching transformed: Achieving excellence, fairness, inclusion, and harmony. Boulder, CO: Westview.

R e fe r e n c e s   185 Triandus, H. C. 1989. Cross-cultural studies of individualism and collectivism. Nebraska Symposium of Motivation, 37, 43133.  Trumbull, E. 2000. Why do we gradeand should we? In E. Trumbull  B. Farr Eds. Grading and reporting student progress in an age of standards pp. 2343. Norwood, MA:  Christopher-Gordon. Trumbull, E. 2005. Language, culture, and society. In E. Trumbull  B. Farr, Language and  learning: What teachers need to know pp. 3372. Norwood, MA: Christopher-Gordon. Trumbull, E., Diaz-Meza, R.,  Hasan, A. 2000, April. Bridging Cultures in literacy practices.  Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association,  New Orleans. Trumbull, E., Diaz-Meza, R., Hasan, A.,  Rothstein-Fisch, C. 2001.The Bridging Cultures Project Five-Year Report: 19962000. San Francisco: WestEd. Available: http:www.wested. orgbridgingBC5yrreport.pdf Trumbull, E., Green eld, P. M.,  Quiroz, B. 2003. Cultural values in learning and education.  In B. Williams Ed., Closing the achievement gap: A vision for changing beliefs and practices 2nd ed., pp. 6798. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum  Development. Trumbull, E., Green eld, P. M., Rothstein-Fisch, C.,  Maynard, A. 1999, April. From altered  perceptions to altered practice: Teachers bridge cultures in the classroom. Paper presented  at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Montral, Quebec. Trumbull, E.,  Koelsch, N. in press. Developing a district-wide reading assessment for students in transition. In M. del R. Basterra  G. Solano-Flores Eds., Language, culture, and  assessment. Baltimore: Mid-Atlantic Equity Center. Trumbull, E.,  Koelsch, N. under review. Reading assessment for bilingual students in transition.  Trumbull, E.,  Pacheco, M. 2005. The teachers guide to diversity: Building a knowledge base.  Providence, RI: Education Alliance at Brown University. Trumbull, E., Rothstein-Fisch, C.,  Green eld, P. M. 2000. Bridging cultures in our schools:  New approaches that work Knowledge brief. San Francisco: WestEd. Trumbull, E., Rothstein-Fisch, C., Green eld, P. M.,  Quiroz, B. 2001. Bridging cultures between  home and school: A guide for teachers. Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Trumbull, E., Rothstein-Fisch, C.,  Hernandez, E. 2003. Parent involvement-According to  whose values? School Community Journal, 132, 4572.  Valds, G. 1996. Con respeto: Bridging the distances between culturally diverse families and  schools, an ethnographic portrait. New York: Teachers College Press. Valds, G.,  Figueroa, R. 1994. Bilingualism and testing: A special case of bias. Norwood,  NJ: Ablex Publishing Company. Valencia, R. R.,  Solrzano, D. G. 1997. Contemporary de cit thinking. In R. R. Valencia  Ed., The evolution of de cit thinking: Educational thought and practice pp. 160210.  London: Falmer Press. Valenzuela, A. 1999. Subtractive schooling: U.S.-Mexican youth and the politics of caring.  Albany, NY: SUNY Press. Vygotsky, L. 1986. Thought and language Rev. ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Walker, J. M. T.,  Hoover-Dempsey, K. V. 2006. Why research on parental involvement is  important to classroom management. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook  of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 665684.  Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  Waltman, J. L.,  Bush-Bacelis, J. L. 1995. Contrasting expectations of individualists and  collectivists: Achieving effective group interaction. Journal of Teaching in International  Business, 71, 6176. Watson, M.,  Battistich, V. 2006. Building and sustaining caring communities. In C. M. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice,  and contemporary issues pp. 253279. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Webb, N. M. 1991. Task-related verbal interaction and mathematics learning in small groups.  Journal of Research in Mathematics Education, 22, 366369. Weinstein, C. S. 2003. Classroom management in a diverse society. Theory into Practice, 424,  266268. 
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Weinstein, C., Curran, M.,  Tomlinson-Clarke, S. 2003. Culturally responsive classroom management: Awareness into action. Theory into Practice, 424, 269276. Weinstein, C. S.,  Mignano, A. J. 2003. Elementary classroom management: Lessons from  research and practice 3rd ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill. Wentzel, K. R. 2003. Motivating students to behave in socially competent ways. Theory into  Practice, 42 4, 319326. Wentzel, K. R. 2006. A social motivation perspective for classroom management. In C. M.  Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issues pp. 619643. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Whiting, B. B.,  Whiting, J. M. W. 1975. Children of six cultures: A psycho-cultural analysis.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Altchech, Marie cultural understanding, changes  in perspective, 89 homework, approach to, 6768 intervening on students behalf,  78 parents, relationships with, 6162 punishment strategy, 106107 on rewards, 115116 Altchech, Marie, Bridging Cultures  techniques collaborative learning, 127, 129 inclusive discourse, 138139 inclusiveness, 45 learning partners, 6768, 8889 murals, 35 rules of the classroom, 111112 sharing, 9495 from stories to academics,  138139 Animals of the Wetlands mural, 35 assessment conclusion, 162163 formal, linked to standards,  147151 grades, assigning, 155157 helping and, 146147, 158162 informal, 146147 introduction, 144145 preparation for, 145155 standardized, 151155 standards movement and,  169170 in U.S. classrooms, 145146 attendance, 6870, 117 Bridging Cultures framework classroom elements distinguishing, 21 limitations and potential, 1720,  168 Bridging Cultures Project conclusion, 165176 introduction, 48 organization and management  approach, 78 participants, 56 purpose, 7 research, recommendations for,  171174 school demographics and contexts, 67 buddy system, 9092, 128, 148150.  See also learning partners bulletin boards and walls, 3335 cheating, 158162 child-rearing practices, collectivistic  cultures, 1012, 1617, 5152, 7778 choral reading, 128129 class books, 127128 INDEX Note: Page references for  gures are indicated with an f after the page numbers. assessment continued
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   classrooms, group-oriented achievement in, 148149 attendance component of, 6870 bene ts of, 2123 family approximated in, 2224,  9092 mainstream individualism, in uence on, 15, 8687, 118 physical organization of, 3136,  111, 122123 reward and reinforcement in,  4647 risk taking in the group context,  3839, 67, 132 student-led practices in behavior, correct and  expected, 43, 4446, 96,  107108 communication, 4243 leadership, 3031, 42, 131132 peer support, 30, 3839 classrooms, individualistic assessment in, 145147, 150151 cooperative vs. collaborative, 124 organization of, 2426, 25f sharing in, 97 Cleaning the Blackboard, case of,  1415 communication inclusive discourse, 135143 student-led practices in, 4243 in teacher-family relationships,  5256 competition in the classroom, 132135,  150151 con ict resolution, 2729, 43 Con Respeto Valds, 112113 consensus in con ict resolution, 2729 criticism, 16, 118120 culture de ned, 34 role in classroom management,  12 The Culture of the School and the Problem of Change Sarason, 175 cultures, collectivistic. See also families,  collectivistic autonomy in, 12 collaboration in, 1213, 129 eye contact in, 106 helping in, 12, 1415, 8185 praise in, 118120 reward and reinforcement in,  116118 sense of self, basis for, 21, 22, 119 values dominant in, 1011, 21 cultures, collectivistindividualist  framework dichotomy case of cleaning the blackboard,  1415 in emphasis, xiv globally, 811, 9f parent-teacher conferences,  explaining during, 75 at school, 1117, 57 cultures, individualistic helping in, 8182 in uence in the classroom, 15,  8687, 118 sense of self, basis for, 119 values dominant in, 1011 Daley, Catherine on cheating, 158159 cultural understanding, changes  in perspective, 88 expectations for group learning,  44 grades, assigning, 156 lesson on eye contact, 106 monitoring student helping, 93 parents, relationships with, 53,  75, 77 personalizing instruction, 141 on power of the group, 29, 31 punishment strategy, 105 students of, leadership in, 31 Daley, Catherine, Bridging Cultures  techniques classroom as family, 4546 collaborative learning, 130 helping, 154 inclusiveness, 96 learning partners, 89 rules of the classroom, 108 cultures, collectivistic continued

I n d e x   189 sharing, 94, 9596 student monitors, 8687 test preparation, 153154 touching, allowing, 3233 Describing an Egg, 137 discipline de ned, 3f direct, 104105 need for in BC classrooms, 2930,  102, 104105, 126, 170 pre-emptive strategies, 107 shared responsibility approach,  107108 discourse, 135143 drama activities, 130 education educacin vs., 1314 purpose of, individualisticcollectivist dichotomy, 1112 Exploring the Concept of 1,000,  134135 Eyler, Kathy attendance, approach to improving, 69 cultural understanding changes in perspective, 6061,  83, 94 desire for, 78, 167 home-school crossover, modeling, 3536 homework, approach to, 66 Eyler, Kathy, Bridging Cultures techniques buddy system, 9192 group awareness, 45 helping, 83 sharing, 94 transition activities, 104 families, collectivistic. See also schoolfamily relationships child-rearing practices, 1012,  1617, 5152, 7778 the classroom as an approximation of, 2224, 3536, 9092,  115116 collaborative skills in, 125126 discourse in, 139 respect in, 16, 112113, 132, 139 reward and reinforcement in,  4647 sharing in, 7778, 94, 96 grades, assigning, 155157 Grandmothers Clock, 142 Green eld, Patricia M., 5 groups inclusive, establishing and organizing, 3644 interdependent contingencies in,  4647 for parent-teacher interactions,  59f, 5962 risk taking in the context of,  3839, 67, 132 sticking out vs.  tting in, 16,  4344, 105, 118 groups, cooperative con ict resolution in, 2729, 43 effectiveness strategies, 2627 examples of support in, 133135 homework practice, 6667 individualism in, 35 power and responsibility in,  2931 group writing, 127 Guilty Eyes, 106 The Haunting Halloween, 2728 helping in assessment, 146155 case of cleaning the blackboard,  1415 cheating vs., 158160 in collectivist framework, 12,  1415 collectivistindividualist dichotomy, 8185 deciding who canshould, 81 homework delivery example, 68 families, collectivistic continued Daley, Catherine, Bridging Cultures  techniques continued
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   in uence of mainstream individualism on, 15, 8687 introduction, 8082 moderation in, 93 student perspective, 8285 teacher perspectives on, BPC in  changing, 8285, 86, 88, 89 helping, teacher-developed strategies buddy system, 9092, 128,  148150 classroom monitors, 8588 learning partners, 6768, 8890 Hernandez, Elvia attendance, approach to improving, 70 expectation of responsible behavior, 2930, 107108 parents, relationships with, 52,  54, 58, 7175 Hernandez, Elvia, Bridging Cultures  techniques class buddies, 92 collaborative learning, 133 helping, 8385 inclusive discourse, 139140 inclusiveness, 39 rules of the classroom, 110111 sharing rewards, 116117 touching and physical proximity,  3233, 111 transition activities, 104 home-school crossover. See also  school-family relationships the classroom as family, 2224,  3536, 9092, 115116 inclusive discourse, 135143 modeling, 3536 student open house invitations,  58 home visits, creating relationship  through, 6465 homework, 6568 How to Price Tamales, 141 inclusion of adults in the classroom community, 3941, 9596 creating parent relationships  through, 58, 6265 establishing and organizing  groups, 3639 instructional activities, teacherdesigned bridging stories with science,  138139, 139f competitive, 132134 expectations for individual performance within, 132134 family-related, 34, 140141, 142 Guilty Eyes, 106 language arts choral reading, 128129 class books, 127128 group writing, 127 literature circles, 129 unleveled drama activities, 130 vocabulary pairs, 127 whole-group Zoo Phonics, 130 mathematics Exploring the Concept of  1,000, 134135 How to Price Tamales, 141 math buddies, 148150 Math Fact Friends, 131133 math teams, 133134 personalizing context, 140141 Mr. Mercados Bulletin Boards, 34 Share Days, 98 The Village, 8283 Kohn, Al e, 114 language arts instruction, 126130 leadership class of cers, 86 motivators for, 42 student-led practices in, 3031,  42, 131132 learning cooperative, 125, 159160 dichotomous cultural framework  surrounding, 1114, 18 in uences on, 165 helping continued inclusion continued

I n d e x   191 physical dimension, 3136, 111,  122123 social dimension, 122123,  124125, 135142 learning, collaborative in collectivist framework, 1213 competitive vs., 150151, 154 cooperative vs., 124 cultural congruence in, 125126 de ned, 124 interpersonal interactions in, 125 in language arts instruction,  126130 in mathematics instruction,  130135, 150151 Mercado, Giancarlo on, 2829 positive interdependence in, 125 social and task goals, 124 learning partners, 6768, 8890,  127128. See also buddy system literature circles, 129 Love, Viviana, 23 management, 14, 3f, 165167. See also  orchestration culturally responsive, achieving,  xiv Math Fact Friends, 131133 Mercado, Giancarlo on collaborative learning, 2829 colleagues, relationships with,  7577 grades, assigning, 155156 parents, relationships with, 52,  6263, 7577 personalizing instruction, 140142 Mercado, Giancarlo, Bridging Cultures  techniques bulletin boards, 34 collaborative learning, 129 helping, 8283 inclusiveness, 4041 learning partners, 90 praise, 119 rules of the classroom, 110, 113 sharing, 9495, 99 student monitors, 85 working independently, 155 monitors, student, 8588 motivation, 113117, 118120, 157 Mr. Mercados Bulletin Boards, 34 murals, 35 Open Court reading program, 169170 open houses, 5660 orchestration. See also management conclusion, 120121 current threats to, 169170 de ned, 3f introduction, 101102 orchestration, teacher-developed strategies discipline, 104105, 107108 motivation, 113115, 118120 nonresponse, 104 overview, 102105, 103f praise and criticism, 118120 pre-emptive action, 107 for punishment, 105107 redirection, 103 reward, 115118 rules of the classroom, 33,  108112 transition activities, 103104 organization. See also learning, collaborative assessment and, 145146 collectivist vs. individualist  approach, 2426, 25f conclusion, 142143 cultures role in, 4 de ned, 3f family as basis for, 2224 goal of, 2 introduction, 122124 physical dimension, 3136, 111,  122123 social dimension, 122123,  124125, 135142 parents, involving in attendance issues, 6870, 117 communication in, 5256 learning continued Mercado, Giancarlo, Bridging Cultures  techniques continued
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   as guest speakers and resources,  7273 in homework, 6568 introduction, 4849 open houses for, 5660 out-of-school meetings for, 6265 research  ndings on, 50 school policies as obstacles to,  7578, 169170 as volunteers, 7073 parent-teacher conferences, 1517,  6064, 7475 participation, group-oriented classrooms, 3839, 67 peer support, 30, 3839, 114 Prez, Amada attendance, approach to improving, 6970 on class of cers, 86 cultural understanding, changes  in perspective, 86, 98, 147150 daily group pledge, 3637 grades, assigning, 156 home-school crossover, modeling, 36 homework, approach to, 6667 parents, relationships with, 17,  5455, 58, 6465 Prez, Amada, Bridging Cultures techniques assessment, 147150 buddy system, 91, 128, 148150 classroom organization, 37 collaborative learning, 127128,  130, 131133, 134135 con ict resolution, 2728 encouraging group culture, 3638 helping, 148153 inclusiveness, 3738, 4243 learning partners, 8990, 127, 130 rules of the classroom, 109 sharing, 9798 student monitors, 86 test preparation, 151153 touching, allowing, 3233 transition activities, 103104 physical proximity, 3233, 111 positive interdependence, 125 praise collectivistindividualist dichotomy, 16 motivation and, 118120 punishment, 3f, 105107. See also  discipline Quiroz, Blanca, 5 respectrespeto, 16, 112113, 132 rewards cultural expectations and, 4647 extrinsic, 6970 group sharing of, 9697, 116117 intangible, 115116 motivation and, 113117 punishment as, 106107 schoolwide, 117118 risk taking in the group context, 3839,  67, 132 Rothstein, Fisch, Carrie, 5 rug time, and physical proximity, 3233 rules, classroom, 108113 Saitzyk, Pearl on awards assemblies, 117118 classroom behavior, 108 parents, relationships with, 52,  64, 78 school-family relationships. See also  families, collectivistic; home-school  crossover challenges to cross-cultural  understanding, 1017, 4950 school policies as obstacles,  7578, 169170 self-esteem, cultural values promoting,  21, 22, 118119 Share Days, 98 sharing among students, 9395 motivating, 97 nonmaterial things, 9799 of rewards, 9697, 116117 with the teacher, 9596 standards movement, 169170 storytelling, 138139 parents, involving continued

I n d e x   193 teacher-family relationships. See also  parents, involving BCP teachers changes in perspective, 5256 collectivistindividualist dichotomy, 1517 communication in, 5256 demonstrating value, 58 forging a cultural bridge, 4950 inclusiveness in creating, 58 introduction, 4849 open houses for developing,  5660 out-of-school meetings for, 6265 parent-teacher conferences,  6064, 7475 power balance in, 49 trust in creating, 73 teachers relationships with, 114116 sharing with, 9596 teaching vs. parenting role in collectivist cultures, 1617, 57 theft, 96 touching, culturally appropriate, 3233,  111 Trumbull, Elise, 5 United States assessment in, 145146 dominant values, 10, 12 The Village, 8283 vocabulary pairs, 127 walls and bulletin boards, 3335 ways of knowing, de ned, 3
Carrie Rothstein-Fisch Carrie Rothstein-Fisch, PhD, is associate professor  of Educational Psychology and Counseling at California State University, Northridge. She is one of  the four original researchers on the Bridging Cultures Project, a longitudinal action research project that explores ways to improve cross-cultural  understanding and communication, particularly for Latino students  and their families. She has authored or coauthored numerous articles  and book chapters, and she is the author, coauthor, or editor of  four other books on Bridging Cultures: Bridging Cultures Between  Home and School: A Guide for Teachers with Elise Trumbull, Patricia  M. Green eld, and Blanca Quiroz, 2001; Bridging Cultures Teacher  Education Module 2003; Readings for Bridging Cultures Teacher  Education Module 2003; and Bridging Cultures in Early Care and  Education with Marlene Zepeda, Janet Gonzalez-Mena, and Elise  Trumbull, 2006. Rothstein-Fisch received her PhD in Educational Psychology and  Developmental Studies from UCLA. She earned the Distinguished  Teaching Award at California State University, Northridge. She can be  contacted at the Michael D. Eisner College of Education, California  State University, Northridge, 18111 Nordhoff Street, Northridge, CA  91331-8265; or via e-mail at managingdiverseclassroomscsun.edu. ABOUT THE AUTHORS
M a n a g i n g  D i v e r s e  C l a s s r o o m s   Elise Trumbull Elise Trumbull, EdD, is an educational consultant  specializing in sociocultural in uences on learning and schooling and a lecturer at California State  University, Northridge, where she teaches a graduate course in Language and Concept Development  in the department of Educational Psychology and  Counseling. A former special education teacher, Trumbull completed  her doctorate in education in the area of applied psycholinguistics at  Boston University in 1984. She has studied seven languages other than  English and has conducted applied research in cultural settings ranging from California, New York, Florida, and Arizona, to Micronesia. Dr. Trumbull was the project director and an original researcher  on the Bridging Cultures Project. She has coauthored dozens of articles and book chapters, as well as six books. Among them are Assessment Alternatives for Diverse Classrooms with Beverly Farr, 1997;  Bridging Cultures Between Home and School: A Guide for Teachers with Carrie Rothstein-Fisch, Patricia M. Green eld, and Blanca  Quiroz, 2001; Language and Learning: What Teachers Need to Know  with Beverly Farr, 2000; and The Teachers Guide to Diversity: Building a Knowledge Base with Maria Pachecho, 2005. Dr. Trumbull can  be reached at managingdiverseclassroomscomcast.net.

Related ASCD Resources: Classroom Management and Diversity  At the time of publication, the following ASCD resources were available. For the most  up-to-date information about ASCD resources, go to www.ascd.org. ASCD stock numbers are noted in parentheses. Audio Best Practices in Serving Gifted Hispanic Students by Jaime Castellano Audiotape:  204202 English Language Learners in the Mainstream: Strategies That Work by Virginia Rojas  Audiotape: 203100 Succeeding in Diverse and Inclusive Schools CD: 507127 Mixed Media Educating Linguistically and Culturally Diverse Students Professional Inquiry Kit by  Belinda Williams eight activity folders and a videotape 998060  Networks Visit the ASCD Web site www.ascd.org and click on About ASCD and then on Networks for information about professional educators who have formed groups around  topics, including HispanicLatino-American Critical Issues. Look in the Network  Directory for current facilitators addresses and phone numbers. Print Products Educating Everybodys Children: Diverse Teaching Strategies for Diverse Learners by  Robert W. Cole 195024 Educational Leadership, March 2007, Responding to Changing Demographics Entire  Issue 107031 Educational Leadership, October 2002, The World in the Classroom Entire Issue  102306 Fifty Strategies for Teaching English Language Learners, 2nd Edition by Adrienne Herrell and Michael Jordan 303383  Getting Started with English Language Learners: How Educators Can Meet the Challenge  by Judie Haynes 106048  Meeting the Needs of Second Language Learners: An Educators Guide by Judith LessowHurley 102043S25  Videos and DVDs Educating Everybodys Children six 20to 30-minute videotapes and two facilitators  guides 400228  How to Coteach to Meet Diverse Student Needs one 15-minute videotape 406057  How to Involve All Parents in Your Diverse Community one 15-minute DVD 607056 For additional resources, visit us on the World Wide Web http:www.ascd.org, send  an e-mail message to memberascd.org, call the ASCD Service Center 1-800-933-ASCD  or 703-578-9600, then press 2, send a fax to 703-575-5400, or write to Information Services, ASCD, 1703 N. Beauregard St., Alexandria, VA 22311-1714 USA.

How does the home culture of Latino immigrant students differ from the mainstream culture of U.S. schools? Why is it important for teachers to  understand the differences? How can educators take advantage of students cultural traits to improve classroom management, student performance, and school-parent relations? Carrie Rothstein-Fisch and Elise Trumbull answer these and many other questions by drawing on the experience and collective wisdom of teachers in the Bridging Cultures Project, a five-year action research study of elementary classrooms with high percentages of immigrant students.  The authors present a simple framework for understanding cultural  differences, comparing the individualistic culture that prevails in American education with the collectivistic culture that characterizes most of the worlds population, including many of the Latino immigrant students in U.S. classrooms.  At the heart of the book are teacher-developed strategies that capitalize on the cultural values that these students and their families offer, such as an emphasis on helping, sharing, and the success of the group. The strategies cover a wide spectrum of issues and concerns, including   Communication with families  Open house and parent-teacher conferences  Homework  Attendance  Learning in the content areas  Motivation and rewards  Classroom rules  Assessment and grading Managing Diverse Classrooms: How to Build on Students Cultural Strengths presents both the research foundation and the practical perspectives of seasoned teachers whose classroom-tested approaches have produced positive results. With this valuable guide in hand, readers will have the insights and strategies they need to turn educational challenges into educational opportunities.  Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development Alexandria, Virginia USA BROWSE EXCERPTS FROM ASCD BOOKS: www.ascd.orgbooks