WWW.RESTORINGPOWER.ORG NURTURING CREATIVITY  IN THE CLASSROOM TRAINING HANDBOOK 2020-1-UK01-KA227-SCH-094436 RESTORATIVE JUSTICE SERIES: 51

RJ4All Publications https:www.rj4allpublications.com contactrj4allpublications.com   www.rj4all.info RJ4All Publications is an independent publisher specialising in social sciences and the publication of cutting-edge research on restorative justice, criminal justice, equality and human rights. RJ4All Publications is the publishing arm of the Restorative Justice for All RJ4All International Institute, and the publisher of the international, peer reviewed Youth Voice Journal YVJ  and the Internet Journal of Restorative Justice IJIR Restorative Justice for All RJ4All International Institute is an international   Non-Governmental Organisation NGO with a mission to advance community and social cohesion at the local, national and international levels. Through our programmes, we redistribute power within society using education and the values and practices of restorative justice. First published in the UK in May 2023  by RJ4All Publications  2022 RJ4All All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of RJ4All, or as expressly permitted by law or licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics rights organisation. You must not circulate this publication in any other form, and you must impose the same condition on any acquirer. Trademark notice: Restorative Justice for All, Internet Journal of Restorative Justice, IJIR, the Youth Voice Journal, YVJ, the RJ4All Logo, the IJRJ Logo and the YVJ logo are all trademarks of Restorative Justice for All International Institute cic. All rights reserved. Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only in good faith and for identification purposes. Database right RJ4All Publications maker British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data ISBN: 978-1-911634-84-3 DOI: 10.13140RG.2.2.11481.29280

The European Commission support for the production of this publication does not constitute an endorsement of the contents which reflects the  views only of the authors, and the Commission cannot be held responsible  for any use which may be made of the information contained therein. 2020-1-UK01-KA227-SCH-094436 NURTURING CREATIVITY  IN THE CLASSROOM TRAINING HANDBOOK
Nurturing creativity in the Classroom:  Training Handbook 

Table of Contents  About the project. 4  Organisational partners  authors . 5  Restorative Justice for ALL RJ4ALL .5  CUMHURIYET ANADOLU LISESI .5  IF EDUCATION .6  PIXEL .7  PRIOS .8  GENISTA .9  Introduction . 10  Learning principles. 10  Handbook structure . 10  Restorative art in nurturing creativity in schools  RJ4ALL . 11  How to foster creativity in the classroom? IF . 23  The Necessity Of Creativity In Education  PIXEL . 40  Creativity methods that teachers use to enhance the effectiveness of teaching? Prios . 57  What Should Teachers, Students, Parents and School Boards Do To Remove the Barriers to  Creativity in Education Sultangazi Cumhuriyet Anadolu Lisesi . 69 
About the project 

At a critical point for Europe when COVID19's impact on the creative and cultural sectors has  been unprecedented, up-to-date pan-European tools that empower the young and new  generations to be creative are needed. To overcome the pandemic's health and socio-economic  impacts, innovation and creativity must be employed in all that we do. Creativity is necessary to  inventive thinking in any domain but under-appreciated in many formal educational  environments. All solution making and construction require creative thinking. Yet almost no  school teaches creativity or trains teachers to teach creativity. Creativity is fundamental to  human thought development and survival. Creativity theories are important in supporting  instruction and learning, and elevation of teacher understanding and learning design. As the  economic gap is widening due to the pandemic, creativity can act as a key engineer for facilitating  social harmony, sustainable human development, technological invention, and scientific  revolution.  

Restoring Power responds to this need. It brings together 6 diverse organisations from the UK,  Turkey, Norway, Italy, Ireland, and Malta to form a strategic partnership that will empower  schools to pursue creative education with their young people. Responding to Covid19 challenges,  our project's main objective is to deliver the Erasmus HORIZONTAL priority of Skills Development  and Inclusion through creativity and the arts.  

Some of the main project are the following objectives:  

To equip young people and adults with the necessary tools and competences needed to  come up with creative and innovative solutions to face unprecedented risks and societal  challenges;  To train teacherseducators in the use of new methods and tools related to creativity,  innovation and entrepreneurship;   To strength the profiles of the teaching professions, including teachers, school leaders  and teacher educators through enhancing teachers professional development and  supporting teachers in collaborative and innovative practices;   To develop students creativity and awareness of their own culture, as well as get  familiar with the cultural diversity of Europe;  To encouraging dynamic thinking through varying scenarios, showcasing multiple  solutions, and considering mind expansive concepts.  

Organisational partners  authors  

Restorative Justice for ALL RJ4ALL   Restorative Justice for All RJ4All is an international institute with a mission to advance  community cohesion and human rights locally, nationally and internationally. RJ4All redistributes  power in a more equal way by delivering social justice projects, educational programmes and highquality volunteering opportunities to the most marginalised groups of society. RJ4All does this by  using the power of education, sports and arts as well as the practices mediation, conferencing,  circles, dialogue, workshops and values of restorative justice including power sharing, fairness,  equality, dignity and respect. RJ4All is the leading Europe-wide restorative justice network with  members from over 40 countries. RJ4All has carried out a number of projects for the EU, UK  founders and international organisations. This includes independent evaluation of rehabilitation  and restorative justice programmes, awareness raising and training projects, work on radicalization  as well as research consultancies and expert advice to governments and international organizations.  RJ4All also runs an independent, publishing arm. RJ4All Publications is an impactful publisher  specialising in social sciences and the publication of cutting-edge research.   Website: www.rj4all.info   Email: t.gavrielidesrj4all.org  Facebook: www.facebook.comRjforAll 

CUMHURIYET ANADOLU LISESI 

Our school is located in Sultangazi, a district of Istanbul. The school, that opened its doors in 2001,  hosts currently 812 students. It is one of the 84 project high schools in Istanbul and the only school  in our district that accepts students after they sit required entrance exams. Every year, our school  prepares Scientific Research Institution of Turkeys average of 30 projects, provincial and intraprovincial foreign trips, study and research activities in numerous fields. Our school was involved  in different Erasmus projects in the past, finished them successfully and most of the staff remains  very positive and motivated about participating in local and international projects. We have  language classes consisting of skilled and engaged students who are willing and eager to improve  their language acquisition on different levels. By implementing the activities of the project, we  would like to upgrade schools and regions profile in terms of quality of general education and  civic skills. 

A lot of attention is paid to learning foreign languages  English and German are compulsory  subjects. The development of individual aptitude and interests of the students is emphasised and  encouraged. Our curriculum also offers civics lessons where our students learn about democratic  processes and history of world democracy. With this Erasmus project we intend to share our best  practices and learn from other partners to be more efficient. As for our students, our  interdisciplinary and multitask project is a great tool to make them more active in the learning  process, to offer them exciting and innovative learning opportunities through collaboration and  cooperation with their peers from other countries with European dimension.  Our school wants to improve the quality of the internationalisation, teaching methods and the  knowledge and competences of the staff. 

Associated Partners: Ministry of Education, Aydn University, Istanbul University, Local NGOs,  Sultangazi Municipality  Webpage: https:sgcal.meb.k12.tr  Email: sgcalerasmusgmail.com  IF EDUCATION 

I  F Education is an Irish based organisation working in and from Dublin for the educational  development of people of all ages, especially in the areas of entrepreneurship, sport and personal  development, youth, language acquisition, inclusion and diversity and rural development. We  stress and put the emphasis on lifelong learning as well as adult learning.   ENTREPRENEUSHIP: Our programmes offer everyone a possibility to upskill and learn the  abilities to become an independent self-starter, who tries hard to face the obstacles in life with a 
sporting spirit. We offer courses for entrepreneurs and the self-employed. We give special pride  of place to the acquisition of soft skills by personal coaching and mentoring and by providing  people with links to companies. We encourage new companies and initiatives and get people to  think laterally and positively about their careers and their future.  YOUTH: Young people can learn key competences if the educational setting is right. We believe  in providing young people with the tools to improve their personal development in many areas,  such as emotional intelligence, soft skills, care of the environment, sociability and  entrepreneurship. I  F Education runs programmes for young people who wish to develop their  soft and presentation skills, emotional intelligence, etc. through our Horizon programme.  SPORT: Sport is a key means to educate people and advance their personal development. Good  instruction and individual centered formation is the way for people to flourish. I  F currently runs  soft skills programmes through sport in several clubs. We had the privilege to work with Atltico  de Madrid in the past.  LANGUAGES: The acquisition of a foreign language, especially in the case of English, is an  indispensable tool for entrepreneurship, for young people to get opportunities in life and for older  people to get a job in a highly competitive market. I  F has developed tourism packages intended  for students and adults involved in cultural and learning programmes centered on English language  acquisition in Ireland. I  F Education currently offers English and Spanish language courses with  full immersion for students in a family and school setting.   SOCIAL INCLUSION AND DIVERSITY: In keeping with our supportive approach to  programme management, we at I  F promote and support Erasmus in the context of Inclusion  and Diversity.  The Inclusion and Diversity Programme devised by I  F develops project ideas with an emphasis  on inclusion and diversity. It also develops trustworthy partnerships and engages with programmes  in a meaningful way. Our main target groups are: migrants, refugees and asylum seekers, NEET  youth, women, elderly, youth and adults with learning or emotional difficulties, people with fewer  opportunities with and without disabilities. We develop and implement innovative projects and  provide new tools and methods that meet social needs, create social relationships and form new  collaborations to prevent social exclusion of vulnerable groups. 

Webpage:www.instructionandformation.ie  E-mail: infoinstructionandformation.ie 

PIXEL 
Pixel is an international education and training institution with over 20 years of experience in  international cooperation and project management. Established in Florence Italy in January  1999,   Pixel obtained quality certification according to UNI EN ISO 9001. Pixel is also accredited  by the Italian Ministry of Education. 12 people work as full-time staff and over 100 external  experts and trainers cooperate with Pixel.  Pixel has relevant expertise and significant experience in the following areas:   Direct submission and management of European projects: In the past 22 years Pixel successfully  coordinated and managed over 130 European projects.  The European programmes that funded the  projects in which Pixel was involved are: Erasmus KA2 Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge  Alliances, and Capacity Building, Lifelong Learning, eLearning, Leonardo da Vinci, Socrates  Minerva, Socrates Grundtvig, Socrates Lingua, Socrates ODL, Justice, and Safer Internet.   More information on the European projects carried out is available at http:www.pixelonline.netPRJeuropeanprojectslista.php    Organisation of international education and training initiatives: Pixel organises and delivers  international in-service training courses on different topics such as European cooperation, new  technologies for education, innovative educational methodologies, language learning etc. Some of  these courses have been delivered in over 50 editions so far. An average of 300 participants, from  all over the world, attends Pixel international courses every year. Since 2011, Pixel also organises  the international Master on European Project Planning and Management that has now reached its  10th  edition.  More information is available at http:europlan.pixel-online.orgindex.php    Organisation of international events and conferences in the field of education: Pixel organises  international conferences. Three of them are organised on a yearly basis. About 250 participants  attend each of the events representing over 50 countries in the five continents.  More information is available at http:conference.pixel-online.net   Pixel has developed international partnerships with over 500 organisations worldwide. Pixels  transnational partners are: Higher Education Institutions, Schools, VET Organisations, Adult  Education Institutions, Public Authorities, Research centres etc. based all over the world.   More information about Pixel can be found at http:www.pixel-online.net  Webpage: http:www.pixel-online.net  E-mail: elipixel-online.net 

PRIOS 

Prios Kompetanse AS Prios is a research-based corporation having main tasks within project  management, business consulting, innovation processes, training and software development. Prios  as research center aims to implement the idea of lifelong learning, support and conduct 
development projects. The center is open to all who wish to develop their talents, refresh their  knowledge, improve their business, needs new or better digital tools or have ideas in need for  support to be fulfilled.  We value innovation and creativity, since training content and training methods constantly need  to be improved as response to digitalization and development of society in general. Our courses  and assignments are carried out by own staff or professionals from our large network. Prios  receives no government funding. Main source of income is sales fees from our services. Prios have  8 persons in its administration staff and about 15 teachersprogrammersconsultants.    The main sectors and activities Prios operate in, is in brief:  Our educational activities are focused on adult learners and labor market service within basic skills  training, VET, entrepreneurship training and tailored training for businesses.   Our software department supports our educational activities as well as developing new digital  solutions based upon requests and needs in different projects we participate in. We developed and  own the Follow-Up concept.   Our consulting department activities supports our business clients within internal innovation  processes, HR processes, economical advises and management improvements.  Our international project department manages and coordinates a wide scope of projects connected  to our other activities.    For  more  information,  please  visit https:www.prios.noen-gbabout-us   E-mail: postprios.no 

GENISTA 

Genista research foundation has been operating as an NGO since 2002 and during these past years  we have managed as applicant and coordinator 28 approved projects, as partner in 154 approved  projects and project writer and project manager for other organizations in 24 approved projects.  Genista foundation is also a Registered centre of Informal Education with the Malta Qualifications  council providing training on organic farming, media, communication, EU affairs and intercultural  dialogue working both in Malta and in various other EU and Non EU countries, coordinating and  providing training in Palestine, Turkey, Slovakia, Poland, Tunisia, Italy, Norway, France,  etc.  For 4 years we were also the local contact point and manager of Europe Direct network, with 500  offices around the EU and members of the EU communication policy development.  Facebook: https:www.facebook.comprofile.php?id100057428470813 
Introduction   This Training Handbook has been developed by the consortium of the Erasmus project Nurturing  Creativity in Education: Restoring Power. It is addressed to teachers, educators, youth leaders,  organisations and focused on  training professionals working in formal e.g. school and informal  e.g. in the community educational settings in the use of new methods and tools related to  creativity, innovation and entrepreneurship.  The Handbook is structured around 5 modules. Each Module is composed of 4-5 Units. A module  involves 2-3 hours of learning. The programme is accredited with Continuing Professional  Development CPD status by the RJ4All International Institute. It is supplemented by the CPD  certified ecourse.   The 5 educational training content modules are developed by: 1st ModuleRJ4all, 2nd ModuleIF, 3rd ModulePIXEL 4th ModulePRIOS, 5th Module-Sultangazi.  

Learning principles  

Use of inquiry-based and problem-based learning approaches.   Accommodate multiple learning styles work and project-based learning, collaborative  learning.   Contextualize learning to meet the project objectives in different contexts.   Provide authentic learning opportunities.   Present the content in modular small chunks that will be able to provide just in time  learning.   Preparation of learning activities to be carried out either synchronously or  asynchronously.   Provision of best practices.  

Handbook structure 

1. Restorative justice and art in nurturing creativity in schoolsRJ4ALL  2. How to foster creativity in the classroom? IF  3.  The necessity of creativity in education PIXEL  4. Creativity methods that teachers use to enhance the effectiveness of teaching?PRIOS  5. What should teachers, students, parents and school boards do to remove the barriers  to creativity in education SULTANGAZI 

Restorative art in nurturing creativity in schools  RJ4ALL 

MODULE I   CONTENTS   Title:   Restorative justice and art in nurturing creativity in schools  Target group:   Youth workers, youth educators, principals, teachers, parents and  professionals in school settings  Learning  Objectives: 

Understand what restorative justice is and its benefits  

Understand the key restorative justice practices 

Foster creativity in education by using a restorative justice approach 

The application of restorative justice in school settings and restorative  art   Overall duration:    2h  Uni t 1   Title:  Understandi ng  restorative  justice 

Topic title 1.1: Introduction 

This module will inform on how restorative justice practices can be a  useful tool to in classrooms not only to foster understanding and respect  but also to nurture creativity through restorative art.   Through restorative justice practices, the collective responsibility and  ethos are promoted along with shared values in the community. This is  essential for a healthy community being active in a free of expression  environment.   

Restorative Justice can take place in a variety of different contexts  including schools, the workplace, universities, and communities.  Promoting the values of restorative justice including power sharing,  equality, dignity and respect can provide a fertile ground for young  people to empower their creativity and be able to share and develop  their ideas.  

Furthermore, by using restorative approaches is efficient in building,  maintaining and mending relationships, ensuring that disputes are dealt  with constructively.  
Topic title 1.2: A few words about restorative justice   https:www.youtube.comwatch?vzzsJNs2Y5Ow 

In this module e-course we understand Restorative Justice as an ethos  with practical goals, among which is to restore harm by including  affected parties in a direct or indirect encounter and a process of  understanding through voluntary and honest dialogue. Restorative  justice adopts a fresh approach to conflicts and their control, retaining at  the same time certain rehabilitative goals Gavrielides 2007. 

Restorative justice teaches values that encourage social cohesion and  understanding another persons perspective. 

Restorative justice is called restorative because it employs processes that  restore agency, ownership and decision-making power to those directly  affected by a harmful event, that is, victims, offenders, their supporters  and the wider community UNODC, 2019.   Restorative justice process is guided by voluntary participation,  truthful speaking, the creation of a safe and respectful environment,  a positive commitment to repair, a concern to clarify accountability  for harms, and more importantly power sharing Gavrielides, 2021  

https:www.youtube.comwatch?vlox1jDE8pPE  

Uni t 2  Title: The key  practices of  restorative  Justice 
Topic title 2.1: The Restorative justice practices 

At the global level, three key models dominate the practice of restorative  justice: victim-offender mediation, community group conferencing and  sentencing circles Zehr, 2002. Although similar in general terms, these  three practical methods of restorative justice differ according to the  number and personality of the participants and according to the style of  supervision chosen by the organizer of the meeting Zehr, 2002. 

Restorative justice practices are being used to address different kinds of  conflicts such as local disputes, school conflicts, family conciliation,  employmenttrade union disputes, etc. Restorative justice practices are  very common in many facilities ranging from   the criminal justice system  to school and other community facilities Gavrielides 2007. Restorative  justice practices are currently being on the following procedures:   direct or indirect mediation, family group conferencing, circles and  restorative boards Gavrielides, 2007; 2020. 

The 3 practices in nutshell: 

Victim-Offender Mediation VOM 

Victim-offender mediation consists of the possibility offered to the  victim and the offender to meet voluntarily to discuss the aspects and  consequences of the conflict between them and to find a fair solution  with the help and under the conciliation of a mediatorfacilitator, whose  role is to supervise the meeting in a completely neutral manner.   Mediation aims to make the meeting possible and to encourage the  offender to measure and take responsibility for the human, social andor  material effect of hisher behaviour. Also, it aims to lead each party to  reconsider and take more account of the point of view of the other and  to consider the forms of the reparation of damages van Ness, 2007. 

Community or Family Group Conferencing  

The conference models pursue the same objectives as victim-offender  mediation, but it is a form of extended mediation because it brings  together, apart from the victim and the offender, all persons or  institutions having an interest in the resolution of conflict: their families,  friends, referents of one or other of the parties as well as representatives  of judicial, police, health, or social institutions Morris and Maxwell  2003.   The number of participants varies from 10 to 30. A facilitator intervenes  within the framework of this meeting.   The conference, thus, makes it possible to consider the characteristics of  the support that the family or social environment is likely to bring to the  interested parties, to the offender, in order to help them to change their  behaviour in the future and to repair the harm to the victim or the  community Morris and Maxwell, 2003. 

Healing and Sentencing Circles 

These circle models are community-directed because they are based on  the idea that it is the responsibility of the community to fight against  problems related to delinquency, to reconstitute or to strengthen the  social bond that existed before an infringement was brought to it by the  offence van Ness and Strong 2010.   In this way, all those who consider themselves involved members of the  community, victims and offenders, their relatives and representatives of  the justice system or other institutions can participate.  These circles can gather from 15 to 50 people.  

During this procedure each party and everyone involved in the crime and  members of the community can make recommendations to the judge 
regarding the appropriate sentence van Ness and Strong 2010. The aim  of these circles is to achieve recognition by each of their wrongs, while  the healing circles are mainly aimed at repairing the whole community  Morris and Maxwell 2003. 

Community Restorative Boards  

The Community restorative boards are small groups of citizens, trained  to conduct public, face-to-face meetings with offenders sentenced by  the court to participate. The aim of each board is to provide an  opportunity for victims and the community to confront offenders in a  constructive manner, while giving the chance to the offender to take  personal responsibility.   Community restorative board provide people with an opportunity to get  directly involved in the justice process, generating meaningful  community-driven consequences for criminal actions that are said to  reduce costly reliance on formal criminal justice processing. The process  also includes a board meeting in which they discuss about the nature of  the offence, and the negative effects the offence had on victim and  community.   The board develops a set of proposed sanctions, the method adopted  and a timeline, which they discuss with the offender and the victim, for  an acceptable agreement. 

Uni t 3  Title: The  principles of  Restorative  justice  Topic title 3.1: The principles of restorative justice 

All restorative justice practices comply with some principles and standards. The  most important underlying restorative justice principle is power sharing  Gavrielides, 2021. Without honoring this center restorative justice value, it is  not possible for the parties involved in harm to share space safely and come to  a mutual and voluntary agreement on restitution.   According to several international treaties and the academic literature,  additional principles need to be respected, and in particular  

Parties should be enabled to participate actively. 

Primarily oriented towards addressing and repairing the harm that  crime causes to individuals, relationships, and wider society. 

Equal concern for the needs and interests of those involved;  procedural fairness; collective, consensus-based agreement; a focus on  reparation, reintegration, and achieving mutual understanding; and  avoiding domination. 

A neutral space where all parties are encouraged and supported to  express their needs and to have these satisfied as far as possible. 

Voluntary and shall only take place if the parties freely consent, having  been fully informed in advance about the nature of the process and its  possible outcomes and implications. 

The parties should be able to withdraw their consent at any time  during the process. 

The discussions in restorative justice should remain confidential,  except with the agreement of the parties concerned. 

Restorative justice services should be available at all stages of the  criminal justice process.  Uni t 4  Title:  Restorative  practices as  an approach  to nurturing  creativity 

Topic title 4.1: Can restorative justice nurture creativite thinking in schools? 

The quick answer is yes, restorative justice can promote creative  thinking. Restorative practices emphasize values of empathy, respect,  honesty, acceptance, and accountability among participants. These  values are necessary for people to feel comfortable and safe in an  environment in order to be able to focus on other domains and feel free  to share ideas and innovative thoughts.  

Restorative justice can be used for educational purposes when its values  are integrated into every day life. Restorative justice assumes the  existence of a social liaison that bonds individuals in a relationship of  respect for other's rights and freedoms Gavrielides, 2005. 

Restorative practices are effective in keeping a healthy and safe  environment in educational settings by addressing any conflict in a  smooth and less traumatic way for both sides as well as the school  community. Restorative justice practices can do so by: 

Involving all those affected by the harm in the discussion and in  determining its resolution, 

Listening and speaking to the needs of the offending person, the  victim, and all others impacted, 

Healing and repairing harm, broken communication, and broken  relationships, and 

Promoting shared community values and positive and productive  forms of interaction ways as encouraging individual and  community accountability. 

Restorative practices involve components of accountability, without  using punitive measures, through circles, accountability conferences,  and peer juries, offenders are sent clear messages that their behaviour  is not condoned by the school community while at the same time they  are offered support, forgiveness, and the opportunity for reparation by  the school community. This aspect of restorative justice, accountability  with care and support, can be beneficial for the school community in  dealing with conflicts. 

Uni t 5  

Topic title 5.1: When art and restorative justice come together 

During the last years, people started to realize the importance of art as  a powerful tool in restorative justices practices and in promoting the  restorative justices values.  

Res Title:  Restorative  art 

Restorative art is an effective method in tackling community issues,  namely ethnic divisions, and creating social solidarity. Through  restorative art young people from various racial, cultural and social  backgrounds come together to understand each other and fight,  discrimination and marginalization.  

Arts can offer an insight into something that may be unfamiliar and help  to explore it in a tangible way. As creativity is a capacity to be able to  make innovative connections, art is a tool that can help express and  share these ideas. Especially, when art and other related activities are  related to restorative justice and its principles this can be beneficial for  the students.  

Art is a universal language it can speak to people and provoke emotions.  When you are trying to convey a message across cultures, art allows you  to transmit that message across languages. Often if people are unable to  express how they feel through talking they are able to through different  forms of art. In reality, visual art is by nature the universal symbolic  language that can be understood not only by art critics trained in  deciphering the meaning of its symbols, but by any human being who  cares enough to engage with the image.  Various art activities such as art workshops provide opportunities to  communicate with a wider range of people from the community. By  doing art workshop it creates community cohesion as people are able to  learn about the good parts of their community. Art workshops allow  different communities in the area to interact well with each other.  

Topic title 5.2: Art therapy and restorative justice  
Art therapy practices is an effective solution when working with teens  and  supporting  their  identity  perception  issues,  recognising  interpersonal relationship needs and addressing mental health  problems. These protective factors are achieved through selfimage  reproduction and emotional development course Hartz  Thick, 2005.  

Erickson  Young 2010 confirms that community arts programmes are  conceptualised by providing opportunities in marginalized communities  to explore self-expression and encourage self-esteem as well as  emotional development. 

According to a study in the United Kingdom, providers have used art in  conjunction with restorative justice practices. Some providers utilize art  as a therapeutic exercise through which offenders can reflect on their  crime. A particular restorative justice program encourages offenders to  use artwork as a means of making amends with their victims. For  instance, offenders are encouraged to make pictures, mosaics, or  paintings to offer as gifts to their victims or to the community Liebmann,  2007. They report also that art therapy helps to build up positive  relationships with others and that they learn to be tolerant and to accept  others Smeijsters et al., 2011. The facilitative nature of art therapy as  described in this study, may be an important factor in group art therapy  incorporating restorative justice principles.   This integration of methods could be especially useful with juveniles.  Utilizing art therapy to visualize restorative justice concepts may  contribute to the participants understanding of the past behavioral  experience and deepen the meaning they derive from group therapy.  

https:digitalcommons.lmu.educgiviewcontent.cgi?article1124co ntextetd  
Uni t 6  Ti Title: Best  practice  Examples  of  restorative  justice art  Topic title 6.1: The CA4U workshops on Empowerment and Culture 

https:www.youtube.comwatch?vZmDbfdBCoMY   

The CA4U workshops were organised under the Erasmus project, and  main the focus was to present the use of restorative justice art for  migrant integration.  

During the workshops children and their families developed creative,  digital and electronic skills for life in order to bring Rotherhithes culture  back to life. The workshops focused on increasing environmental  awareness while also focusing on culture. Throughout the workshops,  the children worked on four key designs: the 3D masks, the recycled  lamps, the plastic fishes, and the electronic robots. All of these craft  works were created using a mixture of recycled materials and 3D-printed  objects. In these workshops, they have used their own cultural  backgrounds and understanding to apply what they have learned in  regards to pollution and recycling, and to creatively express their own  opinions.  

https:www.rj4allpublications.comproductcommunity-cohesionthrough-restorative-justice-art  

Topic title 6.2: The Culture and Art for the Square Mile CA4SM project.  With the support of City of London, the RJ4All International Institute ran  the Culture and Art for the Square Mile CA4SM project. A youth-led  project which aimed to enhance the Square Mile cultural heritage and  creative future by providing children with an opportunity to learn and  use their creativity.   It is recognised that cultural heritage plays a vital role in the formation  of peoples identity and cohesion within wider society, particularly  within a society that is becoming increasingly divided along cultural lines,  therefore, cultural enrichment is of special importance in creating  diversity.   The CA4SM project, aimed to enhance and share the Square Mile cultural  heritage by providing children and young people from South East London  an opportunity to learn about it while enhancing their skills and  confidence.  

https:www.rj4allpublications.comproductculture-and-art-for-thesquare-mile-a-restorative-justice-approach-to-culture-and-artrestorative-justice-series-no18  

Bibliography and further sources 

Ashley, J., and Burke, K. 2009. Implementing Restorative Justice: A Guide for Schools. Chicago:  Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority.  Basar, M., and Akan, D. 2013. Assessment of Class Teachers Dispute Resolution Applications in  Conflict Environments on the Basis of Restorative Justice. International Journal of Academic  Research, 5 5, 2630  Curtis-Fawley  Daly, 2005, Gendered Violence and Restorative Justice: The Views of Victim  Advocates,  Available  at: https:www.researchgate.netpublication7701237GenderedViolenceandRestorative JusticeTheViewsofVictimAdvocates  Costello, B., Wachtel, J., and Wachtel, T. 2009. The Restorative Practices Handbook for  Teachers, Disciplinarians and Administrators Kindle. Bethlehem: International Institute for  Restorative Practices.   Council of Europe. 2016. Combating Sexist Hate Speech. https:bit.ly3hBVIKT  Gavrielides, T. 2007. Restorative justice theory and practice: addressing the discrepancy. Helsinki:  HEUNI.  Gavrielides, T. 2011. Restorative Practices: From the early societies to the 1970s. Internet Journal of  Criminology.  Gavrielides, T. 2021. Power, Race, and Justice: The Restorative Dialogue We Will Not Have.  10.43249781003194576.  Idemudia, S. 2013. EPQ and Self-esteem Scores of Male and Female Bullies in Mafikeng Schools,  South Africa. Gender and Behaviour, 11 1, 52085219  Jansen, G., and Matla, R. 2011. Restorative Practice: a Change of Heart. Wellington: Restorative  Schools.  Jenna Walters, Integrating Restorative Justice Approaches in an Art Therapy Group  https:digitalcommons.lmu.educgiviewcontent.cgi?article1124contextetd   Lomas, J., Stough, C., Hansen, K., and Downey, L. A. 2012. Brief Report: Emotional Intelligence,  Victimisation and Bullying in Adolescents. Journal of Adolescence, 35 1, 207211  Mecha, E. 2020, January 5. Gender-based violence: Using communication approaches to  alleviate the vice. https:bit.ly2Ge5eHy  Meyersfeld B, 2012, The Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence  Against Women and Domestic Violence: Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and  Combating  Violence  Against  Women  and  Domestic  Violence,  Available  at: https:www.cambridge.orgcorejournalsinternational-legal-materialsarticlecouncil-ofeurope-convention-on-preventing-and-combating-violence-against-women-and-domesticviolence6ACC0F5F699D52BE6A1A47F7B98DE7FF   Mampane, R., and Bouwer, C. 2011. The Influence of Township Schools on the Resilience of  Their Learners. South African Journal of Education, 31, 114126  Morrison, B. 2002. Bullying and Victimisation in Schools: A Restorative Justice Approach Trends  and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice. Canberra: Australian Institute of Criminology  Morris,  Young. 2000. Reforming criminal justice: The potential of restorative justice. In H.  Strang and J. Braithwaite eds. Restorative justice: Philosophy to practice, 11-31. Aldershot:  Ashgate  Restorative Justice Council, 2014, Restorative Justice and Policing, Available at: 
https:restorativejustice.org.uksitesdefaultfilesresourcesfiles1z87infopacks20220 police.pdf  Sonke Gender Justice Network 2008. Workshop Activities: Talking to men about gender,  domestic and sexual violence and HIVAIDS. https:bit.ly3egjADS  Strang H 2002 Repair or Revenge: Victims and Restorative Justice. Oxford: Oxford University  Press.  Stubbs,  2012,  Gendered  Violence  and  Restorative  Justice,  Available  at: https:www.researchgate.netpublication333917203GenderedViolenceandRestorativ eJustice  The Centre for Social Justice, 2012, Beyond Violence: Breaking cycles of domestic abuse,  Available  at: https:www.centreforsocialjustice.org.uklibrarybeyond-violence-breakingcycles-domestic-abuse  United Nations, 1979, Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against  Women  New  York,  18  December  1979,  Available  at: https:www.ohchr.orgDocumentsProfessionalInterestcedaw.pdf  United  Nations  1948.  Universal  declaration  of  human  rights. UN  General  Assembly. https:bit.ly2PkLqmH  van Ness D 2007 Prisons and restorative justice. In Johnstone G and van Ness D eds Handbook  of Restorative Justice: 312-324. Cullompton, Devon: Willan Publishing.  Yadav, M., and Yadav, R. 2018. Impact of SpiritualityReligiousness on Cyber Bullying and  Victimization in University Students: Mediating Effect of Emotional Intelligence. Journal of  Religion and Health, 57 5, 19611979.  Zehr H 2002. Little Book of Restorative Justice. Pennsylvania, USA: Good Books.  https:www2.unwomen.orgmediafield20office20ecaattachmentspublicationscountrybosniaun20woman20pri rucnik20nasilje20nad20zenama-en-web.pdf?laenvs1226  

How to foster creativity in the classroom? IF        

Module 2 Content 

Unit 1   Introduc tion: 

The traditional view of creativity in schools  According to Cropley 1995, the desire to foster creativity is part of a tradition in  educational thinking going back at least to the Ancient Greeks. Creativity is still  the subject of study and debate in many disciplines today, with education and the  school environment being the most notable, at least from the point of view of this  module.   Creativity starts at an early age, often beginning in the classroom. Giving students  free reign to think and play in diverse ways can help train them to think outside the  box. Traditionally students have relied on and been led down the road of 
convergent thinking; the likes of standardized tests that rely on the memorization  of details, multiple choice questions etc., to the detriment of divergent thinking,  which is more abstract by nature, and which uses a wider range of solutions to solve  problems.   The latter involves breaking up old ideas, enlarging the limits of knowledge and  making new connections. When teachers encourage divergent thinking, they help  to maintain children's motivation and passion for in-depth learning, while  encouraging children to keep on generating new ideas Early Childhood Today,  2021. This is the kind of creativity we should be aiming for in the education system,  so that going to school becomes something useful and not just an institutionalized  routine.   Since the benefits of fostering creativity in the classroom are many, this module  focuses on this issue to help teachers and facilitators implement a creative crosscurricular methodology to guide the learning of child learners.   

Learning objectives:  1. Learn the difference between convergent and divergent thinking  2. Make teachers aware of the great scope of creativity in the educational system  through its benefits   3. Get to know new creative methods of teaching  4. learn about new methodological platforms for learning in the classroom.  

Expected Results:   1. Teachers become aware of the need to value divergent rather than convergent  thinking.  2. Make new teaching methods known and implemented.  3. Teachers make use of the proposed technological tools in their classes.  Unit 2   Teachin g  compete nces  For some education professionals it is still unclear what is meant by creativity, so it  is interesting to address some of the particularities of the concept.  

DEFINITION OF CREATIVITY 

Creativity is defined as the use of imagination or original ideas to create something.  Many authors agree that novelty is a key factor linked to creativity, in the sense that  creativity must represent something new or different. But creativity is not only that,  but it is also a way of thinking that occurs prior to creating something.  Although some heirs of romantic thinking argue that creativity is an inherent  personality trait, the evidence shows that it is a learned behaviour, not reserved for 
exceptional  individuals,  and  that  it  tends  to  occur  in  group  situations. 

BENEFITS OF INTRODUCING CREATIVITY IN THE CLASSROOM 

The benefits of instilling creativity in young people are numerous. These include: 

self-made infographics   CREATIVE METHODS OF TEACHING 

The application of creative methods in schools is not new, but there is still plenty  of room for development, as creativity is an inexhaustible source of resources and  ideas.  Teachers and their involvement and influence on young people greatly affect their  levels of creativity and to what extent they will be successful at solving both personal  and societal issues in the future.  So how do we gently steer young people away from traditional  yet limiting   processes of thinking, and towards modern  yet generously diverse  ways of  thought? There are a number of different ways, the most important being, 

Technology 

Games 

Change in thought process 

Art and design 

Let us develop each of the four in more detail:  Technology  The challenges of the past two years have seen the area of technology rise in  importance as a viable and beneficial education tool. When schools shut down and  students were sent home, tools like Zoom became invaluable to be able to continue  with childrens education. Isolation and missed class time were replaced with a fully  interactive and immersive online learning experience. Integrating technological  advances into our education system can lead to several benefits both for students and  teachers alike. Some of these include, 

Improved engagement 

Improved knowledge retention 

Encouragement in individual learning 

Encouragement of cooperation and collaboration  Technology opens up a whole new world of creativity to the budding student. It  allows them to participate in activities they never would have without it  such as  the creation of posters or infographics that can be done on a tablet or computer, the  real time drawing of posters or pictures using a stylus pen, the collaborative working  on a project with different members of their class, and many more. 

Games  Game-based learning can transform the classroom from a place a student must be to  a place they want to be. This is pretty much related to one of the benefits of instilling  creativity in young students: learning through fun.  

There is evidence that games can have positive effects on many skills such as  reading, reasoning, and mathematics.   Using games for learning can help foster greater creativity among students who  would otherwise not be attracted to many subjects.  

But, as effective as gameplay can be, it depends on the type of the game and the  educators ability to implement it properly. Games can be a useful tool, but teachers  must also be open to them and avoid setting rigid goals. 

Change in thought process  At the beginning we mentioned the difference between convergent and divergent  thinking. The latter involves breaking up old ideas, enlarging the limits of  knowledge and making new connections. When teachers encourage divergent  thinking, they help to maintain children's motivation and passion for in-depth  learning, while encouraging children to keep on generating new ideas Early  Childhood Today, 2021. This is probably the kind of creativity we should be aiming  for in the education system, so that going to school becomes something useful and  not just an institutionalized routine.  

Divergent thinking is cognition that leads in various directions. M.A. Runco, in  Encyclopedia of Creativity Second Edition, 2011. Some of these directions are  new and novel, while others are more conventional. 

Two methods to encourage divergent thinking are free writing and brainstorming,  the results of which generally help to promote a number of unique ideas from just a  single thought. These activities rely on creative almost subconscious thought  rather than a more practical working out of a problem that may have its solution in  a deeper or more hidden area of the brain.  Through the use of this form of thinking, students can gain access to a well of new  information, solutions and inspiration to their obstacles, problems and lives. 

Art and design 
Art and design fosters creativity, confidence and imagination, which are skills that  can be transferable to other subjects on the school curriculum.   Children are not either scientific or artistic, as has recently become widespread  among some schools of thought. Art and design has a central role in the pursuit of  science, technology, engineering and mathematics STEM subjects, encouraging  skills that are undoubtedly valuable in school, and then later in the workplace. Some  of them are innovation, analysis and evaluation.   Since ideas can flow through numerous arts, such as music, sport, dance or theatre,  it is interesting to think of this modern thinking process as a vehicle that can  gradually transform classroom methodologies.   Unit  3:  Creative  methods  for  teachers  to  impleme nt at the  classroo m 

What this covers:  We propose here 8 creative methods for teachers to implement in school settings. In  the following, we will explain what each one consists of and offer exercises and  activities linked to each point, so that this part of the module can serve as a practical  guide for teachers and educators.   1. Brainstorming and Mind-maps  Brainstorming is a cooperative approach in which a number of people collectively  agree upon a solution after all of their ideas are brought forth and discussed.   Ideally, more people in a group coming from different backgrounds and academic  disciplines can lead to more ideas being generated.  To implement this approach, provide students with a problemtopic that is new to  them. Then welcome all the ideas they provide even if they can be  perceived funny  or silly or weird because they can lead to creative solutions.  To make sure that everyone participates you can implement the brainstorming in the  form of a chain, so that everyone has to come up with an idea.   Coggle is a brainstorming and mind-mapping tool for students. Teachers can use  this tool to create a classroom-guided brainstorming to explore new ideas and  for  students to creatively come up with solutions to problems.  

2.  Storyboard and Painting  Activities like painting allow for a flow in creativity. The student is able to bring  forth what he or she sees in their own minds and put it down on paper in the form of  an illustration.  A storyboard is similar, where a student uses a visual representation of something.  It usually maps out a concept, narrative or script. This can also tell the story of a  students life, ambitions or what they want their future to look like. Like painting, it  stokes the youngsters imagination and helps them to look at life from a different  perspective a creative perspective.  It is important to convey to students that they do not have to draw great masterpieces.  It is an artistic activity where freedom is essential. In fact, storyboards are meant to  represent a sketch of a situation or story; you don't have to be very precise in your  drawing, as this example shows: 

Here is a blank template for you to hand out in class and put this creative activity  into practice. All the boxes are accompanied by a few lines below for the students  to describe in words the scene they want to represent. This can be useful for those  who do not feel comfortable drawing. 

3.  Teambuilding 
This refers to the process where a group of people work together effectively doing  collaborative activities that require cooperation and different roles within the  team. 

This is an excellent way to encourage positive habits and interactions since it fosters  social relations.  This root concept leads us to the idea of Team creativity, that takes place when  members of a group collaborate and brainstorm together to generate ideas.   Team creativity can also lead to more viable solutions and also encourage  productivity as students help each other to be more effective as a class. This means  better marks for everyone, for instance.  Teambuilding will be more affective if it takes place in spaces other than the  classroom where classes are taught. It has to be a place that motivates us to open up  personally to the other person and get to know them better. On the other hand, in  classrooms, students subconsciously perceive values such as responsibility,  homework, exams, silence.   I Notice, I Wonder  Sometimes the best thing you can do to help solve a creative challenge is to give it  some space and take time to reflect in a new setting. With this exercise, students are  invited to go to a busy place and sit quietly for thirty minutes and observe. They then  write down those things that stick out as things they notice and then add a thought  or curiosity that comes up too. By closely observing others and reflecting on what  stood out and what curiosites this raised, your group can then bring any learnings  back to their practice or solution solving and find further places for investigation. 

4.  Outdoor activities  With an increased emphasis on utilizing the outdoors since the onset of the pandemic  in 2020, chances to develop a natural curiosity and creativity about the world around  us are numerous. 
Spending time outdoors and learning and experiencing all it has to offer can help  students get more in touch with their emotions and allow a natural flow of creativity  to emerge. Research shows us that this can improve mood and lighten stress or  anxiety. When students worry less and are more at ease with themselves and the  world their imaginations can run free and they can tap into an awareness of things  they might not have been aware about before.  Time spent outside in nature can, 

Give us a better awareness and understanding of plants and living things 

Help us to have an appreciation of nature 

Get us more in touch with the natural rhythms of life 

Improve health as students are moving and benefiting from the suns rays 

Increase levels of cognitive performance and memory as more time is spent  away from digital devices  A good activity for students to do is to take a nature walk and bring a journal with  them. This is an upgrade to just walking through a field or some other natural  attraction as it brings things out when they put it down on paper. The subconscious  is working as the mind is relaxed and takes in what its seeing and experiencing  while out on the trail.

What they write down can be a type of diary entry or answer to questions and  opinions to what theyre seeing. It can also be free writing, where the mind is in a  receptive state and channels what its feeling and sensing in a natural and highly  creative way onto the paper. What comes out is often remedial, helping the students  to solve problems or issues in their own lives, as well as gaining insights into bigger  topics or changes theyre experiencing.  

5.  Roleplaying or Impro theater techniques  These techniques are fun and are usually after some embarrassment! loved and  embraced by youngsters. It allows them to be silly, to just go with the flow and say  and do whatever comes to their minds.   Impro theater is acting with a twist. Rather than with a script of whats going to  happen and whats going to be said, things are instead improvised. The dialogue  and actions come from the students imagination. It is up to them how the story goes  there may be a very loose plot just for guidance and what the characters will say. 
This is a very creative way to tap into their inspiration because the more open they  are to suggestion and possibility the better their expression and acting becomes!  Roleplaying is similar in that a student plays the role of a particular person. Its  like swapping bodies and it can give them a fresh and unique insight into what its  like being someone elsetaking on their personality, problems and lives basically.  This can have a profound effect as the act of portraying someone else stepping into  their shoes can help the student see things from a different perspective and give  them unique clarity on their own problems.  Actor Switch  Three actors are given a situation and a character from the audience. They start a  scene. At some point during the scene you call out SWITCH! The three actors now  have to switch characters. That means they have to really listen to each other and be  aware of who the other characters are, so that they can pick up another character at  any moment. And remind students, the aim is to keep striving for a complete  cohesive scene no matter what the situation. 

6.  Puzzles and Games  Puzzle and games are ideal for getting students to put their minds to the test and  think outside the box. From traditional games to their modern counterparts, trying  to solve a puzzle or a riddle takes creative thought and experimentation and often  the assistance of other students where teamwork becomes valuable.  There are many of these to choose from but a current favourite and one that involves  a collaborative effort are Escape Rooms. Thought of as one giant puzzle, escape  rooms give you a certain amount of time normally an hour in which to negotiate a  number of different puzzles, games and riddles. If you cant work together 
effectively as a team, the doors wont open and you will lose the game.

Minecraft  Its not just traditional games and puzzles that improve focus, concentration levels  and creativity, but recent research has also found that video games can have a  positive effect also. Minecraft is a popular computer game among the young and  young at heart and is a first person survival game. The aim of this game is to use  your creativity and create your own personal world. It is up to each individual what  form this world will take and is only limited by the students imagination. This game  can be accessed through a wide range of different devices and regular updates  expands the games potential. 

7.  Storytelling  Children love stories. They help them retain their attention for longer and learn while  having fun.  
This  method  can  be  approached  in  many  ways:

The first is for the teacher to read an excerpt from a familiar story or fairy  tale. 

Another is for the pupils to go to the blackboard and read the text. This will  help them to lose stage fright and improve their speaking and reading skills. 

Another alternative is to organise storytelling competitions. Each child  should create a short story individually and present it to their classmates.  They can then join in pairs or groups to enrich their individual stories and  create another story together. This dynamic shows them the importance and  benefits of working in groups and joining ideas together.   

8.  Posing questions  Open-ended questions are a great way to get children's creative juices flowing.   Here are some tips and strategies for using open ended questions in a correct way:    Combine closed ended and open-ended questions together   Use encouraging interrogation formulas such as What happened?
Dont expect a specific answer   Use the famous 6-W method 

Best  practice  in Ireland 

Creative Schools  Creative Schools is an initiative of the Creative Ireland Programme  led by the Arts  Council in partnership with the Departments of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Sports and  Media, Education  Skills and Children  Youth Affairs   that aims to give our  children and young people the opportunity to experience creativity as an integral  part of their education placing the arts and creativity at the centre of school life. 

It started in 2018 and since then, 462 schools including primary, post primary  schools, DEIS and special schools have joined the initiative. Each school is  supported by a Creative Associate who develops an individual plan for them and  strengthens links between the school and other cultural organisations linked to the  arts. The long term goal is that every school will be able to fully embrace the arts  and creativity, ensuring a positive experience for children. 

This initiative provides opportunities for young people to build their artistic and  creative skills; to communicate, collaborate, be inventive, and to fuel their curiosity  and imaginations. It will empower children to develop  and implement creative  activities within their schools and reinforce the impact of creativity on children and  young peoples learning, development and well-being. 

Students from Coliste Ailigh perform during Creative Schools Celebration Week 2019.  Balor Arts Centre, Donegal. Photo: Liam Kidney 
Referenc es  Early Childhood Today 2021. How to Promote Creative Thinking. Scholastic.  Retrieved from https:www.scholastic.comteachersarticlesteaching-contenthowpromotecreative-thinking 

Edsys 2017. Role and Importance of Creativity in Classroom. Edsys. Retrieved  from https:www.edsys.increativity-in-classroom 

Dddul, P. 2015. We need creative teaching to teach creativity. The Conversation.  Retrieved  from  https:theconversation.comwe-need-creative-teaching-toteachcreativity-34407 

Pond, J. 2018. The Power of Games for Creative Learning. Connected Learning  Alliance.  Retrieved  from  https:clalliance.orgblogthe-power-of-games-forcreative-learning 

Twins Club 2020. The Importance of Art and Design in the Curriculum. Retrieved  from  https:www.twinsclub.co.ukthe-importance-of-art-and-design-in-thecurriculum 

M.A.  Runco  2011  Divergent  Thinking  https:www.sciencedirect.comtopicspsychologydivergentthinking::textDivergent20thinking20is20cognition20that,creative20t hinking20and20problem20solving. 

Northern Illinois University Center for Innovative Teaching and Learning. 2012 Brainstorming. In Instructional guide for university faculty and teaching assistants Retrieved from https:www.niu.educitlresourcesguidesinstructional-guide  5  outdoor  experiences  to  nurture  your  childs  creativity  https:www.mindchamps.orgblog5-outdoor-experiences-to-nurture-your-childscreativity 

Improv games for collaboration https:www.theatrefolk.comblogimprov-gamesfor-collaboration 
The Necessity Of Creativity In Education  PIXEL 

Module 3   1.5 hours  Content 

Unit 1   What Is Creativity In  Education 

Introduction   Attaining a creative achievement is not a one-shot affair; instead it  needs passion, the labor of love, and the commitment of a lifetime  Amabile, 1996; Simonton, 1998; Weisberg, 1988. Indeed, a life  span trajectory of creativity development varies from adult to  adult Simonton, 2006, and this necessity implies that creative  action is learning Guilford, 1950. For instance, with more  experience, the quality of creation will show more mature and  refined ideas Sinnott, 1998. Accordingly, developing creative  capacity is a lifelong learning. Researchers have justified that  creativity can be learned and taught through proper training  programs with educators conscious efforts and providing a  creativity friendly environment Davis, 2006; Reese  Parnes,  1970; Runco, 2003. The assumption behind creative training is  not to warrant creative breakthroughs but to employ useful  strategies in meaningful ways and achieve greater satisfaction  through creative efforts Treffinger, 1995; Treffinger  Isaksen,  2005. In line with this notion, some supporters suggest that  creative thinking and training pedagogy should blend into  curricula, and with a more pluralistic approach will facilitate  students to produce an increment of quantity and quality of ideas  Hsen-Hsing, 2006; Lau, Ng,  Lee, 2009; Parnes  Meadow, 1959;  Puccio  Keller-Mathers, 2007.  

Facets of Creativity   In early times, creativity was viewed as mystery. Creativity was  credited to the visitation of the Muse or the divine force, creative  geniuses were serendipitously inspired by divine intervention  Haring-Smith, 2006; Niu  Sternberg, 2006. In this light, human  beings cannot create and only mimic the glory of God as inspired  by the Muses Ludwig, 1992; Niu  Sternberg, 2003; Simonton,  2000. Thus, Plato argued this inspiration is the gift of Gods Plato:  The Laws. The notion of creativity under the umbrella of the  divine entity was dominant in the history of Western mindset for  centuries. In the Age of Enlightenment, the concept of creativity  shifted from divine to individual, as emphasis shifted to the  achievement of science and technology Craft, Gardner,  Claxton,  2008; Niu  Sternberg, 2006. Creativity is hard to define and  there is no single theory that dominates the academia Kleiman, 
2008; Niu  Sternberg, 2001. For example, Ribot 1900 taped  creativity  into  imagination.  He  identified  that  creative  imagination demands something new: this is peculiar and  essential sign. Following this line, Vygotsky 19302004 was  inspirited by Ribot and theorized the creative imagination. He  viewed creativity as the ability to combine existing elements and  to present in a new way. According to Dewey 1934, the  participation of creative expression is for self-expression. In the  similar thread, Maslow 1968 viewed creativity is selfactualizing. He stressed the importance of personality traits  instead of achievements with regard to this kind of creativeness.  In Piagets 1962 view, the creative process stems from play. The  creative thinking is assimilation, which is the interaction between  imagination  and  environment.  During  the  process  of  accommodation, the creative product is manifested by this mental  experimentation. Rather focusing on creative process, several  scholars underline the fruit of the creativity. This intention has  received increasingly support over the years Baldwin, 2010;  Runco, 2010. MacKinnons 1962 provided a well-known  product-orientated definition of creativity: It involves a response  or an idea that is novel or at the very least statistically infrequent.  But novelty or originality of thought or action, while a necessary  aspect of creativity, is not sufficient. If a response is to lay claim to  being part of the creative process, it must some extent be adaptive  to, or of reality. It must serve to solve a problem, fit a situation, or  accomplish some recognizable goal. And thirdly, true creativeness  involves sustaining of the original insight, an evaluation and  elaboration of it, a developing of it to the full. Creativity, from this  point of view, is a process extended in time and characterized by  originality, adaptiveness, and realization. In a drastic recognition  of creativity, Csikszentmihalyi 1988 underscored the impact of  social and milieu on creativity. He theorized that the creativity is  the consequence of three shaping forces: domain, a set of  opportunities or constraints that preserve and transmit the norms  and ideas to the individual; the filed, the set of gatekeepers or  professionals who judge the creative production meets the criteria  of the domain; and the person, the creative individual persuades  the filed to accept the creative idea or product that changes the  domain to some extent. In order to address the diverse definitional  issues, Mumford and Gustafson 1988 observed that a  homogeneous psychological attribute of creativity is impractical.  Rather, creative behavior should be described in a complex  interaction framework between the attributes of the individual  and the attributes of the environment. Thus, they conceptualized  creativity as a syndrome, including: 
a The process underlying the individuals capacity to generate  new ideas or understandings,   b the characteristics of the individual facilitating process  operation,   c the characteristics of the individual facilitating the translation  of these ideas into action,   d the attributes of the situation conditioning the individuals  willingness to engage in creative behavior, and   e the attributes of the situation influencing evaluation of the  individuals productive efforts.   To sum up, at this juncture, in contemporary western view, the  general consensus of creativity is defined as the individuals  creators, processes creating, and products creations with the  features of usefulness, appropriateness, and novelty Amabile,  1996; Csikszentmihalyi, 1996; Taylor, 1988. 

Barriers to Growth and Prosperity  Barriers that may be hindering creativity: Easily recognizable and  are not set. Perhaps behaviors and patterns of educational, social  and cultural point of view are considered desirable, necessary and  timely, but a serious obstacle in the way of creativity and its  growth and prosperity are, these barriers can be in three parts,  cultural barriers, environmental barriers and personal barriers  can be divided into:  

School Barriers  From the very beginning of the school teachers and education  professionals are trying to give students the intellectual  capabilities, academic down to categories. So the expectations of  parents and classmates, and the indirect basis are unaware of it,  this will determine the level of ability and talent to the child's  growth on the same basis, to look as well as their patterns of pretraining and education governing the education system, students  can also play a decisive role in the inhibition of creativity. 

Identification of Students Type of Creativity  Not only are people not equally creative, but they are not creative  in the same ways, either. While our estimates show that the four  types of creativity described in the preceding section make up the  total of almost half of an average class, more or less one out of ten  individuals may be identified as a complexly creative child.  Consequently, in an average class, there are likely to be two-tothree students characterized by this particular profile of creativity. 
But how does one identify the remaining types of creativity? The  profiled identification of creativity we encourage makes it possible  to determine the type of creativity that a particular student usually  exhibits. We believe that individual dimensions intellectual and  personality related should be rated in comparison with other  students, but also in a more ipsative way: showing the individuals  strengths and weaknesses. As a consequence of such assessment,  it is possible to plan the stimulation of creative potential in a way  that is concordant with the profile of individual differences.  Responding to the demand for methods that make it possible to  conduct profile assessment of creativity, we developed the Types  of Creativity Questionnaire TCQ Karwowski, 2015a for older  students.  This  questionnaire  enables  valid  and  reliable  measurement of creative abilities, openness, and independence,  and makes it possible to determine which types of creativity  individuals represent. Currently, we are also working on the Types  of Creativity Observation Scale for the assessment of younger  pupils. This instrument is composed of two observation sheets  that include statements that describe particular behaviors of a  child at home, in a kindergarten, or at school. As in the case of  TCQ, these behaviors are indicators of creative abilities, openness,  and independence. Sheets are completed by one of a particular  childs parents and a teacher. 

Supporting Students Creativity  Holding Types in Mind The typological approaches we propose  make up a particular, potentially supportive system thanks to  which teachers can better understand and support students  creativity. However, as is the case with any typology, it can bring  benefits, but it can also carry some risks. The first example of the  latter is associated with unreflective ascription of particular  creativity types to students and consideration of these identifiers  as unchangeable. It is important to remember that any type of  support must aim at development of students creative potential.  However, even the type we defined as complex creativity cannot  be considered as the point of arrival and the final step toward the  development of students creativity. It is therefore a mistake to  think that students who fit in with the complex creativity type,  characterized by high openness, independence, and creative  abilities, do not require any special support anymore. First of all, a  type is a theoretical classification category whose aim is to  facilitate identification of strengths and those areas that require  support, which requires application of some  

Four Faces of Creativity at School 345 generalizations 
After all, in practice, we infrequently come across the socalled flat  profile that is characterized by low internal variability, and this is  why even in case of complex creativity one can identify differences  in the intensity of individual elements of a creative potential.  Finally, even a relatively harmonious profile of complex creativity  can still be developed further. It is important to note, after all, that  even a very high level of creative potential does not yet warrant  eminent creative achievement. Transfer from potential to its  fulfillment in particular areas of life is the main task of those who  work with students characterized by this profile. It happens that  pupils characterized by high creative potential are not aware of  their own abilities, and for this reason they do not search for  occasions to develop them. In case of rebellious creativity, we are  dealing with pupils who have the potential for creative  functioning, but their low openness at a high level of  nonconformism is occasionally a source of overall demotivation  that pervades their functioning. They need someone who would  suggest to them the domain where they could grow, or who would  indicate a challenging problem for them to solve. Of course, this  person can be a teacher, although this task is not at all easy. The  key to success may be to understand the causes of the pupils lack  of motivation and openness that blocks their desire to act.  Ordinarily, these causes are lack of self-confidence andor lack of  goals. Pupils who lack self-confidence usually focus on what they  would like to do rather than what they have already achieved.  Frequently, low social competencies result from this lack of  confidence. Another reason for forsaking creative activities may  be the fear of failure, which could seriously tarnish the image of  independent individuals. This is why we think that it is worth to  begin working with these pupils from building elements of  creative identity. Sometimes, it is enough to indicate the current  results of their creative activities and emphasize their value, costeffectiveness, and benefits. However, activities that aim at  realizing the potential of these pupils are usually a long process of  building appropriate motivational orientations it is unfortunately  usually longer than stimulation of the development of the  cognitive aspects of creativity. Working with pupils characterized  by the subordinate creativity profile with high level of  conformism, teachers should emphasize the element of being  creatively against, which includes alternative views and courage  of proposing changes. It is of course not about encouraging  destructive resistance, but reformist discord that expresses itself  in autonomy, ability to make independent decisions, and sense of  agency. This is where another question arises, however: How to  encourage subordinate pupils to question  the status quo? 
Apparently, it is worth to attract their attention to issues they find  important and worth getting involved in. Subjective importance of  the confronted problem may alleviate their internal emphasis of  acceptance and obedient acceptance and, consequently,  encourage a creative search for changes. It is often also worth to  impose on them the role of group leaders in certain tasks in order  to weaken their conformism and warm them up to taking risky  decisions. Certainly, sensing the right moment to change the  support strategy and support progressive expansion of the space  for their independence in such a way that their developing  independence aims at posing questions and discovering new  problems is the most difficult thing while working with pupils  characterized by subordinate creativity.  Unit 2   Needs and Benefits  of  Creativity  in  Education 

Creativity and Technology in Twenty-First Century Education  Given the digital world in which education is increasingly situated,  there has been much consideration of what teachers need to know  to use technology effectively in the classroom, and the  competencies needed to develop digitally-fluent, creative students  Mishra and Mehta 2017. This is partly due to what scholars refer  to as an important emergent relationship between creativity and  technology, and the apparent connection between innovation and  digital technologies Mishra and Deep-Play Research Group 2012.  Unquestionably, the effects of globalization and digital technology  advancement in our world have an impact on how humans now  live, work, think, communicate and create Zhao 2012. Digital  tools, digital devices and applications are affording a new world of  opportunities in which people can imagine, make and share in  creative ways Zhao 2012. As knowledge bases expand and our  world becomes more complex, we need creative thinking to  address twenty-first century problems Florida 2014. Amid the  shifting context of globalization and rapid digital change,  creativity becomes that much more necessary in contemporary  society. It also becomes increasingly vital in discussions of  learning, particularly in technology-rich contexts as described by  Henriksen et al. 2016. Yet before the field of education can  address the complex relationship between creativity and  technology, it must consider how creativity can be enacted in  classroom settings and student learning experiences. This is  because, despite the rhetoric about the importance of supporting  creativity in education Runco 2014 scholars have noted that  school systems still function in traditional ways, with rigid  boundary  lines  between  subjects,  linear  single-answer  assessments, and restrictive practices for students and teachers  Collins and Halverson 2018. These constraints emerge largely 
due to broader policy goals that define what ought to be in the  curriculum, and how this curriculum is to be instantiated. In this  context that it becomes imperative to consider educational  policies across the globe. Before delving into national educational  policies, we examine some of the benefits and challenges of  infusing creativity in education. 

The Value of Creativity  In Education and Beyond Creativity is closely connected not only  with the artistic world and the creation of products, but also with  science, engineering, innovative thinking and problem-solving.  Creative people are increasingly demanded in the labor market  Ambrose 2017. Companies 412 D. Henriksen et al. 1 3 and  entrepreneurs are cognizant that the key to success is an ability to  create new knowledge ahour 2016. Education has a pivotal role  in fostering creativity and creative practices, and thus the skills  needed to create new knowledge. Indeed, schools and initial  education play a key role in fostering and developing peoples  creative and innovative capacities for further learning and their  working lives Cachia et al. 2010, p. 5. Creativity is central to  societal progress and the formation of new knowledgethus it is  necessary for schools to pay attention to the construct. According  to Loveless: Education systems in the twenty-first century are  having to adapt to the changes, aspirations and anxieties about the  role of creativity in our wider society, not only in realising  personal learning potential in an enriching curriculum, but also in  raising achievement, skill and talent for economic innovation and  wealth creation Loveless 2007, p. 5. Since the 1950s,  psychologists have empirically examined the concept of human  creativity Plucker et  al. 2004. Research has demonstrated  substantial  and  lifelong  intellectual,  educational  and  developmental advantages associated with creative thinking  Torrance 1995; Blicblau and Steiner 1998. Educational  psychologists and researchers have noted strong positive  correlations between creativity and life outcomes, including life  success Torrance 1995, leadership in the workplace Williams  2002,  healthy  psychological  functioning,  and  strong  intellectualemotional growth Runco 1997. Maslow 1962 and  Rogers 1976 noted the overall beneficial impact that creativity  has upon human development, mental health and selfactualization. In any of these studies done through the latter part  of the twentieth century, creativity was viewed as a kind of  thinking skill or habit of mindwhereas in earlier history it had  often been thought of as an inherent talentor trait for special and  gifted people. In viewing it as a thinking skill, it becomes 
more accessible through learning, growth and change. Creativity  is recognized as one of the most coveted psychological qualities;  yet it is often misperceived as an inherent trait limited to unique  individuals Sternberg and Lubart 1991. This view has created a  tension: educators recognize the importance of creativity but are  unclear if or how it could be facilitated in classrooms. The problem  of concrete implementation of creativity is at odds with the  conviction across educational discourse that creative thinking is  important Sawyer 2015. The international implementation of  technologies in educational settings may be a way of grounding  creativity in practice or could provide a tangible mechanism for  fostering its development. However, there is comparatively little  scholarship that has explored the complex relationship between  technology and creativity, though some work has recently begun  to emphasize the connection Henriksen et al. 2016. This  connection between creativity and technology may have stemmed  in part from changes in the economy and workforce, which has  shifted dramatically in the last 50 years, due to accelerating shifts  in digitization and mechanization. Specifically, more of the  workforce has shifted from lower-skilled labor or manual jobs, to  what Davenport 2005 referred to as knowledge work. Florida  2014 has spoken of this shift, warning the education and  management sectors to avoid class divides between creative and  non-creative knowledge workers. Given these new trends in the  labor force, he notes that, the only way forward is to make all jobs  creative jobs, infusingevery form of human endeavour with  creativity and human potential Florida 2014, xiv. In other  words, workers must not only develop knowledge-based skills,  but also embody creative practices in work Creativity  and Technology in Education: An International 413 1 3  situations. However, it is not clear that there is any consensus on  what these changes mean in the realities of policy and practice in  work places, industry and in education. 

Results  While creativity has become a core issue for twenty-first century  teaching and learning, it is still not clear what this means for the  field of educationin policy, and therefore in practice. Our review  of the literature has highlighted both the essential nature of  creative thinking across contexts Runco 2014, as well as the illdefined and ill-structured nature of creativity Runco and Jaeger  2012. The tension faced by the field of education lies in how to  navigate this conflict between the needs of policy and the nature  of creativity. In our review of six national contexts, this broader 
tension also becomes clear, though it shows up differently in  different spaces. We have noted how in some cases, curricula or  policy meet this ill-structured dilemma with silencesby not  defining it or sometimes not even mentioning it. This may lead to  problems for practitioners, who seek to be guided by policy or who  might benefit from clarity in order to instantiate a complex  construct such as creativity in classrooms. Another challenge may  be to overcome pre-existing traditions and cultures, which  sometimes involve practices that are antithetical to creativity, yet  are endemic in many schools. Thus, even for nations that manage  to describe creativity within policy, such as in the case of Australia,  there may be problems in practice, if it goes against traditional,  ingrained structures. The implication is worse, of course, for  nations such as the US, which fails to position creativity within the  curriculum an issue further reinforced by testing regimes that  exclude, ignore or devalue it Au 2011. Across the six contexts  represented here, there is also not a great deal of clarity around  how creativity can be a part of teacher capabilitiespartly  because of a lack of consistency across national contexts in how it  is approached, and perhaps partly because of the complex nature  of creativity and the definitional openness inherent in the  construct. Teaching in and of itself happens in a complex space,  where they need a blend of both flexibility and support for creative  practice. Without a clear idea of the goal of creativity in policy, it is  Creativity and Technology in Education: An International 421 1  3 difficult to cultivate it in teachers, yet teachers are essential to  infusing it into practice Hall and Thomson 2005. Moreover,  while much educational scholarship and rhetoric has discussed  and  described  the  relationship  between  creativity  and  technologies in learning Malhotra et  al. 2015, there is still little  direct connection between these in policy. They are sometimes  mentioned or noted together, but not oftenand while there is a  sense of the possibilities in these spaces, this is often not  articulated in policy. While this challenge of integrating creativity  in policy and curriculum is inherent to this line of work, based on  the complexity and subjectivity of the construct, it is not  insurmountable. In fact, many of the major thinking, teaching and  learning constructs that most education policy deals withfrom  literacy to scientific thinking and moreare concepts that have  been and in some cases, still are contested, subjective and  changeable. Yet over time they have still become part of curricula  and policy in clear and practicable ways, which has often  happened via much debate, discussion, and examination Bowe  et al. 2017. Even with respect to the current limits of creativity in  education, some nations have taken some key initial steps to 
integrate it. We suggest that through affording creativity the time  and space for extensive and serious policy discussions, creative  twenty-first century education may become as much as part of  policy as it already is in the rhetoric. References Amabile, T. M.  1996. Creativity in context. Boulder: Westview Press Harper  Collins Publish  Unit 3  Pandemics Role 

Teachers have been unable to use all learning models during the  COVID-19 pandemic because distance has limited interactions  with students. Therefore, creativity is needed to take advantage of  different learning models to deal with conditions during the  COVID-19 epidemic, such as blended learning. The limited use of  face-to-face conventional models is replaced by online learning  Van Bruggen, 2005. Teaching creativity during the COVID-19  pandemic will increase students' motivation to learn Favale et al.,  2020. Creativity also impacts learning achievement and has a  direct or indirect effect on improving the quality of education.  However, given the presencee of students with varied skills, the  learning process requires that teachers uses' methods, time,  material simplification creatively generate motivation, process  quality, and highquality learning outcomes. Although teachers can  provide teaching creativity, a qualified teacher cannot be formed  just like that. Developing creativity and use creative methods  requires a long series of processes. For example, even though you  already have adequate educational qualifications as a teacher, you  need additional experience, skills, and knowledge. Training is one  of the most common methods, but proper training requires good  management to achieve a good result. Furthermore, only practical  training will produce a high-quality teacher and ultimately  stimulate good teaching creativity Thomas  Cheese, 2005.  Teaching creativity for teachers is an essential part of the teaching  and learning process Dehaan, 2009. Creativity is a necessary  aspect of human development Sternberg, 2003. Therefore, the  creativity model that teachers are applying in teaching and  learning activities, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic, is an  interesting and necessary topic. Not all teachers during the COVID19 pandemic have managed distance learning well Daniel, 2020.  This happens because many teachers have limitations in the use of  information technology. This research articulates some of, the  advantages and disadvantages of learning practices. As a result,  teachers will be better able to evaluate their methods to improve  teaching and learning process activities. This study aims to reveal  a series of processes that teachers carried and their policies. This  study explores the relationship between training management,  training efficiency, teacher quality, and teaching creativity, during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Although much research on teacher  performance training has been done, training management and  teacher quality and their relationships to training efficiency are  lacking. This research helps to fill this gap. Literature Review  Teaching Creativity In theory, teachers must be well-versed in the  topic of teaching imagination. Creativity is transforming an  existing definition into a new one, for example, when two old  reports have been merged to form a new meaning Livingston,  2010. Creativity is the product of interactions between  individuals and their surroundings, the ability to create new  combinations based on data, details, or elements that already exist  or are previously established, namely all a person's life  experiences and knowledge. The term "teaching" refers to  managing and organizing the surrounding environment to grow  and promote the teaching and learning process. There are two  phases to the teaching process Dehaan, 2009. First, the teaching  process is carried out to establish students' learning opportunities  by using the environment as a supporting factor. Second, learning  conditions are selected such that the teacher's guided teaching  actions can achieve the intended learning objectives. Teaching  innovation is the ability to develop a mixture that creates a new  idea of a deliberate process to provide students with the  opportunity for the learning process to take place in conjunction  with the objectives that have been established. Teacher teaching  innovation is a competency playing an essential role in achieving  the desired learning effectiveness based on the learning goals and  school curriculum. Learning achievement is the product of a  teacher-managed method of transforming the learning treatment.  Teachers, through their creativity, provide students with learning  treatment in the form of changing instructional materials,  behaviors, personality, discipline, and exemplary behavior  Simonton, 2012. The more skilled and imaginative the teacher is  in providing learning treatment, the better the results will be. On  the other hand, the less professional and creative the teacher is,  the worse the results will be. A creative teacher holds the following  qualities Jeffrey  Craft, 2004. These are fluency, which is the  capacity to produce many thoughts, answers, and problem-solving  solutions from one's mind, as well as provide multiple suggestions  for doing different things. 2 adaptability, i.e., the ability to address  problems using various methods, consider multiple solutions, and  adjust one's way of thinking. 3 originality, which is the ability to  give birth to new and creative expressions, think of unusual ways  to convey oneself and combine parts or components, and 4 
elaboration, or the ability to create an idea or product and detail  an object, idea, or circumstance to make it enjoyable.  Best practices  1. Entering  Caravaggio's  paintings  Entering Caravaggio's paintings, Emanuela Pulvirenti, a  successful Art teacher and blogger, had her students interpret no  less than ten Caravaggio paintings:   1. Vocation of St. Matthew,   2. David,   3. Deposition,   4. Narcissus,   5. Supper at Emmaus,  6. Incredulity of St. Thomas,   7. Judith and Holofernes,   8. The Bares,   9. Medusa,  10. Boy Bitten by a Lizard. 

The series of pupils' invasions inside the most famous paintings in  art history continues.  I will not dwell on the didactic effectiveness of this kind of activity  extremely playful but also educational to go straight to the story  of the experiment.  There were only six students but they lent themselves to  interpreting as many as ten paintings: Vocation of St. Matthew,  David, Deposition, Narcissus, Supper at Emmaus, Incredulity of St.  Thomas, Judith and Holofernes, The Marians, Medusa, and Boy  Bitten by a Lizard. 

The extreme realism of the images and the relative simplicity of  the postures made the posing much easier than previous living  paintings. 

The presence in the room of windows placed only on the short side  also simplified the creation of Caravaggio's typical cutting light.  Light that generally comes from our left, except in the case of the  Vocation of St. Matthew where the illumination is due to a source  placed on the right, outside the frame.  The first work reinterpreted is a large canvas made by Caravaggio  at the turn of the 1600s along with two others that narrate the  vocation, activity, and martyrdom of St. Matthew. It is in the  Contarelli Chapel at the Church of San Luigi dei Francesi, Rome,  and shows Christ's entry into a sort of tavern where the tax  collector Matthew counts denarii with other men.  Jesus' hand, a tribute to Michelangelo's Creation, enters the cone  of light to make the future apostle's call more imperious. 

As in all the canvases of Michelangelo Merisi called Caravaggio  after the name country of his parents, in the province of Bergamo,  light plays a key role. Contrasting with the thickest darkness, it  strikes and sculpts figures, gestures and expressions, creating  particularly theatrical effects.  In David with the Head of Goliath 1610 Caravaggio, now in the  grip of extreme pessimism, goes so far as to portray himself in the  severed head in the hands of the young biblical hero.  The scene is truly macabre: the giant's head is dripping blood from  his neck and his face still looks alive and astonished.  Also extremely theatrical, fully in keeping with the spirit of the  Baroque, is the Deposition of Christ 1604.  A very dynamic composition with a diagonal cut reinforces the  drama of the scene. The humanity of each character can be  unleashed without any idealization as was the case in the  Renaissance.  Caravaggio shows without veils the weeping, despair, and even the  varicose veins in the ankle of the man holding Christ's legs.  The pathos was a bit lost in my students' staging because, as is  often the case, the embarrassment of being photographed made  them laugh.to appreciate it look for the original or, even better,  go see it at the Vatican Museums. It is one of the most evocative  canvases I have ever seen!  But Caravaggio did not deal only with biblical subjects. Mythology,  in fact, also offered interesting cues to express the drama of our  existence.  In the Narcissus 1599 only the beautiful young man appears as  he is mirrored in the water looking spellbound at his reflected  figure. 
With a religious theme is again the Supper at Emmaus 1601. We  have reproduced the first version, the one currently on display at  the National Gallery in London.  The setting, still shrouded in semi-darkness, is slightly brightened  by a side beam of light that casts the shadow of the man standing  next to Christ. The emotion is obvious: the two disciples  recognized Jesus who had already risen from the act of blessing  the bread and express their immense astonishment one in the jerk  from his chair and the other in the sudden opening of his arms.  The same tension is felt in the Incredulity of St. Thomas 1600.  Again the painter does not spare us the crudest details such as that  finger of the skeptical apostle that Jesus introduces into the cut on  his side to induce him to believe in his resurrection.  Evident in these details is the culture of the Counter-Reformation,  which asked art to persuade heretics by arousing strong emotions.  With the Council of Trent mid-16th century painters were  suggested to depict the figure of Christ "afflicted, bleeding, vilified,  with his skin torn, wounded, deformed, pale and unpleasing to the  eye."  In short, he had to arouse pity and emotion and touch the deepest  chords of the human soul.  To paint Judith and Holofernes 1599 Caravaggio was inspired by  one of his lovers, a prostitute. This is not the first time the painter  chose his models from the "rejects" of society. For him it is a way  to be as real as possible, meaning by this term the opposite of ideal  and academic.  Here the light is also very real, always coming from the left, causing  a very elegant purple drape to emerge from the shadows, almost a  curtain raised to show us the spectacle of death live!  It is this kind of light that my students have tried to recreate in the  Caravaggesque pictures exercise.  Some pictures, however, are neither mythological nor religiously  themed. This is the case with the so-called "genre scenes,"  paintings in which a moment of everyday life is depicted.  In The Cheaters 1594 the artist portrays three people showing,  through the play of glances, all the subterfuge that is taking place  unbeknownst to the player on the left.  Mythological again is the figure of Medusa 1598 depicted, like  Goliath's head, decapitated and with an expression full of horror.  Snakes coil around her head biting each other and adding yet  another gruesome element to the image.  Finally, we also took up Boy Bitten by a Lizard 1993. A seemingly  ironic work, a minor incident in which, however, emotions and  expressions of great intensity are unleashed. 
As in Supper in Emmaus, a small still life, a masterpiece within a  masterpiece, is present here on the table. The glass vase with the  reflections, transparency and refraction of water, the somewhat  wilted flower reminding us of the transience of beauty, and the  fruit loosely arranged on the shelf are a true work of art and  virtuosity that only a great master could leave us with. 

Best Practice 2 

Experimentation of the Teaching Source Change your glasses  YouTube  Link:  https:www.youtube.comwatch?v762W771rmuY 

is  an  experiment taken in the framework of the European Project  KeyCode. This project is about teaching and learning the practice  of empathy, view as a colelction of European values, by creative  ways.   The experimentation found below has been carried out in May  2021 at the Arnolfo di Cambio School, Colle Val dElsa, Tuscany  Italy.  

https:keycode.pixel-online.orgPGshortFilmssch.php?idasch22  

Description of the experience   The lesson has been developed into two different parts: an  introduction and the final works presentation. The first lesson  started with a brainstorming activity: the teachers displayed  social and environmental contexts which are apparently neutral,  but that can assume a different value from a different point of  view. In particular we showed some images a staircase, a bench,  a beach etc and the participants matched them with situations  linked to disadvantaged people: the staircase has become a  mobility barrier for a disabled, the bench a home for a homeless  person, the beach a hostile place for those with a different body.  From these inputs, the students created a story to tell and a  drawing, or they chose a symbolic image. Many students 
identified with a homeless person, others faced the theme of  immigration and a small number of students told stories about  disability and mobility barriers. A girl told the suffering of a  bullied person, choosing her bedroom as the symbolic image. The  activity produced a great emotional impact; a very meaningful  moment has been represented by the story of the bullied girl, a  closer topic to the students sensitivity  and background.   In every composition imagination and personal experiences have  been combined by the students who have written realistic  stories, full of sensitivity and deep reflections. The final feedback  shows the positive impact of this kind of activity.  

This source has been adapted in order to suit the students needs.  In particular, teachers proposed students themes close to their  sensitivity and knowledge. The activity has confirmed the pupils  necessity to express their reflections, thoughts and emotions  about familiar situations or about events they have been touched  by.   This teaching source is easy and challenging. Its a good  opportunity to interrupt the routine of the school week.  Quiz of the module  References 

1. International Journal of Learning  Development,  ISSN  2164-4063 2012, Vol. 2, No. 4  2. Creativity in Schools, Porandokht Fazelian a , Saber Azimi  b, World Conference on Psychology and Sociology  2012  Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 82  2013   719  723 1877-0428  2013 Published by Elsevier Ltd. ,  South Africa. doi: 10.1016j.sbspro.2013.06.335  3. "Four faces of creativity at school." , Karwowski, Maciej,  et al. , Nurturing creativity in the classroom 2016: 337354.  4. Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership  AITSL. n.d. Retrieved May 27, 2018 from the Australian  Institute for Teaching and School Leadership: https  :www.aitsl .edu.au.   5. Beghetto, R. A.,  Kaufman, J. C. 2013. Fundamentals of  creativity. Educational Leadership, 705, 1015.   6. Blicblau, A. S.,  Steiner, J. M. 1998. Fostering creativity  through engineering projects. European Journal of  Engineering Education, 231, 5565.  
7. Bowe, R., Ball, S. J.,  Gold, A. 2017. Reforming education  and changing schools: Case studies in policy sociology Vol.  10. New York: Routledge.   8. Cachia, R., Ferrari, A., Ala-Mutka, K.,  Punie, Y. 2010.  Creative learning and innovative teaching. Final report on  the study on creativity and innovation in education in the  EU member states. JRC 62370. European Union, 2010.  Retrieved  from  http:www.euros  faire  .prd.fr7pcdoc13007 02480 jrc62 370 learn ingteach  ing2010.pdf. 7 Apr 2018.   9. Caena, F. 2014. Teacher competence frameworks in  Europe:  Policy-as-discourse  and  policy-as-practice.  European Journal of Education, 493, 311331.   10. Collins, A.,  Halverson, R. 2018. Rethinking education in  the age of technology: The digital revolution and schooling  in America. New York City: Teachers College Press.   11. Constantine the Philosopher University in Nitra. n.d.  Retrieved from https :www.pf.ukf.skskveda-avysku m2proje kty24-veda-a-vysku mveda-a-vysku m-2308pc-cp. 7 Apr 2018  12. Henriksen, Danah, et al. "Creativity and technology in  education: An international perspective." Technology,  Knowledge and Learning 23.3 2018: 409-424  13. Create  Teaching  Creativity  through  Training  Management, Effectiveness Training, and Teacher  Quality in the Covid-19 Pandemic Hasmin Tamsah1 and  Jamaluddin Bata Ilyas, Journal of Ethnic and Cultural  Studies  2021,  Vol.  8,  No.  4,  18-35  http:dx.doi.org10.29333ejecs800  14. http:www.didatticarte.itBlog?p2766   15. https:www.coe.intenwebcompasschange-yourglasses 

Creativity methods that teachers use to enhance the effectiveness of  teaching? Prios 

Module 4  1.5 hours  Content 

Unit 1   Introduc tion: 

A View on creativity in school-the missing ingredient  Creativity isnt always something that just happens. It can take quite a bit of work  to nurture, grow, and develop creativity, even for those who are immersed in creative  and dynamic fields.  This module is created for teachers who wish to improve their knowledge of  creativity methods through a combination of workshop examples, project-based  work, field projects and "talking to people" situations. For teachers who want to  expand their teaching repertoire and  like to learn new strategies for increasing the  creativity of students. 

Learning objectives:  1.Train teacherseducators in the use of new methods and tools related to creativity;  2. Make teachers more creativity literate and free to use new methods;  3. Introduce creativity techniques for bigger engagement;  4.Master the fundamentals and take the critical further steps towards a more creative  classroom. 

Expected Results:   1. Teachers gain self-esteem and confidence in their work.  2. Adding Creativity methods as an extra tool in lessons   3. Perceiving an actual processes which are the source of the stimulation  creativity 

Unit 2   Traditio nal  Creativit y  Methods  used  What covers?:  

Traditional methods in school teaching are essential to begin acquiring  knowledge or just to compare them to the new ways of learning. They include:  1. Teacher-centered method the teacher in the classroom presents the new  lesson without giving an opportunity to students to say their opinions and to  show their knowledge.  2. Textbook-based education teachers only use the textbook to teach.  3. Classroom-centered method the room in the school building is the place  where the lesson takes place.  4. Lecture it is a method which gives a leading role to the teacher.  5. Discussion teachers control students during their talking and sharing  opinions about the topic. 

CREATIVE ACTIVITIES  These tips offer up some fun and interesting ways to explore lessons creatively in  the classroom.  BRAINSTORM.  Whether you work on it alone or with others, brainstorming can be a great way to  get your creative juices flowing. Let your mind roam and dont expect every idea to  be a winner.  USE  TECHNOLOGY.  Technology is an amazing tool for boosting creativity. It can be used to find ideas, 
brainstorm, and even create final products. The possibilities are endless, so dont  count it out when working on creativity.  USE  PUZZLES  AND  GAMES.  When students are having fun, they often forget theyre learning. Puzzles and games  can challenge them to think creatively but also provide entertainment that will make  them more motivated to keep learning and working.  USE  MIND-MAPS.  Mind maps can help students to use a central idea and expand creatively on it.  ROLE  PLAY.  Being able to think how another person would think or react is a great way to get the  mind working and being creative.  BUILD  A  STORYBOARD.  Story boarding asks students to use their imaginations to tell a story in pictures, a  form of communication they may not use every day.  RETHINK  FAILURES.  Sometimes, an idea that didnt pan out can be the best place to start over. Help  students to return to failed ideas and figure out ways to retool and repurpose what  they already have.  FLIP  IT  AND  REVERSE  IT.  Turning a situation around can be an interesting way to keep students on their toes.  It will show them multiple viewpoints and require some creative thinking.  CONNECT  IDEAS.  Everything your students learn is connected in some way. Help them to make  connections between subjects and to find creative links in their knowledge.  LET  KIDS  BUILD  AND  INNOVATE.  Whats more creative than inventing? Let students get hands-on with materials and  ask them to come up with a creative solution to a problem you pose.  ASK  STUDENTS  TO  SOLVE  REAL-WORLD  PROBLEMS.  A lot of the things students learn in school seem useless to them, which can sap their  interest. Combat that problem by asking them to use what they know to solve realworld problems.  TELL  STORIES.  Everything becomes more interesting when a story is attached to it. Even math can  be related to a story if you get creative.  INVOLVE  ALL  THE  SENSES.  Learning can be a multisensory experience when you embrace everything from  touch, to taste, to smell in your lessons.  MAKE  LESSONS  INTERACTIVE.  Its hard for students to get bored when theyre taking an active part in a lecture.  Hands-on activities that provide a lot of feedback can be a great way to inspire.  SHOW  KIDS  THE  NEXT  STEPS.  Help students to actually follow through on their creative ideas by showing them  how to develop them into products they can be proud of.  Working with creative materials is a strong motivator for many children.  Additionally, research has proven that you can enhance children's intelligence  through specific, creative activities. 
Example scenarios for  promoting creativity:  

1. IMAGE-WISE 

Spatial intelligence: Activities in which children must use their abilities to perceive,  recognize and express themselves within the spatial, real world.  Enhanced by activities in which children must use their abilities to perceive,  recognize and express themselves within the spatial, real world.  This happens through working with clay modelling, mosaics, candle-making,  molding, making sweets, plaster molding and papier-mch.  2. LIFE-WISE 

Existential intelligence: Activities in which children must use their abilities to  perceive, recognize and express themselves within the spatial, real world.  Enhanced by activities in which children must use their abilities to perceive,  recognize and express themselves within the spatial, real world.  This happens through working with clay modelling, mosaics, candle-making,  molding, making sweets, plaster molding and papier-mch.  3.BODY-WISE 

Physical-kinaesthetic intelligence: Activities in which children must use their body  and muscle strength to express ideas and feelings.  Enhanced by activities in which children must use their physiognomy, physical  strength and body to express ideas and feelings.   This happens through Finger-painting, making feet and hand prints, painting and  decorating partitions and scenery, making drawings and designs on large surfaces,  producing large collages and sculptures and when they use the implements and tools.  4.GROUP-WISE 

Interpersonal intelligence: Activities in which children must use their abilities to  distinguish between different emotions in other people, and activities which require  cooperation in order to succeed.   This is enhanced by activities in which children must use their abilities to distinguish  moods and emotions in other people and to learn to work together. This happens  through using different materials and working together to produce images. Working  together to make gifts for each other and help and narrate about each other's ideas  and desires. 

Unit 3  What covers?:  
New  applicab le  methods 

1. Breaking old thinking patterns.  2. Making new connections.  3. Getting fresh perspectives.  We'll look at each of these elements in turn. Then, we'll outline five ways to foster  the best environment for creative thinking to flourish. 

Brainstorming  probably one of the most popular creative techniques 

This is the most obvious creative method, and an endless whiteboard is just perfect  for it. The basis of brainstorming is generating ideas in a group situation based on  the principle of suspending judgment  a principle which scientific research has  proved to be highly productive in individual effort as well as group effort. 

Mood boards  Mood board is a type of collage that may consist of images, text, videos and samples  of objects in a composition of the choice of the mood board creator. You can use  Mood boards. BUT it's vital to make sure that your mood board is more than a  confusing collage of disparate ideas. It should be a cohesive, visually attractive  expression that makes your vision clear.  

Random Input  Random Input creativity method encourages your imagination skills to create  different perspectives and new angles on your idea or the problem you are facing. It  is by far the simplest of all creativity methods and is widely used by people who  need to create new ideas for example, for new projects.  https:miro.comtemplatesrandom-words  

Metaphorical thinking  A metaphor is a new creativity method which connects two universes of meaning.  Examples: Food chain or flow of time. Metaphorical thinking is based on Similarity.  Our mind tends to look for similarities. A road map is a model or metaphor of reality  and useful for explaining things.  Imaging within another conceptual frame can help, eg. the visual images of spring  which inspired Vivaldis Prima Vera, the dream that led to Berliozs Symphonie  Fantastique, the art exhibition which Mussorsgy illustrated in Pictures at an  Exhibition, and so on.  Put everything that you may need on the board  words, images, videos, icons, etc.  to help you create something new and exciting.   

Brain shifter  Brain shifter is one of the creativity methods that is similar to mind mapping, but  you should act as if you were someone else. The purpose is to create new  engagements and ideas that you never thought about before. Get into character by  changing your mindset and try to think like another person. E.g imagine that you are  a doctor, a lawyer, a kid or why not a Batman? Start to write your ideas on post-its,  thinking as your superhero. If you use the method in a group, you can give the  roles to each other before the session.  After the session is finished, vote for the best ideas. 
Unit 4  Technol ogys  role  to  increase  creativit y   What covers?:  

1.Why learners these days are more attracted to video games than books?  2.How creativity poured into technology   makes an  exciting  engaging ?  3.Understanding  technology as full potential to boost creativity  

Technology has made it a lot easier to bring creative minds and ideas closer and take  those ideas further at the same time.  Miro is a great tool for brainstorming and creative projects. Endless whiteboard and  a set of tools allow you to generate ideas for thousands of different projects  from  travelling to engineering. In this post, we collected popular creative techniques you  can easily use in Miro, and prepared some tips  tricks for you.  The thing that many teachers hate the most, technology, can be excellent in helping  students express their creativity. Heres how: 

Creative Thinking Blogs  Blogs are an excellent tool for students to develop their writing and creative thinking  skills. They allow learners to post whatever they want, comment on other learners  material, and share them.   Topics can be discussed openly, which provides a space to vent and discuss their  interests without worrying about grammatical errors or grading.  Audio and Visual Tools  There are plenty of easy-to-use tutorial and video creation tools that teachers and  learners can use in the classroom. They can be used by students to create their own  videos and share them with the class, providing an excellent opportunity for them to  develop creativity.   Their creations can even spark class discussions about the material they are learning.  These videos can be posted to the creative thinking blog mentioned above so that  learners from other classes can see and discuss them with one another.   Some video tools include Camstudio and Jing.   Why is Student Creativity Important?  Without creativity, kids will turn into mindless drones that do as they are told  without really thinking for themselves. When you foster creativity in your child,  youre preparing them for the real world. There isnt going to be someone guiding  them for their whole life, and theyll need to be able to think creatively about a lot  of things.   Creativity is also essential in the classroom since the school system itself has  contributed to the decay of creativity in students. Specific skills and subjects are  prioritized over others, making children robotic and systematic in their thinking,  rather than autonomous and capable of critical thinking.   Wrapping Up  Creativity is an essential skill that every learner needs, and what better way to  develop such a necessary skill than to use the thing that pretty much every kid loves   technology. We hope that youve been inspired to incorporate tech into your class,  rather than resist it. 
Unit 5  Outdoor  and  indoor  methods  to apply  to  empowe r  creativit y   What covers?:  

1. Train and improve the teacherseducators skills and competencies through  creative indoor and outdoor activities.  2.New insights and ideas on how to use teaching and learning indoor and  outdoor, to improve students' creativity   3. How to improve cooperation between teachers of different subjects for  greater students' motivation. 

In modern psychology, there are different ways to accept information:   Some students have a photographic memory, others remember facts while listening  to them. Other ways involve learning through doing. We must not underestimate that  perception in order to teach students effectively.  1. Fieldwork Students learn how to conduct research.  2. Public speaking participating in conferences, seminars.  3. Hike and learn hiking in the mountains and learning facts about nature.  4. Museum-based learning while visiting museums, students learn facts about  historical events, nature, minerals, etc.  5. DIY Learning through producing something.  Spending time in nature and the natural light can improve your mood and reduce  stress and depression. Engaging in physical activity produces similar benefits and  often times relaxes and cheers people up. Your self-esteem will improve. Outdoor  exercise stimulates all five senses in a way that indoor activities cannot.Indoor  activities are important to inspire creativity and to have some No-screen fun during  school. 

Bake and decorate  You as a teacher could spend time indoor to pass on your baking skills to your  students. Whipped cream, colorful sprinkles and yummy cookie dough can  definitely entice your students creativity. 

Tissue Box Monster 

If you as a teacher would like to stimulate the creative senses of your students, you  can provide a craft area in your classroom. The tissue box monster is an indulging  indoor fun activity as the students must make best from some waste. 

Brain-sketching  To solve a specific problem, students make sketches and then pass evolving sketches  to their neighbors.  How: Students sit in a group of 6-8 around a table or in a circle. Questions or  problems should be well explained and understood by each student. Each participant 
privately makes one or more sketches and passes the sketch to the person on the right  when it is finished or when a brief set time has passed. Participants develop or  annotate the sketches passed to them, or use them to inspire new sketches which are  also passed in turn. 

Concept Mapping  Concept maps represent knowledge in graphic form. Networks consist of nods,  which represent concepts, and links, which represent relationships between  concepts. Concept maps can aid in generating ideas, designing complex structures,  or communicating complex ideas. Because they make explicit the integration of old  and new knowledge concept maps can help instructors assess students  understanding.  How: Create a focus question specifying the problem or issue the map should help  resolve. List the key concepts roughly 20-25 that apply to the area of knowledge.  Put the most general, inclusive concepts at the top of the list, and most specific at  the bottom. Build a hierarchical organization of the concepts, using post-its on a wall  or whiteboard, large sheets of paper, etc. Revision is a key element in concept  mapping, so participants need to be able to move concepts and reconstruct the map.  Seek cross links between concepts, adding linking words to the lines between  concepts.  Playing outdoors can help to boost students' creativity by giving them the ability to  create their own games with their own rules, as well as to create elaborate stories  and play make-believe within the framework of the surroundings that they have when children are outside, the toys and other distractions they have  

activities to learn about your own culture establishment of the country,  traditions and historical scarves, visits to museums. 

cultural performances symphony, ballet, opera, musical theater, plays,  etc. 

sporting events major league baseball, football, basketball etc. 

outdoor activities picnics, skiing, skating, kayaking, hiking, nature walks,  camping, amusement parks, zoo, etc. 

trips to other close cities   https:www.pinterest.comteachmamacreative-indoor-fun-activities-for-kids   Best  practices  suggestio ns 

One ready practice from a school:  Creative Clusters and BLAST arts programme  The Creative Ireland Programme is a culture-based, all of government initiative whic laces creativity at the centre of public policy, and is designed to promote individual ommunity and national wellbeing. BLAST and Creative Clusters are two of the key in chool initiatives developed and rolled out under Pillar 1  Creative Youth. I December, Government agreed to extend the Creative Ireland Programme to 2027. 
BLAST Bringing Live Arts to Students and Teachers aims to provide pupils in primar nd post-primary schools all over the country, time and the space to work with  rofessional artist trained within the Teacher Artist Partnership TAP scheme, o reative, imaginative and fun projects.  These innovative classes are designed and developed between the artist, teacher and th chool under the coordination of the Education Support Centres in Ireland ESCI etwork of 21 full-time education support centres.  For example: 

a music percussion programme in a DEIS school that has special classes. Th programmes focus is on three younger classes in a school along with specia classes. The programme will offer therapeutic and sensory benefits while als tying in with wider music education in the school, including allowing for  whole school music programme 

design of a school crest, using either or both of traditional art materials an technology. The hope is to include all students in the school and link in to it history, culture, heritage and ethos. The project will be documented through digital photography and the final product will appear on students propose new PE tops  Creative Clusters is a pilot initiative of the Department of Education, led by and i artnership with the 21 full-time education centres and funded through the School Excellence Fund. A Creative Cluster consists of between three and five school ollaborating on the design, implementation, evaluation and dissemination of an nnovative arts and creative learning project which supports them to address a commo ssue or challenge, identified by that cluster. For example: 

a cluster of five schools working on a theme entitled Create a play area. Al five schools are in the unique position that they cater for students with ASD and have either ASD units or are a dedicated special school. Through thi project they hope to broaden their students experiences of natural habitats an the natural world around them. They propose to create an interactive, tactil and creative outdoor play area within each school environment through th cooperative work between all the staff across the five schools 

three primary schools working together as a Creative Cluster whose theme i Cracking the Code. In forming a cluster, they aim to create a shared interes in coding between the three schools and seek to create games or activities in coding that the children can share with other classes in their school supportin critical thinking and problem-solving skills through creativity in coding  The Schools Excellence Fund is an initiative of the Department of Education t ncourage and recognise excellence and innovation in our schools. It is available t rimary and post-primary schools. 
"Bibliog raphy"  https:taxedu.campaign.europa.euenteacherscorner?pkcampaignGeneralTeachingpkkwdAd2pksourceGooglepk mediumSearch 

https:www.education.comlesson-plans?gclidEAIaIQobChMI58-gocnGgIVzuvtCh35QAxnEAAYAyAAEgISFDBwE 

https:www.campsinternational.comreal-worldstudies?gclidEAIaIQobChMI58-gocnGgIVzuvtCh35QAxnEAAYBCAAEgLv9DBwE 

https:www.goodhousekeeping.comlifeparentingg31677468educationcompanies-offering-subscriptions 

https:www.ixl.com?partnerbingadGroupSearch20-20General2020Exact2020USlesson20plansmsclkid9733643530f019f20e0c0709166a8490utms ourcebingutmmediumcpcutmcampaignSearch20-20General2020Exact2020USutmtermlesson20plansutmcontentlesson20plans  https:youtu.beGYWwjLGIJe0  https:youtu.beJMYnjK-8tYs  https:www.gov.ieenpress-release8a543-minister-foley-welcomes-hundreds-ofadditional-schools-to-creative-clusters-and-blast-arts-programme 

What Should Teachers, Students, Parents and School Boards Do To  Remove the Barriers to Creativity in Education Sultangazi Cumhuriyet  Anadolu Lisesi 

MODU LE 5   CONTENTS   Title:   What Should Teachers, Students, Parents and School Boards Do To Remove the  Barriers to Creativity in Education?  Target  group:  Students, Teachers, Parents, Principals, Organisations  Learnin g  To examine the perceived barriers to creativity among school students, and the roles of of  students, teachers, principals, parents and boards to overcome the these obstacles. 
Objectiv es:  U n it  1

Titl e:  The  Role  of  Tea cher s to  Fost er  Cre ativi ty  And  Ove rco me  Chal leng es  Topic title 1.1: Introduction  Teachers indeed have an important role to play in the development of creative learning  environments to foster the creativity of learners. They can do this through building positive  relationships, modelling creative behaviour, longer-term curriculum planning, striking a  balance between freedom and structure, allowing flexible use of space, understanding  learners needs and learning styles, creating opportunities for peer collaboration and  assessment, and effective use of resources. For this to happen, teachers need to have a  positive attitude towards creativity and feel confident about their own skills base.   However, this can be difficult if teachers encounter barriers such as a school culture that  hinders creativity, perceptions of a performativity culture, constraints of time and  resources for enhancing creativity, or lack of peer support. CPD was seen to be effective;  however little information is available in the literature of the content of CPD. Nevertheless,  it was found that CPD that gave teachers first-hand experience and raised awareness of the  impact of creativity were of benefit. Similarly, providing opportunities for reflection and  peer dialogue with colleagues and external partners were also seen to be effective.  External partnerships, especially with creative professionals, were seen to be beneficial as it  led to co-creation of knowledge and exploration of conceptualisations of creativity.  How teachers respond to their students ideas, views and suggestions during lessons can  also be expected to have an influence on the students subsequent effort and inclination in  coming up with new ideas, views and suggestions. Well-timed positive teacher responses  will naturally encourage students further efforts while, in contrast, premature and  especially negative teacher responses will discourage students from further creative 
exploration. In short, teachers are in a strategic position to foster creativity of their  students, if the teachers are able to and in a habit of demonstrating creativity fostering  behaviour in the day-to-day interaction with their students. The other factors that may help  to remove barriers are;  Topic title 1.2: Avoiding Rash Judgement  The teacher has the power to make or break a childs creativity. Teachers must refrain from  commenting or passing judgment on a piece of work a student has done without proper  observation. The teacher must also be wary of the language they use. Provide constructive  criticism only when necessary, and appreciate them when they do something good.  Topic title 1.3: Promoting Self-Evaluation  Rather than the teacher providing them their opinion on where the student might want to  improve, make an effort to ask the students what feel they need to improve upon on the  basis of their current work. This way, the student will learn to be self-critical, not so much  as to demean their own work, but looking through the lens of self-improvement. This is a  very powerful tool, not just when looking through the lens of art and creativity, but in all  practical aspects of life as well. 

Topic title 1.4: Soft Empowerment of Students  Soft empowerment refers to the empowerment of students not through direct  encouragement of the students but by making the students themselves say what they feel  worked best for them. This is a very powerful method because it instills confidence within  the students and at the same time, also helps them see what their strengths are and how  they can work on them to improve them.  Topic title 1.5: Conferring Autonomy onto Students  Giving students a sense of autonomy in the learning process gives them a sense of  responsibility regarding their own education, which in turn provides a feeling of wanting to  succeed. It is when someone is determined and focused that they use their full potential,  and in this case, the student will be motivated to do their best, which is when their most  creative ideas will come to the forefront. 

U n it  2  Titl e:  The  Role  of  Par ents  to  Fost er  Cre ativi ty  And  Ove rco me  Chal lang es  

Topic title 2.1: Introduction 

Topic title 2.1.1: Recognizing the Potential 

    The cognitive processes required to develop creative thinking skills are the  same   all  people, but some individulas are more creative than others. This differences seems  to related to the characteristics,  experiences,  knowledge,  attitudes and interests of  individuals.    According to Ornstein and Levine 2008 families are considered as the primary  socializing institution. Childrens tendencies are manipulated by the adults around them  Anning  Ring 2004; parents and teachers can enhance or impede childrens creativity.  Brzeziski 1993 claimed that parental beliefs have a great impact on childrens creative  skills. If parents recognize their childrens potential, they would contribute to the  development of these skills by register the child to the art classes, or encourage the childs  problem solving and problem finding labors more than usual.  Creative individuals are  thought to come from families that offering a suitable environment for the development of  mental abilities. 

Topic title 2.1.2: The Obstacles 

Although  parents  have  an  inevitable  role  to  encourage  childrens  creativity,  there  are   some  obstacles  that  impede  parents  to  contribute  to  their  childrens  creativity  growt h.  For  instance,  parents have little or no knowledge of the games, rhymes, toys, songs,  home  environment,  stories,  household  goods,  and  parental  attitudes  in  developing  childrens  creativity  Jayatilaka,   2010.  Moreover,  parents  and  teachers  find  it  difficult  to  notice  their  childrens  crea tivity.   Some   of   the   behaviors 

of 

creative 

people such   as   unconventionality,   impatience,   difficult   to   control,   inappropriateness, and  unusual viewpointare frowned upon by society Shapero 1991. Besides, parents and  teachers match negative behaviors such as disobedience, rebelliousness, with creativity.  Since  parents  and  teachers  want  to  bring  up  compliant,  obedient,  polite,  compassion ate  children,  they would ignore their childrens original ideas Brzeziski, 1993. The  questions should be asked that whether parents really want more creative children and  whether they are prepared to live with them. 

 First of all those misconceptions and negative attitudes of parents on creative thinking and  creative  people  should  changed  and  then  they  taught  their  roles  in  developing  creati vity.  The  parents  need  to  recognize  the  fact  that  education  not  occurs  only  in  the  cl assroom  anymore;  children can learn at home, in the street, shopping and so on. For that  reason, parents should learn to see each environment and situation as a learning opportunity  for  their  child.   To  achieve  this,  first,  parents  need  to  know  what  creative  thinking  is  and  then  learn  how  to  develop   creative  thinking skills. In addition, the interaction between teachers and parents has a great  influence  on  creating  an  effective  educational  environment  Sabanc,  2009  and  students  achievem ent  Esa,  Razzaq,  Yasak,    Omar,  2010;  Coleman,  2009.  Moreover,  if  their  parents   actively  participate  in  their education, students perform better Barton  Coley, 1992; Yan   Lin, 2005 

Topic title 2.2: Encouragement 

Parents can help children learn to think and solve problems in creative ways by giving them  the freedom to make mistakes and by respecting their ideas. This happens with greater  mobility and use of language through modeling and being allowed to experiment without  fearing failure. DeBord, K. 2005, suggest to the teachers and parents can encourage  creative thought simply by providing:   

Topic title 2.2.1: Choices Children who are given choices show more creativity than do  children who have all choices made for them.    Topic title 2.2.2: Stimulation Physical environments designed to stimulate the senses can  enhance creative problem solving.  Topic title 2.2.3: Time for play and fantasy Dramatic play just before engaging in problemsolving tasks can lead to more creative thought.    Topic title 2.2.4: The joining together of two or more irrelevant elements, called synectics,  can lead to creative answers. The process of synectics can take many forms: Independence  with reasonable limits, exposure to a diverse community, brainstorming sessions, place a  child in a different time and place, encouragement, honest critiques, an environment where  there is no one right answer for every problem 

Topic title 2.2: Involvement  The following of the steps to parent involvement in developing childrens creativity that  adapted from Epstein, et al. 2009 there are six types of involvement:   

Topic title 2.3.1. Parenting: help for families establish home environment to support  children's creativity. Sternberg 2010, argues that The most powerful way to develop  creativity in your students is to be a role model.  Children develop creativity not when you  tell them to, but when you show them, designate a space for creating, and keep it simple.  

Topic title 2.3.2. Communicating: design effective forms of school-to-home and home-toschool communications about school progress, and their children's creativity progress.; as  clear information on choosing schools or courses, programs, and activities within and beyond  school. Connect what your child learns to everyday life.  

Topic title 2.3.3. Volunteering: recruit and organize parent help and support; as support  school programs and students activities in anyway, anyplace, and anytime.  

 Topic title 2.3.4.  Learning at home: provide information and ideas to families about how  to help children at home and other curriculum-related activities, decisions, and planning.  Help your child take charge of his learning, dont over-schedule your child, keep TV to a  minimum, down time, stress kills creativity, and help your children activate their senses, and  take the time for your own creativity  

Topic title 2.3.5. Decision making: include parents in school decisions, developing parent  representatives and cultivate creative critical thinking  
Topic title 2.3.6. Collaborating with the community: identify and integrate resources and  services from the community to strengthen school program, family practice, and student  learning and creativity development, bring your children at exposure to a diverse community. 

A lesson for parents about raising a creative genius:  https:www.youtube.comwatch?vJv0oEjs68I4 

U n it  3  Titl e:  The  Role  of  Boa rds  to  Fost er  Cre ativi ty  and  Ove rco me  Chal lang es 

Topic title 3.1: Introduction 

The board as the creative administrative leader in the school should be aware of the  educational philosophies and the different teaching methods, in addition to the availability 
of the safe environment for the teacher and the student, as well. In addition, they should  contribute in eliminating all things that make the students fear and worried inside the  school. Moreover, they should care about the school maintenance to make it a clean and  beautiful environment full of educational stimuli to be a motivated place for the creativity  energy of the students. 

Topic title 3.1.1: The Role of Curriculum  It is crucial to consider the curriculum as a group of experiences prepared by the school to  achieve a comprehensive growth for the students. Therefore, the concern will be with the  student not with the material and the role of the teacher is not as connection between the  textbook and the student's mind but as a guide and assistant for developing the students'  abilities and launching their creative energy. 

Topic title 3.1.2: School Norms  There are many barriers that lock creativity in schools. There are also many ways to inhibit  creativity. Making risk-taking more common, increasing cooperative learning and making  being wrong an acceptable norm in schools are the enablers that is considered to be most  important ones. Trying to do more or less of something in schools is not likely to lead to  change in behavioural regularities in schools unless people give up some fixed assumptions  what are the most important purposes of schooling. 

Bibliography 

1. https:www.greenschool.orgwp-contentuploads201203Pasi-Sahlberg1-1.pdf  2. https:thepestleweedschool.comenhancingcreativity 
3. https:cpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.comu.osu.edudiste5164files201501The-Teachers-Roler85133.pdf  4. https:hrcak.srce.hrfile271842  5. https:www.academia.edu10516957Rolesofparentsinenhancingchildrenscreativethinki ngskills  6. Anning, A.  Ring, K. 2004. Making sense of childrens drawings. Maidenhead: Open University  Press.  7. Barton, PE,  Coley, RJ 1992. America's smallest school: The family. Princeton, NJ: Educational  Testing Service.  8. Brzeziski,  J.  1993.Creativity  and  consciousness:  philosophical  and  psychological  dimensi ons.  Rodopi.  9. Esa, A., Razzaq, A.R. A., Yasak, Z.  Omar, Z.  2010. Teachers perception on the relationship  between parents and school. US-China Education Review, 7, 5, 47-54.  10. Jayatilaka, G. 2010. Creative futures: A new deal for the early years sector. In C. Tims, Eds.,  Creative learning in the early years is not just childs play, pp.71-86.  11. Ornstein,  A.C.,    Levine,  D.U.  2008.  Foundations  of  education  10th  Ed.  Boston,  MA:   Houghton  Mifflin.  12. Sabanc,  A.  2009.  Views  of  primary  school  administrators,  teachers  and  parents  on  paren t  involvement  in  Turkey:  Eitim  aratrmalar.  Eurasian  Journal  of  Educational  Research, 36,  245-262. 

THE INTERNET JOURNAL  OF RESTORATIVE  JUSTICEIJRJ ISSN ONLINE: 2056-2985 IJRJRJ4ALLPUBLICATIONS.COM   WWW.RJ4ALLPUBLICATIONS.COMIJRJ 440 7708758600 The Internet Journal of Restorative Justice IJRJ is the leading, international  peer-reviewed journal on restorative justice. It was established in 2012 to  push the boundaries of criminal justice by adopting a unique, practical  approach to researching and investigating restorative justice. It is indexed and ranked by Scopus, Kudos, The European Reference Index  for the Humanities and the Social Sciences ERIH PLUS as well Criminal  Justice Abstracts and EBSCO Information Services. Submissions to the IJRJ must follow the Editorial Guidelines, and can be  made by email to ijrjrj4allpublications.com at any given time. We aim to  complete the review process within 4-6 weeks of receipt.  The Editor-in-Chief is Professor Dr. Theo Gavrielides. The Journal is guided and scrutinised by its Editorial Board and the  International Advisory Board. All submissions are first reviewed by the  Editor-in-Chief, and if judged suitable for this publication, they are then  blind-reviewed anonymously and separately by at least two external,  expert reviewers. PUSH THE BARRIERS OF RESTORATIVE JUSTICE, AND CHALLENGE CONVENTIONAL APPROACHES TO CRIMINOLOGY AND  CRIMINAL JUSTICE ENABLE JUNIOR RESEARCHERS TO PUBLISH ALONGSIDE LEADING NAMES IN RESTORATIVE JUSTICE, AND ENCOURAGE A  DIALOGUE BETWEEN VARIOUS GENERATIONS OF ACADEMICS.   INCREASE AWARENESS OF RESTORATIVE JUSTICE, AND HELP ADDRESS MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT ITS POTENTIAL AND  LIMITATIONS. BUILD A STRONG EVIDENCE BASE FOR RESTORATIVE JUSTICE, AND INFORM AND INFLUENCE CRIMINAL AND RESTORATIVE JUSTICE  POLICY AT NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL LEVELS. ENABLE THOSE WITH LIMITED RESOURCES TO ACCESS SCHOLARLY WORK ON RESTORATIVE JUSTICE, INCLUDING STUDENTS,  PRACTITIONERS AND THE PUBLIC. IJRJ  AIMS TO  STUDENTS:   45 INDIVIDUALS:  75 INSTITUTIONS  110 ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTIONS UNLIMITED DOWNLOADS: RJ4ALL PUBLICATIONS ACCEPTS ANNUAL  SUBSCRIPTIONS FROM: Subscription can be purchased from   www.rj4allpublications.comijrj-subcriptions or by emailing  IJRJrj4allpublications.com 

THE YOUTH VOICE  JOURNALYVJ  ISSN ONLINE: 2056-2969 YVJRJ4ALLPUBLICATIONS.COM  WWW.RJ4ALLPUBLICATIONS.COMYVJ 440 7708758600 The Youth Voice Journal YVJ is the leading international peerreviewed journal publishing theoretical contributions and empirical  studies on issues affecting young people and youth work. YVJ is  published by RJ4All Publications and is ranked and indexed by Scopus,  ORCID, Kudos, Criminal Justice Abstracts, EBSCO and ERIH PLUS. 

The Journal encourages submissions from young researchers, and is  particularly interested in publishing papers, reviews and commentaries  exploring the youth-led  user-led method of evidence gathering. 

Submissions to the Youth Voice Journal YVJ can be made at any  given time to YVJrj4allpublications.com 

Once  accepted,  submissions  are  published  online  and  indexed. Occasionally, the Journal publishes Special Issues and the  deadlines relating to these publications are included in the related Calls. 

All submissions will be subject to the normal process of peer  review. We aim to reach a decision within 4-7 weeks of receipt. 

Altogether the Journal has received and processed fifty-seven articles  this year alone. The number of submitted papers show a dramatic  increased compared to the previous year, which has nineteen  submissions and publications, including the Special Issue Young  People Doing Politics 2019. CREATE KNOWLEDGE AND CONTRIBUTE TO THE LITERATURE BY PUBLISHING HIGH QUALITY RESEARCH ON ISSUES  AFFECTING YOUNG PEOPLE ESTABLISH AND FURTHER DEVELOP THE YOUTH-LED METHOD FOR RESEARCH AND SOCIAL POLICY PROVIDE A PLATFORM FOR THE INTELLECTUAL EXCHANGE OF IDEAS AROUND THE GLOBE WITH THE AIM OF   INFLUENCING POLICIES AND PRACTICES ACTIVELY ENCOURAGE AND AIDE THOSE YOUNG PEOPLE WHOSE VOICE IS RARELY HEARD BY POLICY MAKERS AND  ACADEMIA TO BE PUBLISHED YVJ   AIMS TO STUDENT:   45 INDIVIDUAL:  95 ORGANISATIONAL:   200 CORPORATE:  270 Subscription can be purchased from   www.rj4allpublications.comsubscriptions  or  by emailing  YVJrj4allpublications.com ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTIONS UNLIMITED DOWNLOADS:

THE RESTORATIVE JUSTICE SERIES CATALOGUE

This Training Manual has been developed by the consortium of the Erasmus  co-funded project Nurturing Creativity in Education: Restoring Power. It is addressed to Vocational education and training educators and vocational education and training organizations, Teachers in secondary educational settings, academies and in the community Trainers and Mentors of students not currently in employment Vocational, education and training students of all ages GRANT AGREEMENT NO:   2020-1-UK01-KA227-SCH-094436 RRP 0.99 WWW.RESTORINGPOWER.ORG R