2011. Nova.  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO Publishing: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY 440804; Rebecca J. Newley; Classrooms: Management,  Effectiveness and Challenges Account:ehost. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

EDUCATION IN A COMPETITIVE AND GLOBALIZING WORLD 

CLASSROOMS:   MANAGEMENT, EFFECTIVENESS   AND CHALLENGES 

No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, medical or any other professional services.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

EDUCATION IN A COMPETITIVE   AND GLOBALIZING WORLD 

Additional books in this series can be found on Novas website   under the Series tab. 

Additional E-books in this series can be found on Novas website   under the E-books tab.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

EDUCATION IN A COMPETITIVE AND GLOBALIZING WORLD 

CLASSROOMS:   MANAGEMENT, EFFECTIVENESS   AND CHALLENGES 

REBECCA J. NEWLEY  EDITOR 

Nova Science Publishers, Inc.  New York 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Copyright  2011 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in  any form or by any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, mechanical photocopying, recording or  otherwise without the written permission of the Publisher. 

For permission to use material from this book please contact us:  Telephone 631-231-7269; Fax 631-231-8175  Web Site: http:www.novapublishers.com 

NOTICE TO THE READER 

The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no expressed or implied  warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No liability is assumed for  incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information contained in this book.  The Publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or  in part, from the readers use of, or reliance upon, this material. Any parts of this book based on government  reports are so indicated and copyright is claimed for those parts to the extent applicable to compilations of  such works. 

Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations contained in this book. In  addition, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury andor damage to persons or property  arising from any methods, products, instructions, ideas or otherwise contained in this publication. 

This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the subject  matter covered herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in rendering  legal or any other professional services. If legal or any other expert assistance is required, the services of a  competent person should be sought. FROM A DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS JOINTLY ADOPTED  BY A COMMITTEE OF THE AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION AND A COMMITTEE OF  PUBLISHERS. 

Additional color graphics may be available in the e-book version of this book. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Classrooms : management, effectiveness and challenges  edited by Rebecca J. Newley.     p. cm.    Includes bibliographical references and index.    ISBN 978-1-62081-448-2 eBook  1.  Classroom management--Cross-cultural studies. 2.   Communication and education--Cross-cultural studies.  I. Newley, Rebecca J.     LB3013.C535 2011    371.102'4--dc22                                                              2011014472 

Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc.  New York 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

CONTENTS 

Preface 

vii  Chapter 1  Negotiating Mathematics in  an Interactive Classroom  1  Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  Chapter 2  Factors Affecting Help-Seeking and Learning Gains   in Technology-Enhanced Inquiry-Learning: The Effects   of the Classroom Script and Gender Composition  33  Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  Chapter 3  Framing Student Engagement through Perceptions of Justice:   The Role of Trust  in Authorities in Educational Contexts  59  Chiara Berti and Silvia Di Battista  Chapter 4  Teacher-Child Interaction Training: Description, Historical  Underpinnings, and Case Example  77  Jocelyn O. Stokes, Ashley B. Tempel, Karishma Chengappa,  Amanda H. Costello and Cheryl B. McNeil  Chapter 5  Urban Classroom Pedagogy: The Role of School-Wide   Teacher-Directed Consultation  93  Phillip J. Belfiore and Ruth Auld  Chapter 6  The Racist Teacher Revisited: Race and Social Skills   in a Nationally Representative Sample of American Children  115  Kevin M. Beaver, John Paul Wright and Matt DeLisi  Chapter 7  Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations  and Applications  133  Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin,   Carolina Reich Marcon Passero, David Queiroz de SantAna,  Fernando Bunn, Paulo Eduardo Kirrian Fiedler   and Andressa Maria Coelho Ferreira 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Contents  vi  Chapter 8  Two Ways of Capturing Lesson-to-Lesson Variability   in the Classroom Social Climate: General Trend   and Process Analysis  163  M. Tim Mainhard, M. Brekelmans  and T. Wubbels  Chapter 9  Comfort in School Buildings in Mediteranean Environment  175  Eusbio Z. E. Conceio  Chapter 10  Classroom Discipline: Discipline Strategies, Preventing Student  Misbehaviors and Research on Student Misbehaviors   in the Classroom  187  Kemal Kayiki  Index 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

PREFACE 

In this book, the authors present topical research in the study of the management,  effectiveness and challenges of classroom study. Topics discussed include mathematics and  the interactive classroom; the effects of the classroom script and gender composition in the  classroom; moral stances and discursive power in classroom discourse; teacher-child  interaction training; urban classroom pedagogy; the racist teacher; classroom acoustics and  the classroom social climate. Imprint: Nova  Chapter 1 This chapter draws on the findings of a larger study carried out in a  Malaysian secondary school that aimed to cultivate an interactive classroom context and to  investigate the patterns of discourse that had a positive impact on students' learning over a 10month period. The Vygotskian school of thought provided the main framework to derive the  three constructs of concept formation, student-student interaction and teacher-student  interaction. The study was qualitative and the methodology was designed by incorporating the  features of naturalistic inquiry, and the interventional nature of action research. The samples  were a mathematics teacher and one Form Four class of students aged between 16 and 17  years. We collected qualitative data through audio-visual recordings, observations and  interviews. The comparative method suggested by Glaser 1978 was used to analyze the  data. Drawing on the analyses of discourse from the data collected, it was possible to change  a traditional classroom to an interactive classroom by using a four-phase lesson plan  consisting of whole-class discussion, group work, reporting back and summing up. With this  lesson plan, the teacher managed to reach the full range of competencies in a multi-racial and  large class. Hence, student-student and teacher-student interactions using the Zone of  Proximal Development were enacted in the classroom. During group work, the students were  faced with the social problems of working together and the problems of solving the  mathematical tasks in hand. The teacher used four strategies to initiate and guide the  negotiation of his expectations for group work. First, he stopped by the non-collaborative  groups to exert his authority on the students involved to act appropriately for group work.  Second, he took these cases as opportunities during the reporting-back phase to preach to the  class the obligations and expectations for group work. Third, he constantly reminded the  students of their obligations and expectations when he moved around the classroom. Last, he  approached every solution and explanation in a non-evaluative way. The authors identified  relevant, adequate, timely, and understand and use to be the features of student-student  interactions that helped students to accomplish the mathematical tasks successfully. Finally,  the analyses of dataalso yielded three types of instructional feedback facilitating the   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Rebecca J. Newley  viii  mathematics growth of students, namely, feedback on the task, feedback on the process and  feedback on regulation.  Chapter 2 The use of collaborative inquiry in classrooms is increasing, despite the fact  that the conditions for its effectiveness have not been systematically studied. It has been  claimed that inquiry-learning environments with minimal guidance are less effective than  those with additional instructional support, especially for learners with little prior knowledge.  It has also been argued that collaborative working, working with computers, and learning  scientific contentmay involve gender factors. However, with regard to collaborative webbased inquiry-learning, there has so far been little research on how students learning and  collaboration is supported or hindered by differently structured interaction patterns, and the  gender composition of groups. The present chapterdeals with technology-enhanced  collaborative inquiry-learning. In this context, we examine the influence of the classroomscript structure high structure vs. low structure on the help-seeking of single-gender and  mixed-gender pairs, and also look at the learning gains achieved. The data are drawn from 54  student pairs in secondary science education. We analyzed screenand audio-capturing videos  according to a model of the help-seeking process. Preand post-tests were applied in order to  measure the students learning gains. Overall, the single-gender and mixed-gender pairs under  the high-structured classroom-script condition sought less help, but learnt more than those  under the low-structured classroom-script condition. The results indicate that in terms of both  help-seeking and learning gains, the structure of the classroom script has a greater effect than  the gender composition of the classroom. However, mixed-gender pairs seemed obtain  particular benefit from the high-structured classroom script in terms of learning gains  a  result that would merit further investigation with a larger sample. In addition, a qualitative  analysis of successful and unsuccessful pairs was conducted with respect to learning gains, to  determine whether there could be differences between gender pairs and their ways of  working. In fact, no clear gender differences were found, but students behavior in successful  pairs could be characterized as task-relevant behavior. In conclusion, we discuss the  challenges pertaining to the structuredness of the classroom script and the role of the teacher  in technology-enhanced inquiry-learning classrooms.  Chapter 3 Social psychology research provides evidence that people's engagement in  groups is related more to their perception of authorities than to economic assurances De  Cremer  Tyler, 2007; Tyler  Degoey, 1995. In educational contexts, Berti, Molinari, and  Speltini 2010 have shown that a sense of justice impacts engagement as well as students'  identification, motivation, and dialogue in class. Furthermore, survey and laboratory studies  show that students who identify more closely with their university report more engagement  when university authorities treat them fairly Berti, Di Battista,  Pivetti, 2010; Smith, Olson,  Agronick,  Tyler, 2009; Tyler, Boeckmann, Smith,  Huo, 1997. Among the antecedents  of student engagement, teachers support is considered essential in elementary, middle, and  high school Marks, 2000 in promoting student participation and on-task behavior  Battistich, Solomon, Watson,  Schaps, 1997 and reducing the probability of dropping out  of school Croninger  Lee, 2001. Moreover, a great deal of empirical evidence has shown  the significant role of trust in authorities in building effective, productive and well-managed  schools Bryk  Schneider, 1996. Trust in authorities predicts positive school climate,  productive communication, willingness to go beyond in-role behaviors, and student  achievement Tschannen-Moran  Hoy, 2000. Definitions of trust are broad, but recent  studies Colquitt, Scott,  LePine, 2007 suggest the value of distinguishing among types of   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Preface  ix trust, such as competence and benevolence. Competence-based trust captures the knowledge  and skills needed to perform a specific job. Benevolence-based trust, by contrast, involves  authorities' fairness, caring motives, and intentions. Empirical evidence Hoy  TschannenMoran, 1999 has shown that all of these and other facets of trust are important aspects of  intra-school relations, but their relative effect on engagement depends on the nature of the  relationships. Trust may be based on perceptions of schools' economic motives, on  institutional support conducive to building trust, on students' sense of identification and on  other factors Tschannen-Moran  Hoy, 2000. For instance, unconditional or identificationbased trust emerges in an environment where parties have complete confidence and empathy,  as well as common desires and intentions Lewicki  Bunker, 1996. In summary, this  chapter reviews research about engagement and trust in authorities in order to suggest  potential determinants of a more inclusive and empowering educational system.  Chapter 4 Behavior that disrupts the learning of the student or surrounding students  e.g., arguing, being out-of-seat, not following directions is a prominent concern of teachers  Axup  Gersch, 2008; Ennis, 1996, and 50-68 of teachers believe they spend too much  time managing problematic classroom behavior Beaman, Wheldall,  Kemp, 2007.  Disruptive behavior is stable without treatment Campbell, 1995; McNeil, Capage, Bahl,   Blanc, 1999, and young children who display disruptive behavior may develop delinquent  and antisocial behavior as adolescents or adults Farrington, 1995; Loeber, Burke, Lahey,  Winters,  Zera, 2000. Such students score lower on standardized tests than their compliant  peers Finn, Pannozzo,  Voelkl, 1995. In addition to the disruptive behavior of a child  impacting his or her own academic achievement, a students disruptive behavior adversely  affects the whole class by requiring the teachers attention resulting in decreased instructional  time Carr, Taylor,  Robinson, 1991. Additionally, teachers report that they feel  overwhelmed and unprepared to handle the behavior problems that they face in the classroom  Kurtz, Fernandez, Miller, Madigan, Firpo, Dimotta, et al., 2010. Teachers report that  disruptive behavior increases their job-related stress and believe that effective behavior  management would decrease their stress levels Axup  Gersh. Teacher-Child Interaction  Training TCIT is an emerging program to help teachers of young children effectively  manage the behavior in their classrooms. Proponents of TCIT have adapted Parent-Child  Interaction Therapy PCIT, an evidence-based treatment program for parents of children ages  threethrough six-years with disruptive behavior Eyberg, Nelson,  Boggs, 2008; Hood   Eyberg, 2003; Nixon, 2001, for use with teachers. PCIT, and subsequently TCIT, is based on  the two-phase model of parent training initiated by Constance Hanf in Oregon Costello,  Chengappa, Stokes, Tempel,  McNeil, in press; Hanf, 1969. Specifically, child-focused  play skills that foster a warm, nurturing environment in the classroom are combined with  consistent consequences to handle misbehavior. TCIT is being implemented primarily in  preschools and kindergartens. Given that TCIT is a relatively new program, research groups  differ in the approaches they have used to adapt the characteristics of PCIT to a classroom  setting. For example, some train teachers in the classroom with students present, others train  during workshops or in-service days, and others during the school day but outside of the  typical classroom. Additionally, TCIT has been implemented as both a targeted intervention  to improve the behavior of an identified child who causes significant disruption in the  classroom and as a universal teacher training program to improve behavior management skills  across the board for use with all students. One of the main challenges of adaptation is that  PCIT focuses on the interactions of one parent with one child while teachers are responsible   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Rebecca J. Newley  x  for many children at once and have as many as 30 children in one classroom. The differences  in implementation of TCIT will follow.  Chapter 5 Teachers establish beliefs and skills during the first few years on the job.  Even the most dedicated teachers in urban school face daily challenges in the classroom that  can be defeating. Teaching requires much more than dedication. Many teachers in urban  schools select the job because of availability, not first choice. Many teachers lack the  contextual or personal experience to understand the culture of urban schools. The high turnover rate of teachers in urban schools is one consequence of the under-preparedness and  limited supports available to novice teachers in urban settings. Yet, this consequence  continues to be a foundational problem within the school. If schools have only novice  teachers, there by availability and not by choice, who are learning how to teach, how can the  school meet the goals and objectives of improving student learning outcomes and meeting  adequate levels of academic and social proficiency? It is a self-perpetuating cycle that  perplexes and frustrates urban school administrators. In this study, the administrative staff of  an urban elementary school with a student population at a 99 poverty level set about to  cultivate a new culture within the school. Their ambition was to build a climate of support for  teachers by starting with the goal of improving teacher effectiveness in the classroom. In  order to improve their instructional skill set, urban teachers volunteered to participate in a 2year teacher-directed consultation designed to improve instructional efficacy in the urban  classroom. The study began with novice teachers less than 3 years urban teaching  experience completing a teacher survey which assessed their beliefs about urban students  abilities to learn. Following the survey, teachers were observed monthly throughout the  school year using an Urban Classroom Checklist UCC. The UCC, an ecological assessment,  evaluated classroom environment, instruction, research-based practices, and feedback. After  each observation, the authors consulted with teachers to provide a specific instructional  feedback on their teacher behaviors during instructional time, b instructional  recommendations, and c a written formative summary, from the UCC. Specific and  individualized targeted pedagogical skills such as teacher transition time, teacher proximity, a  ratio of positivenegative comments, and student opportunities to response were measured and  discussed with the novice teachers. The strategy of a regular, on-going, monthly  observations and b ongoing consultation, and c performance feedback and dialog, suggests  that heightening teachers self-awareness of their performance was an effective method for  making measurable gains in teaching practices.   Chapter 6 A long line of research finds consistently that African American students are  significantly more likely than white students to be subjected to a range of negative school  sanctions. Several researchers attribute this differential to racially biased appraisals of African  Americans behaviors by teachers and school administrators. Using data from the ECLS-K the largest sample of kindergarten and first grade students ever createdwe test whether  there are statistically significant differences in social skills between whites and African  Americans at the start of their educational careers. The authors then evaluate whether teacher  characteristics, including their race, have any impact on their evaluations of student social  skills. The findings provide no evidence suggesting that teachers are biased against black  students. The data do reveal, however, that black students enter school with substantial social  skills deficits.  Chapter 7 In every society  past, present and probably also future , knowledge was, is,  and will undoubtedly continue to be transmitted through the process of speaking and   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Preface  xi listening, i.e., a person transmitting knowledge orally to others who receive it. Notwithstanding current requirements for a variety of knowledge transmission techniques involving  multimedia technologies, nothing can replace the teacher-student relationship that is basically  involved in classrooms. It is therefore crucial for classrooms to provide optimal conditions for  the development of activities inherent to education, which include the quality of classroom  acoustics. The quality of transmitted and perceived verbal information is linked intrinsically  to the acoustic performance of the room, which in turn involves the observance of several  speech quality descriptors  Reverberation Time, Speech Transmission Index, Definition and  Centre Time. This chapter on Classroom Acoustics describes the techniques required for in  situ measurements of these parameters, which are crucial for verbal communication. These  parameters, which are based on national and international technical standards, seek to  establish reference values in order to achieve good acoustics in classrooms. Another tool  presented is computational simulation, which enables acoustic solutions for classrooms to be  tested while still in the design phase, as well as interventions in existing buildings. As a  necessary part of the search for optimal classroom acoustics, real cases are presented whose  objects of study are university classrooms.   Chapter 8 This chapter compares two complementing approaches to the analysis of  longitudinal data on the classroom social climate. How students perceive the social climate of  their classroom is related to student academic achievement and well-being den Brok,  Brekelmans,  Wubbels, 2004; Church, Elliot,  Gable, 2001; Davis, 2003, and to the  psycho-social development of students Pianta, 2006; Wentzel 2002. While the importance  of the classroom social climate in general is widely acknowledged, not much research is  conducted on how the social climate differs and evolves between classroom lessons. A  commonly used approach for studying developmental issues is to describe longitudinal data  in terms of general trends over time i.e., multi-level growth curve modeling. Thus, questions  such as do teachers get more directive during the school year? may be of interest in this  regard. Rather than describing variability in the social climate between lessons by using a  general trend e.g., modeling a decline or increase in teacher or student variables, a second  approach, called multi-level process analysis Papp, 2004 can be used to examine whether  factors other than time can account for variability in the classroom social climate. Questions  such as can classroom incidents account for between lesson variability in the classroom  social climate? refer to this latter approach. In this chapter, both approaches are applied to a  longitudinal data set on students perceptions of the classroom social climate during the first  months of a school year Mainhard, Brekelmans  Wubbels, 2011; Mainhard, Brekelmans,  den Brok  Wubbels, 2010. First, some background information on classroom social climate  and the data set used is provided.  Chapter 9 A review of thermal comfort and air quality is the aim of this work. The  numerical and experimental methodology is used in the evaluation of comfort in school  buildings in the South of Portugal Algarve region with Mediterranean environment. In this  work, results about comfort in three typical schools buildings, in Winter and Summer  conditions, equipped with natural and crossed ventilation, are presented. The thermal comfort  level is evaluated by the Predicted Mean Vote value, while the air quality is evaluated by the  carbon dioxide concentration.  Chapter 10 Classroom is the keystone of a formal education system. Conducting the aim  of the education system depends on the success of the teaching-learning process in the  classroom. The success of the learning-teaching activity depends on efficient classroom   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Rebecca J. Newley  xii management. Knowing the characteristics of students and arranging the process according to  this, arranging in-class relationships, arranging the physical structure of the class, providing  student motivation, managing in-class activities and learning processes, sustaining the  discipline and managing student misbehaviors are among the functions of classroom  management. Sustaining the discipline and managing student misbehaviors have great  importance in the success of the learning-teaching process. Improving students learning in  classrooms requires teachers to be effective in coping with classroom misbehaviors Ding et  al. 2008; Ding et al. 2010. The authors cannot speak of the success of the teaching-learning  process in a classroom where the teachers spend most of their times sustaining the discipline  and preventing student misbehaviors. When a teacher who is responsible for the success of  the learning and teaching process in the class feels himself inadequate in managing discipline  and student misbehaviors may have depression, come down with psychosomatic diseases and  even for beginners, especially may resign. In this sense, it is of great importance for teachers  to be educated about managing discipline and student misbehaviors. In this study; classroom  discipline, discipline strategies, student misbehaviors and coping strategies were elaborated.  Moreover, a literature review of the writer on elementary school students misbehaviors in  Turkey was examined. 450 teachers who serve in elementary schools in Antalya participated  in the study. A 5graded likert-type scale named Student Misbehaviors Scale which was  developed by the researcher himself, was used in the study. In the analysis of study,  arithmetic average, standard deviation, t-test, one way ANOVA, LSD and Scheffe test were  used. According to the result of the study, there are significant differences among the  frequency level of student misbehaviors in the sense of gender, age, seniority, branch and  technical means of classroom. Misbehavior which is observed most frequently in schools is  the types of student misbehaviors towards each other. Young teachers who are below 30 are  exposed to these misbehaviors more than elder teachers. There are significant differences  between misbehavior frequency in the sense of classes with poor and good technical means.  As the technical means of classrooms increase, level of student misbehavior decrease.  

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

In: Classrooms: Management, Effectiveness and Challenges  ISBN 978-1-61324-601-6  Editor: Rebecca J. Newley, pp. 1-32   2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 

Chapter 1 

NEGOTIATING MATHEMATICS IN   AN INTERACTIVE CLASSROOM 

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  Universiti Teknologi MARA, Malaysia 

ABSTRACT 

This chapter draws on the findings of a larger study carried out in a Malaysian  secondary school that aimed to cultivate an interactive classroom context and to  investigate the patterns of discourse that had a positive impact on students' learning over  a 10-month period. The Vygotskian school of thought provided the main framework to  derive the three constructs of concept formation, student-student interaction and teacherstudent interaction. The study was qualitative and the methodology was designed by  incorporating the features of naturalistic inquiry, and the interventional nature of action  research. The samples were a mathematics teacher and one Form Four class of students  aged between 16 and 17 years. We collected qualitative data through audio-visual  recordings, observations and interviews. The comparative method suggested by Glaser  1978 was used to analyze the data.  Drawing on the analyses of discourse from the data collected, it was possible to  change a traditional classroom to an interactive classroom by using a four-phase lesson  plan consisting of whole-class discussion, group work, reporting back and summing up.  With this lesson plan, the teacher managed to reach the full range of competencies in a  multi-racial and large class. Hence, student-student and teacher-student interactions using  the Zone of Proximal Development were enacted in the classroom.   During group work, the students were faced with the social problems of working  together and the problems of solving the mathematical tasks in hand. The teacher used  four strategies to initiate and guide the negotiation of his expectations for group work.  First, he stopped by the non-collaborative groups to exert his authority on the students  involved to act appropriately for group work. Second, he took these cases as  opportunities during the reporting-back phase to preach to the class the obligations and  expectations for group work. Third, he constantly reminded the students of their  obligations and expectations when he moved around the classroom. Last, he approached  every solution and explanation in a non-evaluative way. We identified relevant, adequate,  timely, and understand and use to be the features of student-student interactions that  helped students to accomplish the mathematical tasks successfully. Finally, the analyses  of dataalso yielded three types of instructional feedback facilitating the mathematics   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  2  growth of students, namely, feedback on the task, feedback on the process and feedback  on regulation. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Educators are realizing that adults in this information age require capabilities to join a  workplace where intellectual teamwork is the norm. The thinking and actions of these adults  need to show an appreciation of and regard for inquiry and openness to different and  competing perspectives. To cultivate such capabilities, education has to change.   Mathematics education was primarily a process of transmission of knowledge. Educators  believed that a fixed knowledge base existed out there and the aim of education was to deliver  that knowledge to the learners. Drawing on the views of behaviorist models, the teachers  drill provided practice for this knowledge base that led to mastery Freire, 1972. A typical  mathematics lesson is characterized by a teacher briefly introducing and discussing the topic  for the lesson, and demonstrating a procedure to solve a problem which students follow  carefully in order to imitate it. Practice through many exercises follows, either from a  textbook or a workbook. Learning is by memorization and reproducing mechanically the  learned facts to solve these exercises. Students are not trained in calling to mind possible  heuristics, rules or algorithms for mining the information given in a problem, turning them  into different solutions and discriminating between them. Von Glaserfeld 1995 wrote as  follows: 

Educators have noticed that many students were quite able to learn the necessary  formulas and apply them to the limited range of textbook and test situations, but when faced  with novel problems, they fell short and showed that they were far from having understood the  relevant concepts and conceptual relations. p. 20 

This way of teaching and learning of mathematics has changed to a conception that  students actively construct their own mathematics Kilpatrick, 1987; von Glaserfeld, 1995.  The construction process can be accomplished by students making connections, building  mental schemata and developing new mathematics based on their prior knowledge through  interactions with others Vygotsky, 1978; Goos 2004. Such perspective assumes  mathematics teaching and learning as social in nature.   The growth of the social constructivist movement, which assumes meaningful learning  occurs in a context of social interactions, has a marked impact on classroom instruction. It  advocates teaching mathematics in a way that encourages group cohesiveness rather than  individualism, investigation rather than repetitive exercises, and students actively expressing  their ideas. This perspective has inspired many studies on practices that capitalize on the  social context of classrooms. They are investigating how the social context of teaching and  learning enhances the construction process of mathematics meanings in students Kieran,  2001; Gillies, 2003; Foman, 2003; Goos, 2004. Students make connections, build mental  schemata and develop new mathematics through conversations or thinking aloud with another  person about their ideas. The other person can be the peer or the teacher. In other words, how  the teacher and students talk with one another in a classroom constitutes in large measure  such practices. Martin 1985 wrote as follows:   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  3 A good conversation is neither a fight nor a contest. Circular in nature, cooperative in  manner and constructive in intent, it is an interchange of ideas by those who see themselves  not as adversaries but as human beings come together to talk and listen and learn from one  another. p. 10 

Group work is an extremely social form of practice, with peers interacting actively  among themselves as they tackle an activity. Many studies have been focusing on the  facilitating role played by group work in the teaching and learning of mathematics. Some  studies found that students experienced cognitive conflicts that triggered them to re-examine  their existing ideas, initiate a process of intellectual reconstructions and develop evolving  knowledge bases Teasley, 1995; Hershkowitz  Schwarz, 1997. Small-group settings also  led students to higher engagement levels, improved attitudes and active mathematical  communications Leikin  Zaslavsky, 1997. However, other studies suggested that group  work might not be conducive to mathematics learning. Students did not really work together,  were never precise and explicit in their conversations, and were defensive of their own  solutions during group work Sfard  Kieran, 2001; Goos, 2002. The mixed results from  these studies lead to many doubts about the dynamics of group work and how group work  mediates the mathematical growth of students.   In the classroom, teachers face students who have a broad spectrum of needs, abilities,  goals, interests and who are from different racial, ethnic, linguistic and economic  backgrounds. This complexity poses a big challenge to a teacher in making pedagogical  decisions tailored to the demands of students. If we want group work to play the role of a  powerful driver in the teaching and learning process rather than a terminal event, teachers  need to capitalize on students constructions during group work in formulating instructional  feedback for the further learning and enculturation into the mathematical way of negotiation  of their students. According to Hattie and Timperley 2007, If feedback is directed at the  right level, it can assist students to comprehend, engage, or develop effective strategies to  process the information intended to be learned p. 104. Surprisingly, few studies have  investigated the power of feedback in the classrooms. Among others, Kluger and DeNisi  1996 did a very systematic study to investigate the impact of various types of feedback.  They found that feedback is more effective when it is designed based on previous task to  provide information for tackling the task successfully. Other forms of feedback such as  praise, rewards and punishment appear to be ineffective.  Even though a large number of studies were done on group work in the classrooms, very  few investigated the nature of the interactions among students and the types of instructional  feedback constructed by teachers based on the outcomes of group work that could contribute  to the mathematical growth of students. This chapter aims to contribute to these areas of  study. It draws on the findings of a larger study carried out in a Form Four class of a  Malaysian secondary school with the aims to cultivate an interactive classroom culture and to  investigate the patterns of discourse that mediated meaning shaping and justification of ideas  that had differential effects on the emerging mathematics learning of students within the  interactions. These aims meeted the sociocultural emphases proposed by Forman 2003 that  instructional practices and learning outcomes are linked and mathematics meaning-makings  occur in social context. The three guiding questions we used to examine the patterns of  discourse are:  

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  4  1. How a four-phase lesson plan that incorporates whole class and small group  interactions helps to change a traditional classroom culture to an interactive  classroom?  2. What is the nature of the interactions between students during group work that can  enhance their mathematics learning in the classroom?   3. What types of instructional feedback can the teacher design based on the outcomes of  group work to facilitate the mathematical growth of students?  

The next section touches on Malaysian perspective of social context in the teaching and  learning of mathematics. The third section is the literature review relevant to this chapter. We  start with discussing the key concepts from Vygotskys developmental approach and  outlining the limitations of these concepts that have led to the developments in sociocultural  theories for education in general. Then, the three constructs of concept formation, studentstudent interaction and teacher-student interaction are derived based on Vygotskys  developmental approach. The fourth section presents the details of the methods relevant here.  The results of analyses are reported in three sub-sections of negotiating an interactive  classroom culture, nature of student-student interaction and feedback. The chapter ends with a  section on conclusion based on the three guiding questions.  

2. MALAYSIAN PERSPECTIVE 

Education in Malaysia is always examination-inclined and mathematics education is still  predominately a process of knowledge transmission. Malaysia took part in the Trends in  International Mathematics and Science Study TIMSS for the years 1999, 2003 and 2007.  Since the average mathematics scale scores dropped from 519 to 508 and 474, the  performance of mathematics by our students has declined and they were classified under the  Intermediate Benchmark where students can apply basic mathematical knowledge in  straightforward situations Gonzales et al., 2008, p. 13. Our teachers are urged to employ  the different approaches of cooperative learning, inquiry learning, contextual learning and  constructivism for effective mathematics learning in the classroom through in-service courses  and seminars organized by relevant education authorities. However, the use of these  approaches is still minimal at present.   Malaysian society is composed of a whole range of cultures and our cultures encourage  obedience, self-restraint, and deference to elders. This social network is supportive of  knowledge transmission which demands conformity to rules, quietness, a willingness to do  repetitive exercises, and obedience to the teacher as authority in mathematics. In any  mathematics class, we have groups of students who are different in their ethnic backgrounds,  languages, attitudes, customs and mathematics ability. Many of the classes have more than 30  students. Interacting in such classrooms is a challenge and can be emotionally exhausting.  Thus, it requires teachers to embrace change in the ways they teach and the ways they  organize to teach. These issues may explain why teachers are unwilling to integrate these  approaches into the teaching and learning process in any systematic way. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  5 3. RELATED LITERATURE 

Our understanding of how children develop and learn has undergone many changes. Of  these changes, Vygotskian school of thought stands up and is generally agreed to have the  most profound influence on the developments in sociocultural theory Sfard, Forman   Kieran, 2001; Forman, 2003, Goos, 2004. There are basically three important elements in  Vygotskys developmental approach. First, Vygotsky argued that a childs cultural  development is social, and involves another person and the society as a whole. Second, he  claimed that any function in a childs development appears  first between people as an  interpsychological category and then inside the child as an intrapsychological category  Vygotsky, 1978, p. 128. Third, speech, gestures, signs, tools and material mediate the  development. Vygotsky 1978 also proposed the zone of proximal development ZPD as   those functions that have not yet matured, but are in the process of maturation, functions  that will mature tomorrow, but are currently in an embryonic state p. 86. Thus,  development occurs within the ZPD of a child since the social interactions may awaken  mental functions lying in an embryonic state.  Wood, Bruner and Ross 1976 were the first to apply Vygotskys approach to  educational study. They believed that the development of a child is an activity when the  readily relevant skills are combined to solve new and more complex task. This problemsolving activity is successful with the scaffolding from a tutor. Since then, the metaphor of  scaffolding was commonly associated with teacher-student interactions to facilitate a  students learning Greenfield, 1984; Bruner, 1986. Greenfield 1984 defined the  scaffolding process in a learning situation as  the teachers selective intervention provides  a supportive tool for the learner, which extends his or her skills, thereby allowing the learner  successfully to accomplish a task not otherwise possible p. 118.  This first generation of Vygotskian inspired studies was criticized for the limitations of  scaffolding. First, the teacher is imposing a structure on the student. Too often, the teacher is  the builder of the structure and the student is expected to accept a ready structure. Searle  1984 wrote as follows: The childrens understanding, valuing and excitement for the  personal experiences were negated as the children were led to report the experience in an  appropriate form p. 481. Second, the effectiveness of interactions relies on the nature of the  communicative mechanisms such as the semiotic processes, interpersonal relations and goals  of the participants that constitutes the scaffolding process Rogoff, 1990; Stone, 1993. A  learner is continually trying to interpret the adults intervention, whether verbal or non-verbal  in the context relevant to him. Unless the adult and the learner have a shared context at that  point, the implications of the interaction cannot be realized. Rogoff and Gardner 1984 wrote  as follows: 

Without the creation of a context for interaction which is intelligible to the learner, given  his or her current knowledge and skills, the dyad cannot communicate, and the teacher will  not be able to lead the learner toward an understanding of the new information. p. 98 

Third, implicit to the concept of scaffolding is the assumption that the teaching and  learning process involves willing adults on the one hand and eager learners on the other.  Unfortunately, this may not be true. Goodnow 1990 wrote as follows: 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  6  Where are the parents who do not see their role as one of imparting information and  encouraging understanding? Where are the children who do not wish to learn or perform in  the first place, or who regard as useless, what the teaching adult is presenting? p. 279 

Since then, the second generation of such studies expands the metaphor to deal with these  limitations and contributes to a new conception of sociocultural theory which recognizes the  need to give attention to the context and the interpersonal relationships of social interactions  Forman, 2003. Some of these studies employed the sociocultural theory with a discursive  perspective, emphasizing the dynamics of mathematical conversations in teacher-student  interactions within whole-class settings or student-student interactions within small-group  settings OConnor, 2001, Kieran, 2001; Goos, 2004. The focus is on the role of  communication in mathematics learning and the link between instructional practices and  learning outcomes Lampert, 1990; Forman, 2003.  Based on the literature review, the three main constructs of concept formation, studentstudent interaction, and teacher-student interaction are derived to guide the formulation of the  methods of the study.  

3.1. Concept Formation 

The construct of concept formation is derived from Vygotskys theory on everyday and  scientific concepts. Everyday concepts evolve from everyday experiences and scientific  concepts originate from classroom instruction or adult conversations. Meaningful knowledge  is achieved when the everyday concepts of a child merge with the scientific concepts of an  academic community and not by replacing the former with the latter as in knowledge  transmission. Concept formation is influenced by the means with which the process is  accomplished, including the use of tools and the mobilization of the appropriate means.  Vygotsky 1978 wrote as follows: 

The movement that previously had been the choice now serves only to fulfill the prepared  operation. The system of signs restructures the whole psychological process and enables the  child to master her movement. It reconstructs the choice process on a totally new basis. p. 35 

This theory has great implications on classroom instruction. In any classroom, the ZPD of  a student depends on the forms of instruction. The potential for learning is determined by the  environment, resources, the teachers role and the students role in the teaching and learning  process. 

3.2. Student-student Interaction 

Vygotsky conceptualized the notion of the ZPD in terms of peer partnerships, noting that  a child is able to accomplish a task in cooperation with more capable peers which is otherwise  impossible. From an educational perspective, learning opportunities arise when students  interact with one another, exchange ideas, take their peers perspectives and regulate their  own intellectual acts relevant to the task in hand. Forman and McPhail 1993 wrote as   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  7 follows: Over time,  students took turns to listening, observing, explaining, critiquing  and directing their common activities p. 225. This perspective has driven many studies on  group work to investigate how student-student interactions can facilitate mathematics learning  Webb  Farivar, 1994; Slavin, 1995; Fall  Webb, 2000; Gillies, 2003.  Many researchers argued that group work provides the right condition for the free  exchange of ideas and reciprocal feedback between mutually respected equals when tackling  a task Damon, 1984; Johnson  Johnson, 1999. The students speak to each other on a level  that they can easily understand, speak directly in plain language and take the response of  another student seriously. Furthermore, the communications between students are much  friendlier as compared to the corrective advice from an adult, which can be emotionally  threatening. As a result, students gain both social and cognitive benefits Egan, 1997; Johnson   Johnson, 1999; Fall  Webb, 2000. The social benefits are the improvement in  communication skills and the awareness of another students perspectives. The cognitive  benefits are the urge to reshape ones own ideas by considering the perspectives of others and  the evolving understanding. Hence, it can foster students self esteem, pro-social behavior and  scholarly achievement.  

3.3. Teacher-student Interaction 

The third construct is drawn from the ZPD based on the distance between the cognitive  levels when a child performs a task alone and in cooperation with adults. From an educational  perspective, students require their teachers intervention to make progress in their learning.  The term scaffolding became associated with such studies on teacher-student interactions.  When the metaphor of scaffolding in the expanded landscape is enacted in the classroom,  meaningful learning opportunities entail. Freire 1972 wrote as follows: 

The teacher is no longer merely the one who teaches, but one who is himself taught in  dialogue with the students, who in turn while being taught also teaches. They become jointly  responsible for a process in which all grow. p. 67 

During group work, students outcomes are derived based on their prior knowledge. It is  important to recognize that these outcomes can be different, incomplete or invalid and in an  embryonic state. Here, the teacher as the representative of the academic discipline plays a  crucial role in selecting the outcomes to design interventional instruction for the successful  constructions of scientific concepts.   In the classroom, the teacher is the adult and any student can always identify the more  capable peers. The three constructs derived for the study emphasize active involvement of the  classroom community in the teaching and learning process. Since it is impossible for a  teacher to interact for sustained time with each student, an alternative approach that better fits  classroom realities emphasizes interactions among the whole class. The study attempted to  develop such an interactive classroom culture by employing group work and whole-class  interaction as the basic instructional strategies.  

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  8  4. METHODS 

This study was qualitative and the methodology was designed by incorporating the  features of naturalistic inquiry, and the interventional nature of action research. 

4.1. Participants and Setting 

Samarahan School in Sarawak accepted the offer to participate in this study. According to  the school, the majority of the students came from families with average incomes. The school  had a team of very experienced and dedicated teachers. Thus, the passing percentages for  mathematics subjects were higher than the national passing percentages for the Lower  Secondary Examination and the School Certificate Examination. After obtaining the  permissions from the Educational Planning and Research Division of Malaysian Ministry of  Education and Sarawak State Education Department to carry out the study in this school, the  researchers met the principal to identify a teacher and students to be the participants of the  study. The participants were told of the purposes of the study and they were not obliged to  participate. If they wished to participate, their responses would remain anonymous and  confidential.  A class of Form Four students, aged between 16 and 17 years, volunteered to participate  in the study. All Form Four students have to take the subject mathematics, which is a  prerequisite for entry into most university courses. Besides learning the different  mathematical skills of the subject, other important emphases are problem solving,  communication, application and connected knowing. Hence, students are assessed on their  mastery of mathematics skills, and their ability to solve application problems and justify their  methods.  The senior assistant of the school, who was a qualified mathematics teacher having 15  years experience in teaching secondary school mathematics, offered to participate in the  study. As a member of the management team of the school, one of his responsibilities was  planning professional development programs for all the teachers in the school to include the  different approaches of cooperative learning, inquiry learning, contextual learning and  constructivism emphasized by Malaysian Ministry of Education. Hence, he welcomed any  study on developing teaching and learning practices through which such approaches could be  enacted in the classrooms.  

4.2. Classroom Organization 

The teacher agreed to start teaching as he normally would and react as he usually did to  students responses during lessons observed. We, as researchers assumed the role of a  participant-observer, so that we shared as intimately as possible in the life and activities of the  classroom Patton, 1990. The basic instructional strategies were group work and whole-class  interaction. Since the students were already paired in the seating plan before the study  commenced, they were encouraged to stay in the same positions. If other students wanted to  join any specific group for discussions, they were encouraged to do so at any time. Changes   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  9 in partners were made at the discretion of the teacher based on his intimate knowledge of the  social interactions as well as the mathematical development of the students.  During the first 5 weeks of the study, the teacher conducted the lessons as he planned.  Some lessons started with a whole-class discussion and ended with students working on  problems individually. Others started with group work, followed by discussions on students  solutions and ended with individual work. Both the teacher and the researchers, were not  satisfied with the way student-student interaction and teacher-student interaction using the  ZPD, were enacted in the classroom. We deliberated a four-phase lesson plan consisting of a  whole-class discussion, group work, reporting back and summing up, which was  implemented fully in the classroom from the ninth week of the study. During the first phase  of any lesson, the teacher held a whole-class discussion facilitating students to understand a  problem and to come up with possible heuristics and strategies for a solution. Group work  was the second phase that provided a chance for students to work productively together. At  the third reporting-back phase, students were given an opportunity to explain and justify their  solutions to the class. The final phase was the teacher summing up the lesson by discussing  all solutions, justifying the legitimacy of each solution, and introducing new symbols and  mathematical language.  

4.3. Data Collection 

As the emphasis was on analyzing learning from group work and whole-class interaction,  the fieldwork for this study consisted of observing the teacher and students in the classroom  and discussing the work with the teacher. One important way to strengthen the validity of  such research findings is through data triangulation  the use of a variety of data sources  Patton, 1990. We collected qualitative data through audio-visual recordings, observations  and interviews.  A video camera with an external sound box and microphones was used to tape the lessons  in the classroom. External microphones were used to increase the clarity of the audio  recording of the interactions between target students when they were involved in group work.  An audio-recorder was put in the pocket of the teacher to record his utterances throughout a  lesson. We recorded one lesson of 80 min and two lessons of 40 min per week throughout the  10 months of the study. Excluding holidays, examinations, tests and sport weeks, a total of 58  lessons were recorded.   After each recording, the researchers viewed the tapes and identified information-rich  episodes to be transcribed. These information-rich episodes were those from which we could  learn a great deal about issues of concern for the study Patton, 1990. Then, the tape was  replayed to the teacher to seek his interpretations on these episodes. Any conflicting  interpretation from the researchers and the teacher was negotiated. Recommendations to  improve the lesson were agreed upon and implemented in subsequent lessons. Here, we were  adopting the interventional nature of action research Kemmis  McTaggart, 1988. Through  this intervention, we were determined to provide support structures to the teachers  confidence and self-esteem emphasizing social interactions in the teaching and learning  process. Such negotiations were audio-taped with portions being transcribed and inserted as  field notes to the lesson concerned. For example, the teacher would not take up any noncollaborative interaction during group work for further discussions. However, the researchers   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  10 managed to convince the teacher on the importance of taking such cases to negotiate his  expectations for group work with the students. After noticing the potential of such instruction  to enhance students working productively together, he started to identify such cases to  negotiate his expectations for group work with the students and to design feedback for the  further learning of the students.  One of the shortcomings of using audio-visual recordings was that sometimes the  researchers were unable to identify any information-rich episode from the target group. It was  annoying to notice that groups that were not targeted were discussing actively. The  researchers decided to make an ad hoc record of such cases. Such on-site observations and  their interpretations were also verified with the teacher before inserting as field notes of the  lesson. Some of the students and the teacher were also interviewed to get feedback about  learning mathematics through social interactions. These interviews were audio-taped and  transcribed to supplement the data collected. 

4.4. Data Analysis 

Qualitative study specifies a unit of analysis to be investigated so that the focus of data  collection will be on what is happening to the participants in a setting and how these  participants are affected by the setting Patton, 1990. The analysis of data involved studentstudent and teacher-student interactions in the classroom. The data were gathered and  analyzed as soon as possible, and interpretations were derived. The challenge was to make  sense of the data, identify patterns and construct a framework to communicate the essence  revealed.  The comparative method suggested by Glaser 1978 was used to analyze the data. As  mentioned in the section on data collection, data analysis was performed on the data collected  for each lesson immediately after the lesson ended. Each analysis for a lesson consisted of a  three-stage process Schoenfeld, 2000; Cobb  Whiteneck, 1996; Creswell, 2003. During  the first stage, the researchers viewed the video-tape to capture episodes of interest for the  three main constructs of concept formation, student-student interaction and teacher-student  interaction to be transcribed. During the second stage, the contents of these episodes and the  on-site observations were analyzed and interpreted. A negotiated outcome for each interpretation was reached with the teacher. This interpretation process enabled the researchers to  identify patterns and their descriptions for each construct. The coding process took place by  grouping the episodes, on-site observations and the interpretations into these patterns. As the  study progressed, new patterns were founded and some of the episodes, on-site observations  and the interpretations were regrouped. The process of capturing episodes, interpreting the  episodes, identifying patterns and coding continued throughout the study. During the third  stage, a continuous comparison and contrast of the episodes, on-site observations and the  interpretations was performed to develop an overview of the progress on the various patterns  in chronological order. One of the results was the developmental process of the four-phase  lesson plan as the teaching approach that could cultivate an interactive classroom culture for  the first guiding question.  

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  11 5. NEGOTIATING AN INTERACTIVE CLASSROOM CULTURE 

This part deliberates the findings for the first guiding question. The teacher was not the  only one shaping the classroom context in the study. The students also played a very  important role, from passive learners to active participants in mathematics sense-making and  justification of ideas. Prior to the teacher participating in the study, he taught mathematics by  direct instruction. Before the study commenced, the researchers and the teacher had a number  of sessions discussing the possibility of applying Vygotskys ZPD and socio-cultural theories  to the teaching and learning process. The teacher commented: 

To be frank, actually we as teachers normally try to encourage active participation from  students since its something that has been emphasized by our Ministry. Somehow, I think  because of the time factor, we teachers end up solving the problem for our students. 

Besides those sessions, the support that the teacher got for the study came from the many  discussions on student-student interactions and teacher-student interactions from the lesson  episodes. We negotiated our conflicting interpretations and changes were identified and  implemented in subsequent lessons.   During the first three weeks of the study, the teacher used to take activities directly from  the mathematics textbook or the mathematics workbooks recommended by him to students.  Transcription 1 below shows an example of teacher-student interactions in one of such  lessons. 

Transcription 1: Lesson on Sets  

T: We will now study the operations for set. What are the four basic operations for  whole numbers, fractions, decimals and the like?  S1: Subtract, add, divide and multiply.  T: Can we use these operations on sets?  S1: No.  T: We will see in the following example:   The months of a year, P  The months  starting with the letter J, Q  The months with 31 days, R  The months with 28  or 29 days, S  The months with seven letters. What are the months starting with  the letter J?  S2: January and July.  T: Any other?  S2: No.  T: What are the months having 31 days?  S3: January, March, May, July, August, October, December.  T: Which months have 28 or 29 days?  S1: February.  T: What about the months with 7 letters?  S3: January and October.  T: Now we find the intersection of two sets PQ  January, July 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  12 How many elements in this set?  S3: Two.  T: What about PR?  S1: 0.  T: What about QS?  S1: January, October. 

The teacher led the students through the example so as to fulfill the objectives of the  lesson. By doing so, he was trying to use the ZPD by means of teacher-student interaction in  the teaching and learning process. The responses from students were either yes or no, or  brief phrases such as two and January, October. When the teacher was satisfied with the  understanding of students, he made a brief summary on intersection and invited students to  contribute their examples.  

T: Hence, January and October are the results of Q intersect S. The intersection will  result with the same elements in different sets. One of the operations that we can  perform on sets is intersection. Anybody can give another example? 

One of the students responded with the example of boys using neckties and spectacles.  However, the teacher did not guide him to apply the operation of intersection. Instead, he  started with union.  

S3: The number of boys using neckties.  T: Boys using neckties and   S3: Spectacles.  T: Boys using spectacles? What is that?  S3: No response  T: OK. One of the operations that we can perform on sets is intersection. The other is  union. 

The teacher said that the suggestion was not probed further as he would not like the  lesson being side-tracked into discussions on something not intended for the lesson or  students involved in off-task talks and he had limited time to finish a tight syllabus for  examination. As a result, learning happened along a well-marked path laid out by the teacher  for the students. The teacher commented: 

It often happens  every student is talking  they could easily get side tracked into offtask talking. Even though lots of good work can emerge but these are not necessarily what you  wanted and you just have to be careful of that  especially if youve a huge syllabus to cover. 

During the discussion sessions, the researchers also suggested to the teacher formulating  his own mathematics activities. In the following lesson, the teacher was aiming to introduce  parallel lines to the class. He prepared the following activity and gave the students to work in  groups. Here, he was using the ZPD through student-student interaction in the teaching and  learning process. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  13 T: This week, we are going to look at the relationship between straight lines. Hows the  gradient of one line when compared to another. Youre given the handout. Lets look  at the first activity, solve it yourself first. Then, compare the solution with your  friends. Youre asked to draw  not to sketch  Draw the following three straight  lines with the same axes.  

Transcription 2 below shows an example of teacher-student interaction during the  reporting-back phase of the lesson. 

Transcription 2: Lesson on Straight Lines  

T: OK?  Who wants to try first? Nurul, can you draw one of the lines? You can  choose to draw any of the three. Which one you choose?  S1: y  2x  2 and drawing the line.  T: y  2x  2. Everybody pays attention to the front. This is important because you must  be able to imagine the shape of a straight line. Why you marked 2?  S1: y-intercept.  T: OK, y-intercept. Can you show how you get this point?  S1: 2  21, y  2 and x  1.  T:  2 equals to 21, right?  S1: Right.  T: Why is it y here?  S1: Find gradient.  T: OK  Whats the definition for gradient? The difference in y divided by the  difference in x. OK  You move 1 along the x-axis and then move up 2 units. Can  we accept this? 

In this activity, the teacher asked the student to justify the solution and he legitimized it  by saying we give her a clap. Even though he helped the student to clarify a number of  issues involved in the justification, this teacher was showing his willingness to let students  assume more responsibility for their learning.  

T: We give her a clap  Is there any other method? I see one student putting up his  hand.  S2: Drawing the line  T: OK, this is the first method, we can also use. This is the second method. He uses y   0. We want to find the x-coordinate when y  0. We put y  0, we get x  1. So the  point is 1, 0. 

Again, the teacher also encouraged other solutions. This time, he legitimized the  alternative solution as the second method. However, he did not insist that the student  explain and justify the solution. Instead, the teacher explained the second method to the  class. Hence, the teacher was still unable to place the whole burden of explaining and  justifying the solutions on the students at this juncture. The teacher commented: 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  14 I think that these lessons have made me more aware of what the students can do on their  own and the sort of help they need from me to move on when they are stuck  I actually have  to be a little more prepared for  It made me come up with some new ideas to introduce  topics  Im thinking of the way we introduced gradient the other day by bringing my  students out of the class and using the tiled floor as the coordinate grid  The fact that we see  students very willing to come up and share their solutions with the class  It sort of  encourages you to keep working to come up with the ideas  

During the first five weeks of the study, we observed that some lessons started with a  whole class discussion and ended with students working on problems individually. Others  started with group work, followed by discussion on students solutions and ended with  individual work. The teacher was also walking a tightrope in allowing students to pursue  their personal mathematical constructions. On the one hand, he needed to listen and be  sensitive to students responses so as not to make interventions that would inhibit their  thinking. On the other hand, he wanted his students to develop the taken-as-shared mathematical meanings of the wider society. During a discussion session, he voiced his concern  about these issues and he wanted to follow the lesson format consisting of induction set,  content and summary recommended by Malaysian Ministry of Education. However, we all  agreed that both student-student and teacher-student interactions were beneficial to students  learning and such interactions should reach the whole class. It took the researchers and the  teacher another three weeks to deliberate a four-phase lesson plan consisting of a whole-class  discussion, group work, reporting back and summing up. By adopting this four-phase lesson  plan, both student-student and teacher-student interactions using the ZPD could be enacted in  the classroom. It was implemented from the ninth week.  In one lesson, students were asked to work on the following problem in groups: In the  diagram, ABCD is a straight line. Given that CE  3EF BD2, find the value of cos y.  Transcription 3 below is a part of this lesson. 

Transcription 3: Lesson on Trigonometry  

S1: Im blank.  T: Read the question carefully.   CE  3EF, what does this mean?  S1: The length of CE is three times that of EF.  T: Then, we have 3EF BD2. How do we solve this problem?  S1: Correct. BD2  3EF. Now, these are 4EF, 3EF and 5EF. We use Pythagoras  Theorem. 

A  B C D E F y  EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  15 S2: How do we find cos y?  S1: This is cos. So, adjacent divided by hypotenuse.  S2: 35.  S3: Again, how do you find cos y?  S1: CE  3EF, 31  4. So, CF  4EF. 3EF BD2  BC. The sides of the triangle are 3,  4 and 5 by using Pythagoras Theorem.  S3: So, cos y  35.  T: Cindy, what is your final answer?  S1: cos y  35.  T: Can you explain to the class how you get it?  S1: BC  3EF, CF  3EF  1EF  4EF, by applying Pythagoras Theorem to triangle  BCF, BF  5EF. cos y  adjacent divided by hypotenuse  35. 

S1 explained the solution to S2 and S3. He reorganized his understanding and explained  in a more understandable form to S3. He improved further his explanation to the class. Hence,  the responses from students evolved from brief phrases or single disconnected sentences to  explanations which make sense to all. Now, the teacher put the whole burden on students to  explain and justify their solutions, as well as to comment on the contributions of other  students. He said: 

Now I always remember to ask students why they do that particular step; in that way they  will try to recall back and they will try to think of the reason as to why they do it. Then they  will understand it better and I can assess their problem. 

Throughout the study, the teacher encountered numerous situations that conflicted with  his previous practice, but which were very productive in the mathematical learning of the  students. For instance, he would write the solution of any problem for his students. Now, the  students were given an opportunity first to work in groups, then present and justify their  solutions to the class. As a result, they understood the concepts better and improved in  communicating skills. These spurred him to value social interactions in the teaching and  learning process. In other words, both the conflicts and dilemmas the teacher encountered in  the classroom as he tried to enact student-student and teacher-student interactions using the  ZPD, and the discussions on lesson episodes to resolve them, created a context for him to  learn. The teachers learning and subsequent changes did not occur as isolated incidents, but  consisted of connected continuous constructions and transformations. For instance, the  teacher changed from frequently answering his own questions to the students to giving the  students a chance to answer his questions and emphasizing that students should explain and  justify their answers. Another instance is that the teacher was very willing to adopt any  suggestion of students and led a whole-class discussion on those suggestions.   Two other issues were also addressed for successfully implementation of the four-phase  lesson plan. First, there were some students who were often engaged in off-task talk during  group work. Transcription 4 shows such an off-task talk. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  16 Transcription 4: Off-task talking  

S1: Playing with his pen I slept late last night.  S2: Where have you been?  S1: We went for a movie. Oh, I hate doing this.  S2: You cant, were in front of the camera.  T: Josh S1, have you got the answer?  S1: I cant understand the question.  T: Read the question   S1: Reading it.  T: What should we do first? 

The teacher was quite frustrated with the amount of off-task talking from the students.  Not only did the off-task talking make the teacher worried about the progress of those  students, but they also disturbed his concentration on interacting with other students. He  decided to constantly remind the students of their work, ask them to present their solutions to  the class, and attend to them and ask them questions related to the task when he sensed that  the students were off task. By doing so, the teacher made clear to the students his expectations  that they would discuss for a solution during group work and explain and justify the solution  to the class during the reporting-back phase.   Second, the teacher needed to find ways to encourage students to express their thinking to  others. For the students, it is one thing to think through a solution privately but quite another  to express their thinking to others. One of the students commented: 

There were times that I didnt like sharing my solutions with the class especially when I  was not sure whether my solutions were right or not. 

Unless the students are willing to express their thoughts and the methods with others and  are willing to listen to the solutions of others, they will miss the opportunity to reflect on their  work and reorganize their current conceptual level of understanding. As their thinking will be  subjected to evaluations and criticisms, the students needed to feel safe in expressing their  thinking to others. The teacher pointed out that: 

We try to inquire from students what they know about a concept  before introducing to  them that particular lesson. So, with that we are able to actually know the level to enter . Its  making the students quite vulnerable because often youre not sure that theyve got it right  

This aspect placed the teachers under the obligation of approaching the students  suggestions in a non-evaluative way and not imposing their ways of tackling the problem on  the students. For instance, the teacher appreciated the solution put forward by the student  drawing the line y  2x  2 using the y-intercept and gradient method. That was why he said  give her a clap. As the students realized that their thinking and ideas were respected and  accepted, they felt obliged to reconstruct their solutions and explain and justify them to  others. As a result, they improved in doing so and gained confidence in themselves and their  ability. One of the students commented: 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  17 When I feel easy, understand the subject and know my teacher, Im always confident and  not afraid to share with my classmates. 

Hence, reciprocal obligations and expectations were negotiated implicitly during the  teaching and learning process. The students were very optimistic towards such process as one  of them commented: 

Even though my marks havent improved much, but I understand concepts better now.  And Im enjoying it  I understand it and Im asking a lot of questions. Even if I dont get  the final answer right, I always know where I go wrong. Hopefully this year has given me  confidence in mathematics and my marks will go up later. 

6. NATURE OF STUDENT-STUDENT INTERACTION 

This section discusses the insights we have gained for the second guiding question. The  focus is on the negotiating process and the learning opportunities that transpired in the course  of interactions when students were engaged in group work to complete their mathematical  activities. First, we deliberate the continuous negotiating process of group work expectations,  which was crucial for effective mathematics learning of students. Then, the features of  collaborative interactions that created learning opportunities for students are presented. 

6.1. Group Work Expectations 

Prior to the teacher participating in this study, he taught mathematics by direct  instruction, which would be notes, examples, exercises and tests. The students were well into  a school career in which mathematics had been an endless series of passive learning. As the  two main instructional strategies were group work and whole-class interaction, the teacher  needed to change the ways he organized to teach. For the students, they were now faced with  the social problems of group work and the problems of solving the mathematical tasks in  hand.   Before the study commenced, the researchers and the teacher had a number of sessions  discussing the possibility of applying the expanded metaphor of scaffolding and group work  to the teaching and learning process. The teacher commented: 

We know group work can be productive and we try to encourage students working  together. But, they end up in all directions and I think because of the time factor, we prefer  giving the methods and examples. 

However, the teacher was determined to embrace the changes in the teaching and  learning process that were inevitable. Through the many discussions on student-student and  teacher-student interactions from the lesson episodes, the researchers were also determined to  provide support structures to the teacher negotiating his expectations with the students.  During group work, the teacher constantly moved around the classroom observing,  encouraging and facilitating the students in their problem-solving attempts. As a result, he   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  18 was able to identify non-collaborative dialogues and initiated the construction of group work  expectations with respect to these cases. We provide three non-collaborative examples to  illustrate the processes by which the expectations of group work were continually negotiated  and one collaborative example to show the learning opportunity that transpired during group  work.  The first example is contained in transcription 5 below showing the interactions between  two students in a lesson solving the problem: A, B and C are three points on the horizontal  ground. The bearings of B from A and C from A are 225 and 135 respectively. AB  80 m.  AC  60 m. Find BC. 

Transcription 5: Lesson on Bearing 

S2: How to get BAC?  S1: Ah! 360 minus 225 and we get this.  S2: No.  S1: Correct, we get this first Referring to BAN.  S2: Listen first. This is the same as this Referring to BAO and CAO.  S1: The question doesnt say so.  S2: We can assume it. Teacher, does this arrow bisect the angle?  T: Jane, can you explain that? Karen, you listen to Jane first.  S1: We can find BAN  135 and CAN  135. Then, BAO  45 and CAO   45. Shes right. The two angles are equal. 

Initially, both students did not benefit from the dialogue. They were not precise and  explicit in their explanations, and were defensive of their own methods. S2 resorted to clarify  her issue with the teacher and the teacher passed the onus of explaining the issue back to S1  and insisted S2 listening to the explanations tendered by S1. Later, S2 was asked to present  their solution to the class and the teacher took the opportunity to comment on the  collaborative behavior of S1 and S2. 

S2: CAN  135 given. Bearing of B from A  225. BAC  225  135  90.  Using Pythagoras theorem, BC2  802  602  10 000. BC  100 cm. 

N A B  C 80 m 60 m O  EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  19 T: Is this your work?  S2: Smiling.  T: Can you tell us your own method?  S2: CAO  BAO  45. So, BAC  45  45  90.  BC2  802  602  10 000. BC  100 cm.  T: If the bearing of B from A is 230, are the two angles equal?  S2: Yah. I cant assume them.  T: Jane, what about yours?  S1: I was looking at BAN. Then, we got BAC by subtracting the bearing of C from  the bearing of B.  T: I observed Jane and Karen just now. They were unwilling to listen to each others  explanations and both insisted having the correct method. You need to listen to your  friend, then give your justification and agree on a solution. Now, theyve a better  solution. OK. Every group must have a solution. I can call on any one of you to  present and the other to explain.  

Here, the teacher capitalized on this non-collaborative case to convey to the class the  obligations and expectations of them during group work. In the second example, the teacher  was aiming to introduce parallel lines to the class. Transcription 6 below shows the  collaborative dialogue of a pair of students working on the activity.  

Transcription 6: Lesson on Straight Line 

S1: Marking two points.  S2: How do you get these points?  S1: Gradient-intercept method.  S2: Whats that?  S1: continue drawing the line.  S2: Drawing the line using his own method.  S1: The y-intercept is 1. Gradient is 2 and 21. So, x is 1 and y is 2.  S2: Indistinct Drawing his line. 

As the explanation of the gradient-intercept method was tendered later, it was ignored by  S2 as he was drawing the line using his own method. Transcription 6 is continued with the  interactive dialogue during the reporting-back phase of the lesson given under transcription 2.  The two students were asked to present their solutions, with S1 first followed by S2. After the  presentations, the interaction continued as follows: 

T: Listen here. You are working together. What are you going to do with different  methods?   S3: Compare.  T: Compare and   S4: Explain.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  20 T: Right. I want you to explain and help your partner to understand your method. Its  your responsibility to make sure that both of you understand and agree with the  methods.  

The two students used different methods to draw the straight lines and they did not really  work together. Here, the teacher took this non-collaborative case as the context to initiate a  discussion with the whole class on the obligations and expectations during group work. When  the teacher was invited to comment on this lesson episode, he said:  I need to be very observance in these lessons. And I think Im now better in identifying  problematic cases for discussions  However, the students could be insulted because often  youre getting them to present something that theyre not sure that theyve got it right. So,  weve to be a little bit more careful of this and thats why Ive called on students who I think  can take the knock to share their answers. Ill discuss their solutions, pose questions to make  them aware of their mistakes and point out their responsibilities.  

In the third example, a pair of students was engaged in off-task talking during group work  given under transcription 4. The teacher was very concerned with the progress of the students  involved in off-task talking. These off-task dialogues also disturbed his concentration on  facilitating the collaborative moves of other students. He decided to constantly remind the  students of their work, attend to them and ask them questions related to the task when he  sensed that the students were off task. By doing so, the teacher conveyed to the students their  obligations and expectations to discuss for a solution and to explain and justify the solution to  the class during the reporting-back phase.   The teacher often approached the solutions and explanations of the students in a nonevaluative way. In transcription 5, the teacher did not comment on the method used by S1.  Instead, he posed the question If the bearing of B from A is 230, are the two angles equal?  to S1. As the students realized that their solutions and explanations were respected and  accepted, they were very keen to work in groups and the amount of off-task talk also  decreased. One of the students commented: 

You are working on the same question . So, if you come to different answers, you can  compare and you have time to compare and see where you differed . And you can have a  fight over whos right. 

From these examples, the teacher used four strategies to initiate and guide the negotiation  of his expectations for group work. First, he stopped by the non-collaborative groups to exert  his authority on the students involved to act appropriately for effective mathematics learning.  Second, he took these cases as opportunities during the reporting-back phase to preach to the  class the obligations and expectations for group work. Third, he constantly reminded the  students of their obligations and expectations when he moved around the classroom during  group work. Last, he approached every solution and explanation in a non-evaluative way.   As the study progressed, the students demonstrated more collaborative behavior in  working together such as stating their ideas freely, listening to each other, letting their  defenses down and accomplishing a shared purpose. The following example illustrates such a  collaborative case when a pair of students tackled the problem: The diagram below shows a  right pyramid with a rectangular base. The vertex V is vertically above O, the midpoint of the   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  21 plane PQRS. Find a the height of OV, b the angle between the straight line VR and the  plane PQRS and c the angle between the planes PQV and PQRS. 

Transcription 7: Lesson on Lines and Planes in 3-dimension 

S1: We use 5 for this line.  S2: Why 5?  S1: This is the midpoint.  S2: How? Do we use this triangle?  S1: Yes, this is 10 referring to PR.   Because O is the midpoint, this line is 5.  S2: OK. After this  

S1: This is VOR, we get 5, 12, 13.  S2: How do you know that is 12? Use Pythagoras theorem?  S1: Yes.  S2: Thats easy. Do we have to show all these?  S1: Yes. Draw PQR.  S2: Why? Oh! I know 6, 8 and 10. 

The verbal interactions facilitated the mathematics learning of S2 in that the collaborative  moves were supportive, took the trouble to elicit the lack of understanding of S2 and extended  what had been said by S2 further. When the students were aware of their obligations and  expectations during group work, they developed a sense of task interdependence and group  responsibility. As a result, they worked productively together and the collaborative  interactions facilitated each others learning.  

6.2. Collaborative Interactions 

Having resolved the social problems of group work, the students were only faced with  solving the mathematical task in hand. During group work, the students encountered a variety  of problematic situations such as resolving obstacles that arose when they attempted to make 

P  Q R S V

O 13 cm 8 cm 6 cm  EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  22 sense of a problem based on their current ability, accounting for different methods,  verbalizing their thinking process, elaborating their ideas, taking conflicting points of view  and accommodating different solutions. How should they interact to resolve these task-related  issues? It turned out that the students were giving and receiving explanations during the  collaborative interactions. We identified relevant, adequate, timely, and understand and use to  be the features of the explanations during group work that could create learning opportunities  for students.  

6.2.1. Relevant  The first feature is that the explanations must be relevant to the target student. In  transcription 5, both students did not benefit from the dialogue as they were defensive of their  own methods and the explanations tendered were not relevant to the problematic situations  faced by them. However, the collaborative interactions in transcription 7 benefited S2. The  explanations were relevant to the problematic situations faced by S2 and hence created the  learning opportunity for S2. The explanations supported S2, elicited the lack of understanding  of S2 and extended what had been said by S2 further. 

6.2.2. Adequate   The next feature of collaborative interactions creating learning opportunities for students  is that the explanations must be adequate for the target student. Inadequate explanations  included answers, and simple but appropriate responses. Adequate explanations consisted of  descriptions of how to solve a problem or a part of it. The lesson excerpt in Transcription 8  shows the interactions between two students working on the problem: P, Q and R are the  points 1, m, 2, 1 and 5, 5 and PQR  90. Find the value of m. 

Transcription 8: Lesson on Straight Line 

S1: I dont understand the question.  S2: Use gradients to find m.  S1: Gradients?  S2: Indistinct busy writing out his solution  S1: Finding gradients for PQ, PR and QR.  S2: m is 12.  S1: Continue to work out his own solution. 

Obviously, the student requesting for help could not clarify the lack of understanding  through the inadequate explanation of use gradient to find m tendered by S2. In another  lesson, students were asked to work on the following problem in groups: In the diagram,  ABCD is a straight line. Given that CE  3EF  BD2, find the value of cos y. Part of the  student-student interactions during group work is given under transcription 3.  Both S2 and S3 benefited from the adequate explanations tendered by S1. It seems that  receiving inadequate explanations was not sufficient for learning. Furthermore, these  inadequate explanations frustrated the target student and consequently led him to tackle the  problem on his own. The explanations needed to be sufficiently detailed to enable the   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  23 receiving student to overcome the misunderstanding or the lack of understanding through  such exchanges during group work. 

6.2.3. Timely   As the teacher could not always be available at the precise moment when any of his  students was stuck in problem solving, he was less likely to provide timely tips. However, the  students had the potential for giving timely understandable explanations to their partners  during group work. In transcription 6, the clarification on the gradient-intercept method was  not timely for S2. It was ignored as S2 was drawing the line using his own method. The next  transcription shows the interactions between two students working together during a lesson  on trigonometry. 

Transcription 9: Lesson on Trigonometry 

S1: cos130  cos40  0.7660.  S2: Its not 40.  S1: What?  S2: Your diagram is wrong.  S1: You mean this angle.  S2: Yah.  S1: So, its 180  130 for second quadrant. ASTC. Negative.   S2: Yes. 

The timely help tendered by S2 corrected the misunderstanding on basic angle of S1. If  the explanations were not offered at an appropriate time, the learning opportunities would not  arise for the target student. At a later time, the student requesting for help would be at a  different stage in the process of solving the problem. By then, either the target student might  have a method for the answer, or he might be occupied with other processes. This example  also shows that students were very likely to provide unsolicited explanations. A possible  reason for this is that when the students worked together, they were well tuned-in to each  others problem-solving process and provided timely explanations without being explicitly  requested. 

6.2.4. Understand and Use  During group work, many students tendered relevant, adequate and timely explanations  to their friends. The receiving students would only benefit from these explanations if they  understood and used them to solve the problem correctly. In the examples given in  130  40   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  24 transcriptions 5 and 6, the target students did not attempt to understand and use the  explanations as they were either defensive of their own methods or getting a solution using  their own methods. In transcription 7, S2 followed through the explanations tendered by S1.  He understood and used the explanations. That is why he said Oh! I know 6, 8 and 10.  These examples illustrate the importance of the target students in understanding and using the  explanations in order to overcome their difficulties.  So far, we have discussed the benefit acquired by the students receiving the explanations.  Students giving the explanations also benefited from these collaborative exchanges. In  transcription 5, S2 found BAN  360  225  135 first. Then, she calculated BAO and  CAO to find BAC. However, they realized that BAC could be obtained by subtracting  the bearing of C from the bearing of B. To the teacher, theyve a better solution. In  transcription 3, S1 was asked to present the solution during the reporting-back phase. S1  explained the solution to S2 and S3. She reorganized her understanding and explained in a  more understandable form to S3. She improved further her explanations to the class. Hence,  her responses evolved from brief phrases or single disconnected sentences to explanations  which make sense to all. A number of processes accounted for these changes. In explaining  and justifying to the friends, she needed to clarify, organize the thinking and reorganize the  material tailored to the needs of those seeking the explanations. In doing so, she discovered  gaps in her own understanding or discrepancies with her previous understanding. When the  students were asked to comment on the benefit of group work to their mathematics learning,  one of them said: 

I get all sorts of ideas from friends to solve a problem. Moreover, I have a chance to help  my friends. But, sometimes it can be tough when my friends dont have the basic. I need to  teach them from the beginning to the solution. 

7. FEEDBACK 

In this section, we present the findings to the third guiding questions. In the teaching and  learning process, feedback is conceptualized as the information provided by a teacher  regarding aspects of students performance or understanding. For the purpose of this chapter,  it was part of the teaching and learning process that happened during group work, and the  whole-class interaction during the reporting-back phase after the students had presented their  solutions. The focus was on the feedback tendered by the teacher based on the outcomes of  group work to fill a gap between what was achieved and what was intended for the students.  The analysis of data yielded three types of instructional feedback that could facilitate the  mathematical growth of students, namely, feedback on the task, feedback on the process and  feedback on regulation. 

7.1. Feedback on the Task 

This feedback was about clarifying the information in a task and building understanding  on the information, and the correctness of the solution. One of the examples is contained in  the teacher-student interaction at the beginning of transcription 3. The feedback given by the   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  25 teacher probed S1 to clarify and understand the given information CE  3EF  BD2 to solve  the problem successfully. The next example illustrates how the teacher capitalized on the  solution of the students during the reporting-back phase to design feedback related to the  correctness of the solution. Transcription 10 contains part of the whole-class interaction  during the reporting-back phase after the students solving the problem: Given AP  BQ, find  the perimeter of the shaded region.  

Transcription 10: Lesson on Circle 

S1 S  r,   Sr  84  2 rad. QB  AP  2.   PQ  8 cm. AB  62  12 cm.  Perimeter  22 cm  8 cm  12 cm  24 cm.  T: Where do you get 22? 

S1: 2  2.  T: Is 2  2  22?  S2: The answer is the same, but its unsuitable.  T: Yes. Its true for 2 only. If you dont believe, is 3  3  32?  S1: No.  T: So, we must write 2  2. 

In finding the perimeter, the group wrote QB  AP  22 instead of QB  AP  2  2. The  teacher gave another example to help the students realize that QB  AP should not be written  as 22. Later, in an interview, the teacher commented: 

I feel Im better at dealing with students misconceptions. You need to put forward an  example to students that can show them that their conception is not right and thats difficult  because sometimes you cant think of one  I need to think of an example that I can give to  the students. They will do it and find out for themselves that it doesnt work. Because I say  No, thats wrong, they might accept it but they wont understand why  Im confident that  these lessons have definitely enhanced the involvement and understanding of the students.  

7.2. Feedback on the Process 

The teacher capitalized on the solutions of students to design feedback related to the  processes of obtaining the solutions. The teacher-student interaction of transcription 5 is such 

A  O P Q B 8 cm 4 cm 4 cm 2 cm  EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  26 an example. The teacher asked the students to tell the class their own methods. In this case,  BAO is equal to CAO. Then, the teacher posed the question If the bearing of B from A is  230, are the two angles equal? for the students and the whole class to realize that BAO  may not be equal to CAO. The more effective strategy to find BAC is by subtracting the  bearing of C from the bearing of B. Transcription 11 shows another example of feedback on  the process. 

Transcription 11: Lesson on Circle 

T: Is there any other method? Yes, John?  S1: Writing  T: OK. This is the 1st method. This is the 2nd method.  S2: Why do we use 12r2sin and not 12baseheight?  T: Jane, can you draw the height of the triangle POQ?  

S3: Drawing  T:  Now, express h in terms of .  S3: sin   h16, h  16sin .  T: What do you get for the area by using this?  S2: Its the same.  T: Good. Can you use both formulas? Give him a clap. 

Through this feedback, not only Jane, but the other students in the class understood that  12r2sin is derived from 12baseheight. By doing so, the students noticed that they could  use different strategies to solve the problem. 

7.3. Feedback on Regulation 

Last, but not least, is feedback on regulation. This instructional feedback drawn from the  solutions of the students addressed the ways they should monitor, direct and regulate actions  toward success. In a lesson, students were working on the figure below to findDAB.  Transcription 12 shows part of the reporting-back phase. 
12 Q O

h P  EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  27 Transcription 12: Lesson on Trigonometry 

T: What is the answer?  S1: tan DAB  68. DAB  36.9.  S2: Having sinDAB  610 Why do we use tan?   Why dont we use sin or cos?  T: Thats a good question. Why?  S1: We dont have the hypotenuse.  T: Cant we find it?  S3: Use Pythagoras theorem to find it.  T: Yah. Then, we can use sin or cos. Since we can use tan for the given values, why  must we waste time to find the hypotenuse?  

The teacher framed the outcomes of this reporting-back phase as the context to discuss  with the students in choosing the strategy to solve a task based on the information given. In  the end, the students noticed that it would take them more time to accomplish the task if they  used sine or cosine instead of tangent. In another lesson, the students were asked to solve the  following task in groups: AB and CD are two vertical poles on a horizontal plane. These  poles are 10 m apart. The angle of elevation of A from C is 45 and the angle of depression of  B from C is 30. Find the height of AB. Transcription 13 contains part of the teacher-student  interactions during the reporting-back phase. 

Transcription 13: Lesson on Angles of Elevation and Depression 

S1: AE  EC  BD  10 cm. BE10  tan 30.   D A B C 6 5 3   A E B C D 45  30  10 cm  EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  28 BE  10tan 30  5.8 cm.  AB  10  5.8  15.8 cm.  T: Can you tell us what did you get initially?  S1: We wrongly labeled the angle 30.  T: What else? How did you find AE?  S1: Rose said AE10  tan 45.  But, I thought AE  EC since AEC is an isosceles triangle.  T: Good. These are the things that you must do. Make sure that you interpret the  question correctly. Look for the easiest steps. And most importantly, check your  solution again. 

The teacher capitalized on the outcomes of this group work to emphasize to the students  the importance of regulation for accomplishing a task successfully. During an interview  session, one of the students commented: 

At the beginning, I didnt have any confidence as the topics were new. Usually, our  teacher gave us the notes first and we solved the problems later. Now, were asked to solve  the problems first. I get many suggestions from friends and I like it as I can learn different  methods in solving a problem. On top of these, I also learn how to discriminate between these  methods for a good solution. 

CONCLUSION 

Learning mathematics anchored in Vygotskian theory has been actively studied by  researchers interested in identifying how the social context of teaching and learning can foster  students making connections, building mental schemata and developing new mathematics  through thinking aloud with another person. This chapter attempts to contribute to this body  of literature by investigating how group work and whole-class interaction help to realize such  meaningful constructions of mathematics. The study reported here was conducted on a Form  Four class over a 10-month period. The involvement of the upper secondary schooling is very  significant since the pressure for teachers to help their students gain the highest performance  at high-stakes assessment favors knowledge transmission. Bridging the individual and the  social was the main theme of the chapter, and social, in our sense, referred to more than one  individual actively participating in the teaching and learning process. The emphases of the  analysis were on the partnered activities, the collaborative dialogues engaged in by the  teacher and the students, and the learning opportunities created for the students.   The sociocultural theory, developed from Vygotskys concepts, recognizes the need to  give attention to the context and the interpersonal relationships of social interactions. Within  the sociocultural perspective, the optimum learning of a student occurs in his or her ZPD,  which according to Vygotsky is the difference between the cognitive levels of a students  problem-solving ability when tackling a task alone and in cooperation with an adult or a more  capable peer. Hence, in any classroom, the ZPD of a student depends on his or her cognitive  level and the forms of instruction. Instruction must proceed progressively to create learning  opportunities for students and the classroom culture under which the instruction takes place  determines the potential for learning.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  29 Concept formation, student-student and teacher-student interactions were the three main  constructs drawn from Vygotskys concepts guiding the formation of the research design for  the study. The basic instructional strategies were group work and whole-class interaction. As  the participating students were to exercise in class their curiosity and inventiveness, to  imagine mathematics classes in which mathematics is discovered rather than covered  Schwartz, 1994, p 6, the teacher needed to change the ways he organized to teach. For the  students, they were now faced with two types of problem solving, namely, the problems of  working productively together and the problems of solving the mathematical task.   In our view, the classroom culture for the students working productively together came  into being through the continuous negotiation by the teacher and the students in the course of  their social interactions. The expectations and obligations that made it possible for the  students to act appropriately in the teaching and learning process created learning  opportunities for them. Barnes and Todd 1977 wrote as follows: 

Collaborative moves are mutually supportive: by taking the trouble to elicit an opinion  from someone else, or by utilizing what has been said by extending it further, the group  members ascribe meaningfulness to one anothers attempts to make sense of the world. p. 36 

When the students worked collaboratively together, each was obliged to make his or her  emergent thinking available to the partner. The assisting student assumed the role of a teacher  and tendered explanations that supported the problem-solving attempts of the other student.  Learning opportunities arose as they clarified and revised their own thinking, and attempted  to reach a consensus on the understanding of the task in hand. In doing so, they were showing  a valuing of self and others, respect for self and others and responsibility for self and others.  Thus, they created a ZPD enabling both students to accomplish a shared solution for the task  in hand which could be different if they tackled the task alone.  The students learned as they participated with the knowledge they possessed, no matter  how rich or sparse. They internalized information as their solutions were verified and  clarified. It is important to recognize that their understanding built up during group work was  not yet matured. The teacher as the representative of the academic discipline needed to  select the outcomes of group work to design instructional feedback for the successful  constructions of scientific concepts. The students developed understanding by making their  thinking visible, talking aloud, verifying and clarifying understanding, and contributing clues  as the learning conversations evolved. Here, the teacher and the students created a ZPD  enabling the students understanding to move from not yet matured through the process of  maturation to a full-blown state. The teaching and learning of mathematics became a social  process of negotiation rather than imposition. The teachers role changed from the sole source  of mathematical knowledge to facilitator in the development of the students mathematical  constructions. The students became active participants in the teaching and learning process  rather than passive receivers of the teachers knowledge. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  30 REFERENCES 

Barnes, D. and Todd, F. 1977. Communicating and learning in small groups. London:  Routledge  Kegan Paul.  Bruner, J. 1986. Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  Cobb, P. and Whitenack, W. 1996. A method for conducting longitudinal analyses of  classroom video-recordings and transcripts. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 30, 213   228.   Creswell, J. W. 2003. Research Design, Sage, London.  Damon, W. 1984. Peer education: The untapped potential. Journal of Applied  Developmental Psychology, 3, 331  343.  Egan, G. 1997. The skilled helper: A systematic approach to effective helping 6th ed.  Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks.  Fall, R. and Webb, N. 2000. Group discussion and large-scale language arts assessment:  Effects on students comprehension. American Educational Research Journal, 37, 911   941.  Forman, E. A 2003. A sociocultural approach to mathematics reform: Speaking, inscribing  and doing mathematics within communities of practice, in J. Kilpatrick, W. G. Martin  and D. Schifter Eds., A research companion to principles and standards for school  mathematics, Reston, VA: NCTM, pp 333  352.  Forman, E. A. and McPhail, J. 1993. Vygotskian perspective on childrens collaborative  problem solving activities, in C. A. Stone, N. Minick and E. A. Forman Eds, Context  for learning: Sociocultural dynamics in childrens development, NY: University Press, pp  213  229.  Freire, P. 1972. Pedagogy of the oppressed. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.  Gillies, R. M. 2003. Structuring cooperative group work in classroom. International Journal  of Educational Research, 39, 35  49.   Glaser, B 1978. Theoretical sensitivity. Mill Valley, CA: The Sociology Press.  Gonzales, P., Williams, T., Jocelyn, L., Roey, S., Kastberg, D. and Brenwald, S. 2008.  Highlights from TIMSS 2007. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics,  Institute of Education Science, U. S. Department of Education.   Goodnow, J. 1990. The socialization of cognition: Whats involved, in J. W. Stigler, R. A.  Shweder  G. H. Herdt Eds, Cultural psychology: Essays on comparative human  development, NY: Cambridge University Press, pp 259  286.  Goos, M. 2002. Understanding metacognitive failure. Journal of Mathematical Behavior,  21, 283  302.  Goos, M. 2004. Learning mathematics in a classroom community of inquiry. Journal for  Research in Mathematics Education, 354, 258  291.  Greenfield, P. M. 1984. A theory of the teacher in the learning activities of everyday life, in  B. Rogoff and J. Lave Eds., Everyday cognition: Its development in everyday context,  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, pp 118  138.  Hattie, J. and Timperley, H. 2007. The power of feedback. Review of Educational Research,  77 1, 81  112.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Negotiating Mathematics in an Interactive Classroom  31 Hershkowitz, R. and Schwarz, B 1997. Unifying cognitive and sociocultural aspects in  research on learning the function concept. Proceedings of the 21st International  Conference for the Psychology of Mathematics Education, Finland, Vol. 1, pp 148  164.  Johnson, D. W. and Johnson, R. T. 1999. Making cooperative learning work. Theory into  Practice, 38 2, 67  74.  Kemmis, S. and McTaggart, R. 1988. The action research planner, Geelong, Victoria:  Deakin University Press.   Kieran, C. 2001. The mathematical discourse of 13-year-old partnered problem solving and  its relation to the mathematics that emerges. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 46, 187   228.  Kilpatrick, J. 1987. What constructivism might be in mathematics education. Proceedings of  the Eleventh International Conference on the Psychology of Mathematics Education,  Montreal, Vol. 1, 3  27.  Kluger, A. N. and DeNisi, A. 1996. The effect of feedback interventions on performance: A  historical review, a meta-analysis, and a preliminary feedback intervention theory.  Psychological Bulletin, 119 2, 254  284.  Lampert, M. 1990. When the problem is not the question and the solution is not the answer:  Mathematical knowing and teaching. American Educational Research Journal, 27, 29   63.   Leikin, R. and Zaslavsky, O. 1997. Facilitating student interactions in mathematics in a  cooperative learning setting. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 28, 331   354.  Martin, J. 1985. Reclaiming a conversation: The ideal of the educated woman. New Haven,  CT: Yale University Press.  OConnor, M. C. 2001. Can any fraction be turned into a decimal? A case study of a  mathematical group discussion. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 46, 143  185.  Patton, M. 1990. Qualitative evaluation and research methods. Newbury Park: Sage  Publications.  Rogoff, B. 1990. Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. NY:  Oxford University Press.  Rogoff, B.  Gardner, W. 1984. Adult guidance of cognitive development, in Rogoff, B.   Lave, J. Eds., Everyday cogntion: Its development in everyday context. Cambridge,  MA: Harvard University Press.  Schoenfeld, A. H. 2000. Purposes and methods of research in mathematics education.  Notices of the AMS, 476, 641  649.  Schwartz, J. L. 1994. The role of research in reforming mathematics education: A different  approach, Chapter 1 in A. Schoenfeld Ed., Mathematical thinking and problem solving.  Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   Searle, D. 1984. Scaffolding: Whos building whose building? Language Arts, 6150, 480   483.  Sfard, A., Forman, E. A. and Kieran, C. 2001. Learning discourse: Sociocultural approaches  to research in mathematics education. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 46, 1  11.  Sfard, A. and Kieran, C. 2001. Cognition as communication: Rethinking learning-by-talking  through multi-faceted analysis of students mathematical interactions. Mind, Culture, and  Activity, 8 1, 42  76.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paul Ngee Kiong Lau, Tee Yong Hwa and Sie Hoe Lau  32 Slavin, R. 1995. Cooperative learning: Theory, research and practice 2nd ed. Boston:  Allyn and Bacon.  Stone, C. A. 1993. What is missing in the metaphor of scaffolding?, in C. A. Stone, N.  Minick and E. A. Forman Eds., Context for learning: Sociocultural dynamics in  children development, NY: University Press, pp 169  183.  Teasley, S. D. 1995. The role of talk in childrens peer collaborations. Developmental  psychology, 31 2, 207  220.  Von Glasersfeld, E. 1995. Radical constructivism: A way of knowing and learning, London:  Falmer Press.  Vygotsky, L. 1978. Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes,  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  Webb, N. and Farivar, S. 1994. Promoting helping behavior in cooperative small groups in  middle school mathematics. American Educational Research Journal, 31, 369  395.   Wood, D., Bruner, J. S. and Ross, G. 1976. The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal  of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 17, 89  100. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

In: Classrooms: Management, Effectiveness and Challenges  ISBN 978-1-61324-601-6  Editor: Rebecca J. Newley, pp. 33-58   2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 

Chapter 2 

FACTORS AFFECTING HELP-SEEKING   AND LEARNING GAINS IN TECHNOLOGY-ENHANCED  INQUIRY-LEARNING: THE EFFECTS OF THE  CLASSROOM SCRIPT AND GENDER COMPOSITION 

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl1,, Frank Fischer2 and Carmen Kohnle2  1University of Jyvskyl, Finland  2University of Munich, Germany 

ABSTRACT 

The use of collaborative inquiry in classrooms is increasing, despite the fact that the  conditions for its effectiveness have not been systematically studied. It has been claimed  that inquiry-learning environments with minimal guidance are less effective than those  with additional instructional support, especially for learners with little prior knowledge. It  has also been argued that collaborative working, working with computers, and learning  scientific contentmay involve gender factors. However, with regard to collaborative webbased inquiry-learning, there has so far been little research on how students learning and  collaboration is supported or hindered by differently structured interaction patterns, and  the gender composition of groups. The present chapter deals with technology-enhanced  collaborative inquiry-learning. In this context, we examine the influence of the classroom  -script structure high structure vs. low structure on the help-seeking of single-gender  and mixed-gender pairs, and also look at the learning gains achieved. The data are drawn  from 54 student pairs in secondary science education. We analyzed screenand audiocapturing videos according to a model of the help-seeking process. Preand post-tests  were applied in order to measure the students learning gains. Overall, the single-gender  and mixed-gender pairs under the high-structured classroom-script condition sought less  help, but learnt more than those under the low-structured classroom-script condition. The  results indicate that in terms of both help-seeking and learning gains, the structure of the  classroom script has a greater effect than the gender composition of the classroom. 

Finnish Institute for Educational Research, University of Jyvskyl, Finland. Email: kati.makitalo-siegljyu.fi;  Postal address visiting researcher: Department of Psychology, University of Munich LMU, Leopoldstr. 13,  80802 Munich, Germany. Telephone: 49 089 2180 6255; Fax: 49 089 99 2180 6255.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  34 However, mixed-gender pairs seemed obtain particular benefit from the high-structured  classroom script in terms of learning gains  a result that would merit further  investigation with a larger sample. In addition, a qualitative analysis of successful and  unsuccessful pairs was conducted with respect to learning gains, to determine whether  there could be differences between gender pairs and their ways of working. In fact, no  clear gender differences were found, but students behavior in successful pairs could be  characterized as task-relevant behavior. In conclusion, we discuss the challenges  pertaining to the structuredness of the classroom script and the role of the teacher in  technology-enhanced inquiry-learning classrooms. 

Keywords: Collaborative Inquiry-Learning; Gender;Help-Seeking; Education; Secondary  School 

INTRODUCTION 

In education, increasing use is being made of collaborative inquiry methods, although the  conditions for their effectiveness have not been systematically studied. In science education,  collaborative inquiry-learning requires learnersto engage actively in scientific activities such  as searching for literature, gathering and interpreting scientific data,and building hypotheses.  These activities are considered to be highly demanding and even excessively challenging if  they are not adequately supported, for exampleby scaffolding, small-group scripting, expert  support, and so on e.g. Kollar, Fischer,andSlotta, 2007; Linn, 2006; van Joolingen and  Zacharia, 2009. It has been argued that inquiry-learning environments with minimal  guidance are less effective than those with additional instructional support, especially for  learners with little prior knowledge Kalyaga, 2009; Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark, 2006.  Different instructional approaches can result in varying classroom interaction patterns, and  these may in turn differentially influence individual students or students in small groups, for  example, students working in mixed or single-gender groups in science education e.g.  Harskamp, Ding, and Suhre, 2008; Scanlon, 2000. However, there has so far been little  research on how, within collaborative inquiry-learning, students help-seeking and  learningcan be supported or hindered by different patterns of classroom interaction also  termed classroom scripts; but see Mkitalo-Siegl, Kohnle, and Fischer, 2011, and the gender  composition of groups single-gender or mixed-gender.   Methodologically speaking, help-seeking research has so far been primarily questionnaire  -based, and there is a clear need for empirical studies  including measures of help-seeking  behavior and consequential learning outcomes  in real learning contexts Baumeister, Vohs,  and Funder, 2007; Mkitalo-Siegl and Fischer, 2011. In the present chapter, we examine this  broad question with respect to collaborative inquiry-learning within the science-education  classroom. We look at the effects of different classroom scripts on help-seeking among  single-gender vs. mixed-gender pairs in terms of both behavior and learning outcomes.  Variation in students learning and academic success can be partially explained by  different patterns of classroom socialization, including teacher-student or student-student  interactions, and teacher and student expectations e.g. Brophy and Good, 1986; Nie and Lau,  2010. The term script developed by Schank and Abelson 1977, refers to both culturally  shared and personal knowledge regarding, for example, how persons act in a particular  situation, such as in a restaurant or in a classroom see also Kollar et al., 2007. Both teachers   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Factors Affecting Help-seeking and Learning Gains   35 and learners have certain cognitive representations of typical lesson structures and sequences  of learning activities in the classroom Webb and Mastergeorge, 2003. In the classroom, both  teachers and students bring to the situation their pre-existing cognitive structures; these are  unique to the individual in question, but are likely to interact with those of the broader group  Rajaram and Pereira-Pasarin, 2010. In this chapter, we refer to the cognitive representations  of typical lesson sequences as classroom scripts. These scripts guide both teachers and  students in their understanding of how to act in specific classroom situations see also Seidel,  Rimmele, and Prenzel, 2005.  Classroom scripts can be regarded as one mechanism by which teaching and learning  practices are transferred from one generation to the next, and as students we all acquire scripts  based on over a thousand hours of experience Britzman, 1991. What we call the classroom  interaction pattern is the one that can actually be observed in the classroom; it is influenced  by the classroom scripts of the participating students and teachers, and also by the constraints  and affordances of the instructional context at hand. In practice, classroom interaction  patterns may well to a large extent be determined by the cognitive classroom scripts of  participants, since mental representations have been found to be rather similar among persons  in a given instructional situation, and the constraints and affordances in western classrooms  are impressively homogeneous and constant over time Schratzenstaller, 2010.  In inquiry-learning, students are expected to actively engage in knowledge-construction  processes, by building hypotheses, collecting evidence, and interpreting results. Hence this is  seen as a fairly student-centered form of learning. Being innovative and student-centered, it  sets challenges for teachers, who are often not well trained in applying this form of learning.  Poor adaptations of this innovative form of learning may result from technology  assimilation: the teacher is in this case guided by her own traditional classroom script, using  materials for inquiry-learning to support her own more or less teacher-centered method of  instruction see Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt, 1997; Slotta and Linn, 2009.  Alternatively, an unfavorable situation may result from a replaced-by-technology mindset.  Here, the teacher activates a kind of spectator script, according to which the technology  itself takes on the role of the instructor. In such a case, the physical presence or absence of the  teacher does not actually seem to influence students learning outcomes, or that at least was  the conclusion drawn from a small-scale study on web-based inquiry-learning Martiny,  2005. It may be that when the teacher takes such a passive role, students, too, accept the new  role distribution. From this, one might infer that whereas the teacher was previously the one  possessing domain knowledge, the new classroom interaction pattern poses a barrier in  terms of teachers and learners being able to use this knowledge. This phenomenon could be  termed expertise inhibition.   Web-based inquiry-learning environments, such as the Co-Lab Savelsbergh, van  Joolingen, Sins, de Jong, and Lazonder, 2004 or the Web-based Inquiry Science  Environment WISE; Slotta and Linn, 2000, include teacher instructions regarding how to  embed the environment within the overall lesson structure. However, previously learnt and  incompatible cognitive classroom scripts can hinder teachers in implementing these ideas.  Moreover, such externally represented classrooms scripts or lesson plans have so far rarely  been empirically tested in terms of their effectiveness. As an example, de Jongs 2006  inquiry-learning model can serve as a prototypical inquiry classroom script. It includes five  phases: 1 orientation, 2 hypothesis generation, 3 information collection, 4 conclusion  drawing, and 5 evaluation. Classroom-level or plenary instruction can further vary   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  36 between low-structured and high-structured. A low-structured classroom script means that  students work independently from the teacher; they engage in self-directed and collaborative  activities after receiving an introduction to the topic and to the web-based environment. A  high-structured classroom script involves the active role of the teacher, who introduces,  sequences, and evaluates learning activities. The teacher introduces the main inquiry activities  to the classroom plenary in a sequenced manner, and gives instructions on how to proceed in  the web-based environment; she then allows students to work on one of the activities and  return with their results to the classroom plenary.  It has been argued that open, experience-based learning environments with minimal  guidance often do not lead to effective learning Kirschner et al., 2006 unless they are  supported by additional instructions. This, it is suggested, helps to reduce the cognitive load  imposed by problem-solving, thus enabling knowledge construction Kalyuga, 2009. We  could therefore expect that different classroom patterns will promote or hinder learning  processes, and for example students help-seeking behavior. This would be in line with  previous research on help-seeking, indicating that teacher behavior and the resulting  classroom discourse may indeed substantially encourage or hinder help-seeking Butler,  2006; Karabenick and Newman, 2009; Oortwijn, Boakaerts, Vedder, and Strijbos, 2008.  Nevertheless, there has been little actual research on the effects of classroom scripts on helpseeking. With this in mind, we have endeavored to reach a better understanding of how  different classroom patterns high-structured, low-structured may influence learners helpseeking processes.  Research on inquiry-learning has repeatedly shown that the inquiry process can be  demanding and challenging for students, and may thus hinder further learning e.g. van  Joolingen, de Jong, Lazonder, Savelsbergh, and Manlove, 2005. One reason for this may be  that learners are unable to deal with such demanding processes through seeking help from  peer learners or the teacher. We suggest that the processes associated with such problems may  be conceptualized as help-seeking processes, and we refer to the model developed by NelsonLe Gall 1981 in which different stages of help-seeking are distinguished: a becoming  aware of a problem, b making a decision to seek help, c identifying an appropriate source  of help, such as peers, the teacher, or technology, d implementing strategies for getting help,  and e evaluating the help received.  Learners who are able to control and monitor their learning processes are also able to  identify their problems and to evaluate whether and what kind of help they need; they can ask  for help in order to solve a task or problem successfully Nelson-Le Gall, 1981; Newman,  1998; Puustinen, 1998. Self-regulated learners are rather less likely to seek help when help is  needed Karabenick and Knapp, 1991. It has been noted that in particular those learners who  seek instrumental help by asking for explanations and hints learn more than those who seek  merely executive help by asking directly for answers Nelson-Le Gall, 1981; Ryan and Shim,  2006; Webb, Ing, Kersting, and Nemer, 2006. Help-seekers also need to formulate a request  in such a way that the help-givers can respond in a meaningful way, and will be willing to  assist Webb et al., 2006. After receiving the help, help-seekers should utilize it in order to  solve a problem or a task.   These kinds of help-seeking processes  in which learners seek explanations and hints for  solving a task or problem by themselves  also enhance learners independence in the  learning process Nelson-Le Gall, 1981; Newman, 1998. Increasing learners independence  can indeed be regarded as one of the aims of inquiry-learning. It is seen as a somewhat   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Factors Affecting Help-seeking and Learning Gains   37 student-centered form of learning, one aimed at leading learners to formulate hypotheses,  gather evidence, and interpret data. In inquiry classrooms, learners are expected to take  responsibility by being active and self-directed in their learning processes. However, the  inquiry-learning process can be highly demanding for students. When they struggle with their  learning, students often refrain from seeking help from the multiple resources e.g. teacher,  peer learners, computer available in the classroom, and this may further hinder learning van  Joolingen et al., 2005.   Not asking for help when it is needed is a phenomenon which is widespread across a  variety of educational settings Aleven, Stahl, Schworm, Fischer, and Wallace, 2003;  Newman, 2000; Ryan, Pintrich, and Midgley, 2001. In the classroom context, there are  several factors determining whether help is avoided or sought. Help-seeking is a highly  interactive process, and patterns of classroom interaction, teacher-student interaction, and  student-student interaction can affect students help-seeking or avoidance of it Aleven et al.,  2003; Butler and Shibaz, 2008; Karabenick and Newman, 2009; Newman, 1998; Ryan and  Shin, 2011; Webb and Mastergeorge, 2003. In order to receive help, it is necessary for a  student to approach others and to ask for help. This is a step which might be experienced as  intimidating by many learners, which may to some extent explain why help-seeking is often  avoided Butler, 2006; Karabenick and Newman, 2009; Ryan et al., 2001. With respect to  gender, studies so far have revealed contradictory results on the effects of a fellow-learners  gender within learning and collaborative situations Aleven et al., 2003; Harskamp et al.,  2008; Light, Littleton, Bale, Joiner, and Messer, 2000; Scanlon, 2000; Underwood,  Underwood, and Wood, 2000.   Working successfully in groups demands a lot from group members. Learners must listen  to one another, share and jointly build knowledge, actively work towards a joint goal, and  help one another during collaboration see Barron, 2003; Webb and Mastergeorge, 2003;  Webb and Palincsar, 1996. According to previous literature the gender composition of  groups may set some additional demands on group members. It seems that students behave  differently when working in single-gender and mixed-gender groups, and that this can have  some effects on students learning outcomes. Overall, several studies have shown that  students achievements in single-gender conditions are superior to those in mixed-gender  conditions Harskamp et al., 2008; Light et al., 2000. However, in a study by Underwood et  al. 2000, mixed-gender groups acted differently but did not perform worse than singlegender groups. One reason for the different patterns of classroom interaction in these different  groups may be that males were favored both by science as a subject and by computers as tools  to be used Greenfield, 1997; Newman, 1998; Whitley, 1997. At least in the past, males had  more positive attitudes towards computers, felt more competent in computer-supported tasks,  and felt themselves to be entitled to use technology  all factors that might enhance their  performance Underwood et al., 2000; Whitley, 1997. As regards collaboration and gender, it  has been argued that females prefer to work together, whereas males would rather work  independently; consequently it has been thought that collaborative learning may favor  females e.g. Harskamp et al., 2008.  There are indications that help-seeking behavior, too, is influenced by gender Arroyo,  Beck, Beal, Wing, and Woolf, 2001; Butler, 1998; Newman and Goldin, 1990; Ryan, Gheen,  and Midgley, 1998. Females have been found to be more willing than males to seek help in  the classroom when they need it Ryan et al., 1998. In addition, a study by Butler 1998  showed that male students want to demonstrate their competence, and therefore rarely ask for   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  38 help. Newman and Goldin 1990 reported that gender differences in help-seeking depend on  the domain; in terms of asking for help, females are more worried about their displayed  competence in mathematics classes than in reading classes. Previous research also indicates  that males and females prefer different kinds of help from the help systems in interactive  learning environments Arroyo et al., 2001: females prefer interactive and elaborated  feedback, whereas males prefer less interactive and briefer feedback.   Previous research has further shown differences in interaction gender patterns with regard  to science learning, using computers and the collaborative learning approach. One may  surmise that mixed-gender groups will face particular problems in learning together, given the  different styles of interaction, and different types of help-seeking, attitudes, and interests  among males and females. This might explain the different learning outcomes in singlegender and mixed-gender groups. On the one hand, female students do seek more help  yet  in science learning, it may be that females are more concerned about their competence, a  factor that could inhibit them from seeking help in science classes Newman and Goldin,  1990. On the other hand, male students rarely ask for help, and this could be expected to  hinder progress in learning. It should be noted, however, that these earlier studies on students  help-seeking behavior mostly investigated student-teacher interaction in teacher-centered  classrooms  locations where students are expected to ask help from the teacher, and where  the teacher is assumed to be the only reasonable source of help. In classrooms focusing on  computer-supported collaborative inquiry-learning, a number of help sources are available to  students; however, up to now, we know little about how these sources will be utilized in a real  classroom situation. Despite the increased use of computer-supported collaborative inquirylearning in education, there are hardly any studies on the help-seeking behavior and learning  of gender groups in the collaborative inquiry-learning classroom. 

AIMS OF THE STUDY 

In this study, we investigated the effects of classroom patterns i.e. classroom scripts on  single-gender pairs female-female and male-male vs. mixed-gender pairs female-male on  help-seeking processes and on learning gains in science classrooms. The following research  questions were formulated: 

Research Question 1: To what extent does a differently structured classroom script high  structure vs. low structure affect single-gender and mixed-gender pairs helpseeking processes in inquiry-learning? 

The first hypothesis was that single-gender groups will seek help less often than mixedgender groups Hypothesis 1a. This was based on the assumption that mixed-gender groups  face more problems because of gender factors bound up with different ways of working and  different degrees of interest in science and computers; hence they will seek help more often  than single-gender groups Greenfield, 1997; Harskamp et al., 2008; Light et al., 2000;  Newman 1998; Whitley, 1997. By contrast, single-gender groups will seek help less often   because males do not usually ask for help Butler, 1998; Ryan et al., 1998  and those   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Factors Affecting Help-seeking and Learning Gains   39 females who do usually ask for help will not do so because of the science class context  Newman and Goldin, 1990.   In addition, we hypothesize that a low-structured classroom script with lower levels of  teacher guidance will lead to a higher frequency of help-seeking than a high-structured  classroom script Hypothesis 1b. This is based on the assumption that students need less help  when they receive more support and instruction.   It should be noted that the literature does not provide any basis for specific hypotheses  with respect to the relative frequencies of other variables in the help-seeking process; hence  we tested the variables above in order to find if there are any differences between the gender  groups. 

Research Question 2: What are the effects of the gender composition of groups singlegender vs. mixed-gender pairs on learning gains in collaborative inquiry-learning  environments in the science classroom? 

The hypothesis for this question was that single-gender groups will show higher learning  gains than mixed-gender groups Hypothesis 2a. Based on the literature, we could assume  that single-gender groups will face fewer problems than mixed-gender groups because of their  similar working styles and interests; this will allow single-gender groups to focus more on  content. Hence they will learn more than mixed-gender groups Harskamp et al., 2008; Light  et al., 2000.  Furthermore, we hypothesize that a high-structured classroom script with high levels of  teacher guidance will lead to a higher learning gains than a low-structured classroom script  Hypothesis 2b. This is based on the literature indicating that inquiry learning environments  with minimal guidance are less effective than those with additional instructional support  Kalyuga, 2009; Kirschner et al., 2006. 

Research Question 3: What are the differences between successful and unsuccessful  single-gender and mixed-gender pairs ways of working? 

Prior studies Harskamp et al., 2008; Light et al., 2000; Underwood et al., 2000 have  indicated that students in different gender compositions may come to their successes or  failures through quite different working processes. We conducted a qualitative analysis on  seven pairs who were selected according to their quantitative learning gains. The qualitative  analysis was largely exploratory in character. Our aim here was to determine if there were  differences between genders and their ways of working.  Note that all the process-related data with regard to help-seeking processes and learning  gains have been re-analyzed for the purposes of both the gender perspective and the  qualitative analyses. Thus they are original, and not part of the Mkitalo-Siegl et al. 2011  overview. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  40 METHODS 

Sample and Design 

The participants were 108 secondary education students, aged 16 to 19. The participants  worked in pairs N  54. Five classes were randomly assigned to different classroom-script  conditions high structure vs. low structure, with female and male students within a single  class being randomly assigned to single-gender and mixed-gender groups. 

In the high-structured classroom-script condition 2 classes; n  19 dyads: single-gender  n  16, mixed-gender n  3, an inquiry-learning model was introduced to the students, and  students small-group activities were interspersed with teacher-led plenary activities.   In the low-structured classroom-script condition 3 classes; n  35 dyads: single-gender n   17, mixed-gender n  18, the inquiry cycle was not introduced by the teacher. Instead,  students worked in pairs in the learning environment, after being informed about the learning  environment and the task.  

Figure 1.Screen capture showing the WISE project How far does light go? and one of the cognitive  hints: Why can we see the person dressed in white better than the person dressed in black  what  happens to the light? viewed as a help function for the students. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Factors Affecting Help-seeking and Learning Gains   41 The Web-based Inquiry Science Environment WISE 

The students in each dyad used a shared laptop computer. They worked on a module of  the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment WISE; Slotta and Linn, 2000; translated into  German; see Figure 1. In WISE, the five phases of inquiry-learning are embedded in a webbased learning environment see de Jong, 2006. The students task was to test two  contradictory hypotheses  light dies out versus light goes on forever Bell, 2004.  Students selected one of these two hypotheses and tested it using different sources of  information texts, videos offered by the online learning environment. Students were able to  click on prompts in order to receive hints seen as a help function regarding the interpretation  of the information presented, such as Think about something that is similar to attempting to  see in a dark room. Why is it so difficult? and also regarding what they should do next, for  example: Discuss with your partner. The entire task took up 130 minutes of study time  under both conditions. 

Structuredness of the Classroom Scripts 

Under the high-structured classroom-script condition, the inquiry process was structured  into five teacher-initiated phases of inquiry-learning: 1 Orientation phase and introduction  of the learning environment, 2 Hypothesis generation phase, 3 Information collection  phase, 4 Phase of conclusion drawing, and 5 Evaluation phase. Each phase commenced at  the plenary level, with the teacher giving an introduction and providing clear instructions on  what was expected of the students in their dyadic inquiry. Each phase ended with an  evaluation of the hypotheses, the results, and the findings which students had collected and  formulated during their small-group work. 
Orientation phase and introduction of the learning environment 15 min. After a  short PowerPoint presentation on the topic Light propagation the teacher  introduced students to the problem: How far does light go?. The prior knowledge  of the students was activated by questions such as What sources of light do you  know?, How does light propagate?, and What happens to the light when it leaves  the light source? The WISE learning environment was then introduced and the  students were instructed to read and make notes on two competing theses, Light dies  out and Light goes on forever. In addition, they were encouraged to discuss the  hypothesis with their learning partner.  2  Hypothesis generationphase 5 min. in class plenary. In this phase the students were  supposed to present examples of the hypotheses they had formulated in pairs. They  were asked to utter assumptions and ideas on the propagation of light rays and to  give their own opinion on the two competing ideas of how light propagates.  3  Phase of collecting information 75 min. The class worked with a number of items  of evidence provided in the project How far does light go? Before the dyads  worked on their own, the teacher showed them how to cope with the pieces of  information. Using the first topic, searchlight, the five phases of the inquiry cycle  were illustrated by means of an example 20 min. The learners became familiar  with questions that were intended to help them to organize their learning process   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  42 within the five phases of the inquiry cycle: What is the topic about?, What do I  already know about the issue?, How are A and B connected?, What assumptions  do I have?, How can I prove my assumptions?, What does the information have  to do with my question?, Is the information reliable?, What conclusions can I  draw?, Did I answer my original questions successfully?, and What could be  improved next time?. After this, all dyads were supposed to work with the next  topic called on the soccer field independently. They then presented their results  and got some feedback from the teacher 20 min. After that the pairs worked on  their own in the WISE learning environment 35 min.  4  Phase of drawing conclusions 15 min. The lesson continued with the phase of  drawing conclusions, in which the students completed the last part of the project  How far does light go?. They were then asked to decide on one of two competing  hypotheses and write down three arguments giving strong evidence for the selected  hypothesis, plus three arguments which were either against or not quite clear. As  preparation for the subsequent discussion in the classroom plenary, the learners wrote  their arguments on cards of two different colors.  5  Evaluationphase 20 min. In the last phase, the evaluation phase, there was a  discussion on whether light dies out or goes on forever. The students presented their  arguments for and against the original hypotheses, Light dies out and Light goes  forever. The initial hypotheses were confirmed, and a decision in favor of one of the  two hypotheses was reached. In addition, the proceedings of the dyads in the learning  environment were evaluated and discussed. Successful strategies were compared  with less successful ones, and suggestions for improvement were considered. 

In the low-structured classroom-script condition, the inquiry process was not introduced  by the teacher. Instead, students were informed about the structure of the environment and the  task, before working in pairs in the learning environment, without any plenary phases. WISE  included the same domain information, and also the same information on the inquiry process  steps, as the information provided by the teachers under the high-structured classroom-script  condition.  A teacher with previous experience of using inquiry-learning in her classroom taught in  all five classes, but the students in these classes did not have any prior experience of inquirylearning or of WISE. The teacher was not aware of the research aim  she was instructed to  follow the procedure outlined in the classroom script, but no further instructions were  provided regarding how she should behave in the classroom. In each lesson, appropriate  implementation of the classroom scripts was observed under both conditions. 

Instruments 

Analysis of the Help-seekingProcess  Nelson-Le Gall's 1981 model of the help-seeking process was applied in a quantitative  analysis of 54 screenand audio-capturing videos of the first lessons. Using a time-sampling  method, four 5-minute intervals out of the 90-minute videos were analyzed for each pair  intervals at 2530, 4045, 5560, and 7075 minutes from the beginning of the video. The  coding process was conducted as follows: Help-seeking events in which the students   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Factors Affecting Help-seeking and Learning Gains   43 indicated that they needed help were identified e.g. directly asking for help: Is this right?  or expressing a lack of understanding: I do not understand this. These indications were  categorized as help sought. Then the content of help sought was examined, including domain  knowledge e.g. questions such as Is my solution right? or inquiry-learning How do I  formulate the hypothesis?, or technical problems This video is not working. The type of  help sought was coded with respect to whether it was executive refers to students seeking  direct answers, for example, Is this right? or instrumental no direct answers sought but  rather hints and guidance on how to figure out the problem for themselves, for example,  Could you give me a hint?. The analysis then focused on the source from which help was  sought, regarded as a resource for help teacherfellow-learnerother studentWISE. The data  were coded according to the type of help received: executive receiving complete answers,  helper takes over and solves the task or writes a solution versus instrumental hints.  Thereafter, the usage of the help received was analyzed. Help was used, for example, if  students followed the instructions given by a help-giver, entered the information they had  received, performed a drag and drop action based on the help they had received, and so on.  Not using the help received was coded, if students did not attempt to follow the given  instructions or advice. Finally, the solution of the problem was coded in terms of whether  students solved the problem based on the help they had received they were able to perform  the activity, write down the hypothesis, play the video, etc. If so, the problem was coded as  solved. If students failed to take the actions required to solve the problem failing to write text  in the appropriate text boxes, to perform the drag and drop action, etc. the problem was  coded as still existing. Agreement between two coders determined on the basis of 10 of the  data ranged between 74 and 98. 

Students Learning Gains in Physics  Identical preand post-tests were used to measure students knowledge of physics on an  individual basis. The Domain-Specific Knowledge test Bell, 2004, which was specifically  developed for the content of the WISE, consists of distinct scales which measure different  curriculum aspects. Seven multiple-choice items one pointeach correct answer and three  items with a free-response format 02 points were applied; the overall score range was 0 13. The multiple-choice items covered information which the students were supposed to  collect while working in the online learning environment, for example, Telescopes can be  used to observe things, such as the moon. Which of the following explanations best describes  how a telescope works? and contained four options, for example, A telescope gets you  closer to the moon. The mean score of the two individuals in each pair see Cress, 2008 was  used for the calculation of learning gains.   The learning gain was calculated by subtracting the pairs mean pre-test score from its  mean post-test score; hence it could be either positive or negative. Cronbachs alpha was .74  in the pre-test and .80 in the post-test. Inter-rater agreement between two coders for the open  items ranged from 86 to 99. 

Statistical Analysis  Non-parametric tests were used, because the requirements for ANOVA were not met  unequal group size. The Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare the fourgender groups in  the different classroom-script conditions with respect to learning gains and the variables of  the help-seeking process. The benefit of using the Kruskal-Wallis test is that all possible   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  44 combinations can be tested at once. However, the Kruskal-Wallis test merely indicates that a  difference exists, and post hoc tests are needed to show where the differences lie. For this  reason, we used the Mann-Whitney tests to follow up the Kruskal-Wallis test. The Monte  Carlo exact test was used along with the non-parametric tests, and the level of significance  was set at 95. The unit of analysis consisted of pairs. 

Qualitative Approach  A qualitative approach was used in order to explore further differences in the ways of  working between unsuccessful and successful single-gender and mixed-gender pairs, and it  was mainly exploratory in nature. We used a similar approach to that by Mkitalo,  Weinberger, Hkkinen, Jrvel, and Fischer 2005, involving a case-based analysis with the  focus of the qualitative analysis targeted at the units which had first been analyzed using the  quantitative approach. The help-seeking events were transcribed and analyzed in order to  explore the pairs ways of working, i.e. looking at their task-relevant behavior or taskirrelevant behavior Hijzen, Boekaerts, and Vedder, 2007. The behavior of students who  were actively working with the task was characterized as task-relevant behavior; this meant  that students were active and focused on the task e.g. asking questions and explanations,  reading the text, using their own words when writing the assignments, and not using copypaste tactics. By contrast, the behavior of students who were not actively working with the  task was characterized as task-irrelevant behavior, meaning that students did not work hard  e.g. selected the easiest activities, used copy-paste tactics, gave up easily, and engaged in  task-irrelevant behavior such as chatting or disturbing others Hijzen et al., 2007. We also  explored whether there were any indications in the data as to females having more problems  with computers than males, or whether there were any differences in attitudes and interests  towards computers and science, or whether females were better at collaboration see  Greenfield, 1997; Harskamp et al., 2008; Whitley, 1997. 

RESULTS 

Our preliminary data analysis show that there was no difference between the gender  groups prior knowledge under the different conditions, H3  3.69, p .02. Under the highstructured classroom-script condition, collaborative pair-work comprised 36 and teacher-led  activities 64 of the total sampling time. By contrast, under the low-structured classroomscript condition, pair-work comprised 94 and teacher-led activities 6 of the total sampling  time. 

Single-gender and Mixed-gender Pairs Help-seeking Processes under  Differently Structured Classroom-script Conditions 

Our first research question was: To what extent does a differently structured classroom  script high vs. low affect single-gender and mixed-gender pairs help-seeking processes in  inquiry-learning?   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Factors Affecting Help-seeking and Learning Gains   45 The Kruskal-Wallis test revealed that the difference between the groups with respect to  the amount of help sought was significant, H3  8.84, p .05 see Table 1. The MannWhitney tests were used to follow up this finding. The difference between the single-gender  pairs in the high-structured classroom-script condition and the mixed-gender pairs in the lowstructured classroom-script condition was significant, U  70.00, z  -2.58, p .01, r  -.44.  There was also a significant difference between the single-gender pairs under the highstructured classroom-script condition and the low-structured classroom-script condition, U   72.00, z  -2.35, p .05, r  -.41. We did not find any significant differences between the  single-gender and mixed-gender pairs under similar conditions  thus tending to support the  idea that the condition matters more than the gender. Overall, these results do not support our  hypothesis that single-gender pairs will seek less help than mixed-gender pairs Hypothesis  1a. Rather, the results support our hypothesis that irrespective of gender, pairs in a highstructured classroom-script condition will seek help less often than in a low-structured  classroom-script condition Hypothesis 1b.  The Kruskal-Wallis tests revealed a few other significant differences between the groups  with regarding to the variables in the help-seeking process. There was a significant difference  between the groups on the help sought regarding domain knowledge under the two  conditions,H3  12.92, p .05. The Mann-Whitney test indicated that the difference lay  between the single-gender pairs under the high-structured classroom-script condition and the  mixed-gender pairs under the low-structured classroom-script condition. This difference was  significant, U  54.00, z  -3.33, p .001, r  -.57. There was also a significant difference  between the single-gender pairs under the high-structured classroom-script condition and  under the low-structured classroom-script condition,U  71.50, z  -2.59, p .05, r  -.45. The  difference was also significant between the mixed-gender pairs under the two conditions,U   6.00, z  -2.16, p .05, r  -.47. The Kruskal-Wallis test also showed significant differences  between the four groups related to using a computer as a resource for help,H3  8.38, p  .05. In following up this finding, the Mann-Whitney tests revealed a significant difference  between the single-gender pairs under the two conditions U  79.50, z  -2.61, p .05, r  .45, but did not reveal any statistically significant differences between the other pairs. Again,  all these results indicate that the condition matters more than the gender, since no significant  differences were found between the single-gender and mixed-gender pairs under similar  conditions. The differences between the four groups with regard to other variables in the helpseeking process were not statistically significant; hence, only the mean ranks of the helpseeking variables are presented in Table 1. 

Learning Gains of Single-gender vs. Mixed-gender Pairs under Differently  Structured Classroom-script Conditions 

Our second research question was: What are the effects of the gender composition of  groups single-gender vs. mixed-gender pairs on learning gains in collaborative inquirylearning environments in the science classroom?  There was no statistically significant differencebetween the single-gender dyads and the  mixed-gender dyads under different classroom-script conditions with regard to learning  gainsU  314.00, r  -.08, ns. This result does not support our hypothesis Hypothesis 2a,  according to which we assume that single-gender groups will learn more than mixed-gender   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  46 groups. However, the mixed-gender group in the high-structured classroom-script condition  scored better than the other three groups see Figure 2. In interpreting Figure 2 we could  expect that there might be a slight tendency towards an interaction effect of gender  composition and classroom script. However, because of the small amount of data, no  significant difference could be found in this regard. Overall, students under the highstructured classroom-script condition M  0.60, SD  0.96 showed greater gains than those  under the low-structured classroom-script condition M  0.11, SD  0.89 and this difference  was significant, U  219.00, z  -2.15, p .05, r  -.29. This is a finding which can be  considered to support Hypothesis 2b. On the basis of these results, it would seem that the  classroom-script condition has a greater effect than gender on students learning gains.  

Table 1. Mean rank of the help-seeking variables of single-gender and mixed-gender  pairs under different classroom-script conditions 

Single-gender pair  Mixed-gender pair   Highstructured  classroom script  n  16  Mean rank 

Low-structured  classroom script  n  17  Mean rank   High-structured  classroom script  n  3  Mean rank 

Lowstructured  classroom  script  n  18  Mean rank  Amount of help  sought 

18.72 

30.44 

21.50 

33.53  Content of help  sought 

Domain knowledge  14.96  25.09  10.00  31.38  Inquiry knowledge  27.67  22.32  41.50  20.84  Technical problems  25.13  25.71  20.25  21.81  Type of help sought 

Executive  24.83  25.68  27.00  21.22  Instrumental  21.50  24.29  21.50  25.88  Resource 

Fellow-learner  23.54  22.15  29.75  25.59  Teacher  25.75  24.97  25.75  21.44  Other student  20.00  26.97  20.00  24.34  Computer WISE   16.50  28.76  26.50  24.25  Type of help received 

Executive  24.45  22.77  10.50  22.77  Instrumental  20.55  22.47  34.50  22.23  Usage of help  received 

Help used  24.19  22.18  29.50  18.23  Help not used  18.81  20.82  13.50  24.77  Solution 

Problem solved  22.53  34.32  22.33  26.33  Problem not solved  23.25  25.68  28.00  32.92  significant difference, p  .05   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Factors Affecting Help-seeking and Learning Gains   47

Figure 2. Single-gender and mixed-gender pairs learning gains under highand low-structured  classroom-script conditions. 

Qualitative Analysis of Successful and Unsuccessful Single-gender and  Mixed-gender Pairs 

We selected five single-gender pairs and two mixed-gender pairs the names of the  students have been changed from two conditions, on the basis of who had the best scores 1  or higher scores and the worst scores 0 or minus scores in the learning gains. Our aim here  was to determine whether there were differences in the ways of working in the collaborative  inquiry-learning situation case-based analysis, Mkitalo et al., 2005, and especially whether  the differently-composed pairs might achieve their success in different ways. The number of  pairs, and also the number of events, was so small that it would be inappropriate to use the  results as anything other than a pilot study, with an explorative character. The main question  was: What are the differences between the successful and unsuccessful single-gender and  mixed-gender pairs ways of collaborating in inquiry-learning situations?  In comparing these selected seven pairs and their ways of working, it was found that the  three female-female pairs sought help 36 times, the two male-male pairs sought help 12  times, and the two mixed-gender pairs 34 times during the four 5-minute time samples.  There was not very much difference in the amount of help sought between the successful and  unsuccessful single-gender and mixed-gender pairs; however, the male pairs under both  conditions sought help less often than the other pairs.  In comparing students ways of working, it seems that unsuccessful pairs worked in a  different manner from successful pairs. They selected something easy, ignoring anything that  was more complicated Excerpts 1 and 2, or used copy-paste tactics Excerpt 2, or else  moved to discussing something other than the topic Excerpt 3. In other words, the behavior  0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1 1,2 1,4 1 2 Structuredness of classroom script Learning gain Single-gender pair Mixed-gender pair High Low  EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  48 of students who avoided a hard work could be characterized as task-irrelevant behavior  Hijzen et al., 2007. 

Excerpt 1. Unsuccessful female-female pair in the high-structured classroom-script  condition Dyad C18; starting time 01.11.35  Elise: What are we going to do next?  Sabine: We work on galaxies, dont we?  Elise: Oh noopening the web site of the galaxies  Sabine: Should we work on something different?  Elise: yes  Sabine: lets work on something easy and then well take up the timeshe reads  aloud Thomas notices the stars  Elise: oh, so beautiful  Sabine: Lets just copy it. 

Excerpt 2. Unsuccessful female-female pair in the low-structured classroom-script  condition Dyad B03; starting time 00:25:15  Maria: Do we have to discuss this?  Kathy: Discuss.  Maria: I see.  Kathy: This one, right? They select the hypothesis  Maria: This is its all Greek to me  Kathy: lets sit back, well just copy it and then do something more  slightly later:  Maria: If they ask what were taking, well take the   this is much easier  Kathy: Uhuh, so you want 

Excerpt 3. Unsuccessful male-male pair in the high-structured classroom-script condition  Dyad C13; starting time 01.13.30  Kevin: Why isnt it possible to click on it?  Mike: Sorry?  Kevin: Why isnt it possible to click on it?  Mike: Dont know, righta one-week holiday  Kevin: Soccer ground, soccer ground. This is great, all day on the beach, only 305 euros  for five daysnow if you are up to it?  Mike: Ive no idea, was the food good? 

Excerpt 4. Unsuccessful female-male pair in the low-structured classroom-script  condition Dyad B15; starting time 26.20  Sarah: Surecome on write something down  Peter: We thinkPeter writes the notes  Sarah: Do we have to write it differently?  Peter: Uhuh, so write down the thesis, the thesis in the left parenthesis is right, is right  slightly later:  Sarah: Ask somebody why we believe this is right?  a few minutes later:   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Factors Affecting Help-seeking and Learning Gains   49 Peter: I havent got a plan now, perhaps we should read on or something  Sarah: What did he writelook hes doing the second one already referring to the  student next to them 

The unsuccessful male-male pair focused more on discussing matters off-topic than ontopic, and neither learner was really interested in working on the topic Excerpt 3. As  Excerpt 4 shows, the female student in the female-male pair was not working very efficiently  with the topic, but rather finding other ways  by copying or asking somebody else  to  complete what should be done or written. The male student tried to suggest that they should  read on or do something to complete the task, but the female student ignored his suggestion  see Excerpt 4. Poor participation in the learning activities was fairly common for all the  unsuccessful pairs under both conditions. The male-male pair was less likely than the other  pairs to work on the topic. However, the other three pairs did try to perform some of the  activities. Despite this, their working methods, which involved, for example, copying the text,  probably did nothing to enhance their learning.  By contrast, the help-seeking excerpts below illustrate that the students in the successful  gender groups worked differently from the unsuccessful gender groups. There were no  indications that they would prefer to copy the text or that they would select the easiest topic to  work with, except in the male-male group see Excerpt 10. Instead of selecting the easiest  working methods, they asked why questions, and they seemed to attempt to understand and  explain the phenomenon to themselves and their fellow-learner. The behavior of students who  engaged in the task could be characterized as task-relevant behavior Hijzen et al., 2007. The  single-gender pairs did not ask for any help from the teacher, but the mixed-gender pair asked  for the teacher for help on two occasions, in order to clarify instructions regarding what they  were expected to do see Excerpt 5 and 6. 

Excerpt 5. Successful female-male pair in the low-structured classroom-script condition  Dyad D24; starting time 00:27:18  Janica: There it says discuss.  Eric: reading What is your opinion? Dont we have to write it down?  Teacher: We are talking about this.  Janica: Dont we have to write it down somewhere?  Teacher: Later, you will have different opinions, at the moment you should only talk  about it. 

In the mixed-gender pair, the male student Eric first asked the teacher a clarifying  question about the instructions, concerning whether they should write down their response.  Then, when the teachers help was not adequate, the female student Janica repeated the  question. In the second help-seeking event Excerpt 6, the mixed-gender pair not only  obtained the answer from the teacher regarding how many texts they should work on, but also  important information about how to work with the texts. 

Excerpt 6. Successful female-male pair in the low-structured classroom-script condition  Dyad D24; starting time 00:28:55  Eric: Are we only allowed to work on one, or can we work on several texts?   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  50 Teacher: You are allowed to work on several texts, as many as you can manage in this  and the next lesson, but it is more important for us that you discuss the stuff in detail  and write something down, than just work on every text superficially. 

Later, the mixed-gender group, and especially the female student, insisted that they  should read the text first and then write about what they know Excerpt 7. The male student  wanted to proceed in a more straightforward way and skip the text, which was already known  to them. However, the female student proposed that the text should be read first, since they  were already on the text page. She asked for the male students opinion on this point. In the  mixed-gender pair, both learners, regardless of their gender, participated equally in the  collaboration. There were no signs that the male student was dominant, either because of the  domain or because of the computer. Furthermore, it seemed that collaborative work did not  cause a problem for the male student in the mixed-gender pair. He apparently had good  collaboration skills, in that, for example, he took his fellow-learner into account by asking for  confirmation on his answer see Excerpt 7. 

Excerpt 7. Successful female-male pair in the low-structured classroom-script condition  Dyad D24; starting time 00:43:30  Eric: Sense Maker is up next Searchlights, The light goes on forever thesis.  Janica: We have worked with the galaxy, so now you have to establish where it will fit in.  Eric: Yes.  Janica: We havent worked on this, the galaxy  Eric: Yes, I have the wrong  Janica: This goes.oh no  Eric: The light goes on forever, right?  Janica: Exactly 

Janica: We have to read that first, then go through things, and if we know something we  can put it here.  Eric: Yes, but you know a lot of things already.  Janica: Lets look at the Hubble Telescope, while we are here i.e. at the text page for the  Hubble Telescope, right? 

Whereas the mixed-gender pair refined the instructions from the teacher and discussed  how they should proceed, the single-gender pairs talked about the content. They asked  themselves why questions in order to understand the content, and then asked for  confirmations or explanations from their fellow-learner Excerpt 8, 9 and 11.  

Excerpt 8. Successful female-female pair in the low-structured classroom-script condition  Dyad D03; starting time 00:41:33  Laura: Inquiry diary, what does this have to do with the question of how you can  recognize the light? Save the booklet, yesyou can recognize Stefan better, because  he is white, Stefan is more visible because of his white clothes. But why? What does  this have to do with the question how far the light goes? This supports the what is  the other thesis called? Light dies out and Light goes on forever.  Susan: Light fades because its getting weaker and   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Factors Affecting Help-seeking and Learning Gains   51 Laura: So, this dark thing rather supports the second thesis that the light, I would say it  has nothing to do with that, we just dont have an explanation for it  Slightly later  Laura: I see, I have no idea, I would say the light is swallowed by the dark color.  Susan: All right.  Laura: Enters text into the inquiry diary. The light is swallowed by the dark color of the  clothes, the light will be swallowed by the dark clothes, do you want to add  anything?  Susan: I have no idea.  Laura: I see youre really motivated  Susan: Im not keen on this. 

Excerpt 9. Successful female-female pair in the low-structured classroom-script condition  Dyad D03; starting time 00:54:59  Susan: Stars are light, arent they? And a telescope makes this light source bigger.  Laura: Yes, telescopes enlarge the light of the starsenlarge the light of the stars. But  what is this? In the Sense Maker? What? Galaxy  Susan: Light goes on forever.  Laura: yesno that isnt right, because it is a strong light source, because the star is an  unbelievably strong light source, thats silly, but one thinks.I assumed that as well  to begin with. if the star is a strong light source, if it had less light it wouldnt shine  this far, the sun is only shining down here because its a strong light source. 

In the female-female pair, Laura seemed to be more active than Susan. Laura clarified  their understanding see Excerpt 8 and 9, and also put a lot of effort into engaging her  fellow-learner in the process by asking her opinion and thoughts, although the latter indicated  that she was not interested in working Excerpt 8.  The successful male-male pair performed some learning activities, but not so actively as  the other two successful gender pairs. Male students did not seem to be interested in putting  too much effort into the learning, and they indicated quite clearly that they had little interest  in working on the topic Excerpt 11. However, they did seek explanations and they seemed  to understand and be able to explain the phenomenon Excerpt 11. 

Excerpt 10. Successful male-male pair in the high-structured classroom-script condition  Dyad E18; starting time 01:12:07  Markus: This is too much text.  Slightly later  Benjamin: Inquiry diarywhich one should we pick?  Markus: Something easy. 

Excerpt 11. Successful male-male pair in the high-structured classroom-script condition  Dyad E18; starting time 01:14:04  Markus: What does this have to do with the question?  Benjamin: white clothes are better at absorbing light than black clothes  Markus: I hate this 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  52 In the successful mixed-gender group, both students seemed to be active in the learning  process, so there was no need for the fellow-learner to push the other to participate see  Excerpt 5 and 7. Students in the successful single-gender pairs, and also in the mixed-gender  pair, did take into account their fellow-learners opinion, for example, making sure that they  agreed on the answers. In fact, the male-male pair showed quite clearly that they had no  interest in working with the topic; nevertheless, there was a brief event in which they  discussed the content by providing a correct explanation, indicating that they did engage in  working with the task.  The first impression when reading the excerpts of the single-gender and mixed-gender  pairs is that there are differences between the gender pairs, whereby the successful singlegender pairs had more discussion about the content, with the successful mixed-gender pair  giving more attention to the procedures for example wondering what should be done.  However, we need to look beyond the help-seeking processes and take into account students  ways of working and participating in learning activities. All in all, it seems that the students  in the unsuccessful gender groups worked in a fairly similar manner, demonstrating irrelevant  task behavior, in contrast to the students in the successful gender groups, whose behavior was  more task-relevant; it was merely that the students in the unsuccessful gender pairs put less  effort into the learning activities than the students in successful gender pairs. They tended to  use shallow working methods, such as selecting the easiest topics, copying the text, or asking  somebody else. In contrast, the successful gender pairs engaged in working activities where  they asked why? questions and provided explanations in their own words, rather than  simply copying out the text.   This qualitative analysis gave no indication of any remarkable differences between the  gender groups; in fact the differences occurred rather between unsuccessful and successful  groups and their ways of working. In the female-male pairs in particular, it seemed that the  male students were able to work in pairs as well as the female students. Nor is there any  indication of females having more problems than males in the use of the computer, or  evidence that females are better at collaborating Harskamp et al., 2008; Whitley, 1997. In  fact, both male and female students showed little interest in working with the topic, and we  could not find any evidence that females might be less interested in working with computers  or with scientific material than males see Greenfield, 1997; Scanlon, 2000; Whitley, 1997.  However, the short episodes in the 5-minute time samples do not offer very rich data for an  analysis of the gender pairs ways of working, and this might partly explain why differences  between the gender groups ways of working could not be indentified. It should be noted once  again that our qualitative analysis was mainly exploratory in its nature, and hence that the  results should be interpreted with caution.  

CONCLUSION 

Web-based inquiry-learning is challenging for learners. Compared with traditional  science-learning classrooms, this more student-centered approach is considered to have the  potential to promote high-level aspects of knowledge and skill to a far greater degree see  Linn, Lee, Tinker, Husic, and Chiu, 2006. In the study reported here, we investigated the  help-seeking of single-gender vs. mixed-gender pairs in differently structured inquiryEBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Factors Affecting Help-seeking and Learning Gains   53 learning environments, and also looked at the learning gains achieved. Taken together, our  findings indicate hardly any differences that could be attributed to the gender composition of  the pairs. With regard to help-seeking, the results provide evidence of a generally low  frequency of appropriate help-seeking behavior in web-based inquiry-learning classrooms.  Help was rarely sought by the single-gender or mixed-gender pairs; nor did the pairs differ  substantially in the frequency of help-seeking, in the type and content of help sought, or in the  help source approached.   The learning gains were generally fairly modest, but the differences that were found  between the students could not be adequately explained by whether they had learned with a  same-gender or different-gender learning partner. The qualitative analysis revealed  differences in the way successful gender pairs worked with the task compared to unsuccessful  gender pairs; nevertheless, we could not find any specific indications of gender-related factors  that might have caused differences in the way of working  i.e. differences such as females  having more problems than males with using computers, or being less interested in working  with computers or scientific material, or in terms of females being better at collaborating see  Greenfield, 1997; Harskamp et al., 2008, Scanlon, 2000; Whitley, 1997. Of course, the  results of the study have to be interpreted with caution in this regard, given the relatively  small sample size and hence the relatively small possibilities for identifying differences. In  addition, the qualitative part of the study was set up primarily as a pilot study, so far focusing  merely on seven successful and unsuccessful pairs, and on the transcriptions of only brief  help-seeking events. Our future aim would thus be to obtain more data, examining  collaboration between more pairs.   We observed that the gender pairs generally exhibited low levels of help-seeking  behavior under both conditions high-structurelow-structure. However, it is interesting to  note that both the single-gender pairs and the mixed-gender pairs under the high-structured  classroom-script conditionwhere there were higher levels of teacher guidance sought less  help than the gender pairs under the low-structured classroom-script condition  and at the  same time, learnt more. This might be explained by a low level of student help-seeking skills  and by a reduced need for such skills in the highly structured inquiry-learning environment.  In environments with a high level of structure, students are able to focus on understanding;  hence they do not have to allocate cognitive resources Kirschner et al., 2006 to help-seeking  processes that are generally ineffective due to a lack of high-level help-seeking skills.  However, it might also be that a high level of structure could actually promote students  engagement, and that a low level of structure is linked to increased motivation problems  among low-achieving students. In the more student-centered and open classroom script,  students hardly sought help from the teacher at all, which would seem to reflect distinct  barriers affecting both the teacher and the learners in terms of making use of the teachers  domain expertise. This might be an instance of the expertise inhibition referred to in the  Introduction.  In order to fully make use of the potential of web-based collaborative inquiry-learning, it  would seem necessary to identify and further develop external classroom scripts, i.e. scripts  that can more effectively embed web-based inquiry-learning, and which can adjust the  support provided at different instructional levels Tabak, 2004. Such classroom scripts  should include a focus on developing help-seeking and help-giving skills, and should also be  targeted towards unleashing the teachers expertise, without returning to expository teaching  patterns.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  54 For effective learning, it is not enough merely to bring web-based inquiry-learning into  the science classroom, including theory-guided inquiry software plus a set of laptops. Unless  the technology is embedded in an appropriate inquiry classroom script, the effects on learning  processes and outcomes may well be sub-optimal. At least among learners possessing a lower  learning base, classroom scripts should offer a higher degree of structure, with the teacher  specifying the inquiry-learning steps at the whole-classroom plenary level.  The literature suggests that the beliefs of the teacher play an important role in technology  integration see Liu, 2011; thus teachers with constructivist pedagogical beliefs are more  likely to use technology in their classrooms than teachers with traditional pedagogical beliefs  Ertmer, 2005; Sang, Valcke, van Braak, and Tondeur, 2010. However, the studies also  indicate that their teaching activities do not match the principles they adhere to Harris and  Grandgenett, 1999; Zhao and Cziko, 2001. This chapter might partly explain inconsistencies  of this type, in so far as it highlights the important role of the internalized classroom script  a  script which both teachers and students have learnt at the beginning of their school years and  which they bring to the classroom situation. The great challenge for teachers is to actually  recognize prevalent classroom scripts, so that they can adapt appropriate classroom scripts  when embedding new pedagogical approaches and technological innovations into their  lessons. The best way to recognize these existing classroom scripts might be in collaboration  with their colleagues in the workplace. Here,novice teachers and more experienced teachers  could reflect on and revise their current practices, and  given continuous support  could  develop their professional skills, includingthe incorporation of technology into their teaching  Mekota, Fischer, Kahlert, and Mkitalo-Siegl, 2010; see also Ermeling, 2010. This kind of  collaboration might have a positive effect on the overall school culture and on the ways in  which both teachers and students communicate and behave. For example, one could anticipate  that close collaboration could encourage teachers and students help-seeking behavior in a  way that will enhance learning. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

A part of this article was originally published by K. Mkitalo-Siegl, C. Kohnle, and F.  Fischer in Learning and Instruction. However, the gender perspective and the re-analysis of  gender composition did not form part of the article by Mkitalo-Siegl et al. 2011. The  research of the first author is supported by the Academy of Finland SA project 126643. The  study was partly supported by the German Research Foundation DFG. 

REFERENCES 

Aleven, V., Stahl, E., Schworm, S., Fischer, F.,  Wallace, R. 2003. Help seeking and help  design in interactive learning environments. Review of Educational Research, 733, 277320.  Arroyo, I., Beck, J. E., Beal, C. R., Wing, R.,  Woolf, B. P. 2001. Analyzing students  response to help provision in an elementary mathematics intelligent tutoring system. In R.  Luckin Ed., Papers of the AIED-2001 workshop on help provision and help seeking in   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Factors Affecting Help-seeking and Learning Gains   55 interactive learning environments. Retrieved October 6, 2008, from http:www.  hcrc.ed.ac.ukaied2001workshops.html  Barron, B. 2003. When smart groups fail.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 123, 307-359.  Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D.,  Funder, D. C. 2007. Psychology as the science of selfreports and finger movements: Whatever happened to actual behaviour? Perspectives on  Psychological Science, 24, 396-403.  Bell, P. 2004. Promoting students argument construction and collaborative debate in the  science classroom. In M. C. Linn, E. A. Davis,  P. Bell Eds., Internet environments  for science education pp. 115-143. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  Britzman, D. 1991. Practice makes practice: A critical study of learning to teach. Albany,  NY: State University of New York Press.  Brophy, J.,  Good, T. 1986.Teacher behaviour and student achievement.In M. Wittrock  Ed., Handbook of research on teaching 3rd ed., pp. 328-375. New York: MacMillan.  Butler, R. 1998. Determinants of help seeking: Relations between perceived reasons for  classroom help-avoidance and help-seeking behaviors in an experimental context.  Journal of Educational Psychology, 904, 630-643.  Butler, R. 2006. An achievement goal perspective on student help seeking and teacher help  giving in the classroom: Theory, research and educational implications. In S. A.  Karabenick,  R. S. Newman Eds., Help seeking in academic settings: Goals, groups,  and contexts pp. 15-44. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  Butler, R., Shibaz, L. 2008.Achievement goals for teaching as predictors of students  perceptions of instructional practices and students help seeking and cheating.Learning  and Instruction, 185, 453-467.   Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. 1997. The Jasper Project: Lessons in  curriculum, instruction, assessment, and professional development. Mahwah, NJ:  Lawrence Erlbaum.  Cress, U. 2008.The need for considering multi-level analysis in CSCL research.An appeal  for the use of more advanced statistical methods.International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 31, 69-84.  de Jong, T. 2006. Technological advances in inquiry learning. Science, 3125773, 532-533.  Ermeling, B. A. 2010. Tracing the effects of teacher inquiry on classroom practice.Teaching  and Teacher Education, 263, 377-388.  Ertmer, P. A. 2005. Teacher pedagogical beliefs: The final frontier in our quest for  technology integration? Educational Technology Research and Development, 534, 2539.  Greenfield, T. A. 1997. Genderand grade-level differences in science interest and  participation.Science Education, 813, 259-275.  Harris, J. B., Grandgenett, N. 1999.Correlates with use of telecomputing tools: K-12  teacher beliefs and demographics.Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 314,  327-340.  Harskamp, E., Ding, N., Suhre, C. 2008.Group composition and its effect on female and  male problem-solving in science education.Educational Research, 504, 307-318.  Hijzen, D., Boekaerts, M.,  Vedder, P. 2007. Exploring the links between students  engagement in cooperative learning, their goal preferences and appraisals of instructional  conditions in the classroom.Learning and Instruction, 176, 673-687.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  56 Kalyuga, S. 2009. Knowledge elaboration: A cognitive load perspective. Learning and  Instruction, 195, 402-410.  Karabenick, S. A.,  Knapp, J. R. 1991. Relationship of academic help seeking to the use of  learning strategies and other instrumental achievement behavior in college  students.Journal of Educational Psychology, 832, 221-230.   Karabenick, S. A.,  Newman, R. S. 2009. Generalizable self-regulatory process and socialcultural barometer. In M. Wosnitza, S. A. Karabenick, A. Efklides,  P. Nenniger Eds.,  Contemporary motivation research: From global to local perspectives.Goettingen,  Germany: Hogrefe  Huber.  Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J.,  Clark, R. E. 2006. Why minimal guidance during instruction  does not work: An analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based,  experiential, and inquiry-based teaching. Educational Psychologist, 412, 75-86.  Kollar, I., Fischer, F.,  Slotta, J. D. 2007. Internal and external scripts in computersupported collaborative inquiry learning.Learning and Instruction, 176, 708-721.  Light, P., Littleton, K., Bale, S., Joiner, R.,  Messer, D. 2000.Gender and social  comparison effects in computer-based problem solving.Learning and Instruction, 106,  483-496.  Linn, M. C. 2006. The knowledge integration perspective on learning and instruction.In R.  K. Sawyer Ed., The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences pp. 243-264. New  York: Cambridge University Press.  Linn, M. C., Lee, H.-S., Tinker, R., Husic, F.,  Chiu, J. L. 2006. Teaching and assessing  knowledge integration in science. Science, 3135790, 1049-1050.  Liu, S.-H.2011. Factors related to pedagogical beliefs of teachers and technology  integration.Computers  Education, 564, 1012-1022.  Martiny, S. E. 2005.Wissenserwerb und Lernmotivationbeimcomputerunte rsttzten  kooperativen Inquiry-Lernen: DifferenzielleEffekte von Kooperationsskripts auf Jungen  und auf Mdchen Knowledge acquisition and learning motivation in computer-supported  collaborative inquiry learning: Different effects of collaboration scripts on boys and  girls. Unpublished masters thesis, University of Tbingen, Germany.  Mekota, A., Fischer, F., Kahlert, J.,  Mkitalo-Siegl, K. 2010.Kooperation zwischen  Generationen. 2AgePro Generationswechsel an den Schulen. Cooperation between  generations. 2AgePro generational change in schools. Pdagogische Fhrung Zeitschrift fr Schulleitung und Schulberatung, 621, 221 224.  Mkitalo, K., Weinberger, A., Hkkinen, P., Jrvel, S.,  Fischer, F. 2005. Epistemic  cooperation scripts in online learning environments: Fostering learning by reducing  uncertainty in discourse? Computers in Human Behavior, 214, 603-622.  Mkitalo-Siegl, K.,  Fischer, F. 2011. Stretching the limits in help-seeking research:  Theoretical, methodological, and technological advances.Learning and Instruction, 212,  243-246.  Mkitalo-Siegl, K., Kohnle, C.,  Fischer, F. 2011. Computer-supported collaborative  inquiry learning and classroom scripts: Effects on help-seeking processes and learning  outcomes. Learning and Instruction, 212, 257-266.  Nelson-Le Gall, S. 1981. Help-seeking: An understudied problem-solving skill in children.  Developmental Review, 13, 224-246.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Factors Affecting Help-seeking and Learning Gains   57 Newman, R. S. 1998. Adaptive help seeking: A role of social interaction in self-regulated  learning. In S. A. Karabenick Ed., Strategic help seeking: Implications for learning and  teaching pp. 13-37. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  Newman, R. S. 2000. Social influences on the development of childrens adaptive help  seeking: The role of parents, teachers, and peers. Developmental Review, 203, 350-404.  Newman, R. S., Goldin, L. 1990.Childrens reluctance to seek help with schoolwork.Journal of Educational Psychology, 821, 92-100.  Nie, Y.,  Lau, S. 2010. Differential relations of constructivist and didactic instruction to  students cognition, motivation, and achievement.Learning and Instruction, 205, 411423.  Oortwijn, M. B., Boekaerts, M., Vedder, P.,  Strijbos, J.-W. 2008. Helping behaviour  during cooperative learning and learning gains: The role of the teacher and of pupils  prior knowledge and ethnic background.Learning and Instruction, 182, 146-159.  Puustinen, M. 1998. Help-seeking behaviour in a problem-solving situation: Development  of self-regulation. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 132, 271-282.  Rajaram, S.,  Pereira-Pasarin, L. P. 2010. Collaborative memory: Cognitive research and  theory. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 56, 649-663.  Ryan, A. M., Gheen, M. H., Midgley, C. 1998. Why do some students avoid asking for  help? An examination of the interplay among students academic efficacy, teachers  social-emotional role, and the classroom goal structure.Journal of Educational  Psychology, 903, 528-535.  Ryan, A. M., Pintrich, P. R., Midgley, C. 2001. Avoiding seeking help in the classroom:  Who and why? Educational Psychology Review, 132, 93-114.  Ryan, A. M.,  Shim, S. 2006. Social achievement goals: The nature and consequences of  different orientations towards social competence. Personality and Social Psychology  Bulletin, 329, 1246-1263.  Ryan, A. M.,  Shin, H. 2011. Help-seeking tendencies during early adolescence: An  examination of motivational correlates and consequences for achievement. Learning and  Instruction,212, 247-256.  Sang, G., Valcke, M., van Braak, J., Tondeur, J. 2010. Student teachers thinking  processes and ICT integration: Predictors of prospective teaching behaviors with  educational technology. Computers Education, 541, 103-112.  Savelsbergh, E., van Joolingen, E., Sins, P., de Jong, T., Lazonder, A. 2004, April. CoLab, design considerations for a collaborative discovery learning environment.Paper  presented at the Annual Meeting of the National Association for Research in Science  Teaching NARST, Vancouver, Canada.  Scanlon, E. 2000. How gender influences learners working collaboratively with science  simulations. Learning and Instruction, 106, 463-481.  Schank, R. C.,  Abelson, R. P. 1977. Scripts, plans, goals and understanding. Hillsdale,  NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  Schratzenstaller, A. 2010. The classroom of the past. In K. Mkitalo-Siegl, J. Zottmann, F.  Kaplan,  F. Fischer Eds., Classroom of the future: Orchestrating collaborative spaces  pp. 15-39. Rotterdam, the Netherlands: Sense Publisher.  Seidel, T., Rimmele, R.,  Prenzel M. 2005. Clarity and coherence of lesson goals as a  scaffold for student learning.Learning and Instruction, 156, 539-556.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kati Mkitalo-Siegl, Frank Fischer and Carmen Kohnle  58 Slotta, J. D.,  Linn, M. C. 2000. How do students make sense of internet resources in the  science classroom? In M. J. Jacobson,  R. Kozma Eds., Learning the sciences of the  21st century pp. 193-226. Mahwah: NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  Slotta, J. D.,  Linn, M. C. 2009.WISE science: Web-based inquiry in the classroom. New  York: Teachers College Press.  Tabak, I. 2004. Synergy: A complement to emerging patterns of distributed scaffolding.  Journal of the Learning Sciences, 133, 305-335.  Underwood, J., Underwood, G.,  Wood, D. 2000. When does gender matter? Interactions  during computer-based problem solving.Learning and Instruction, 105, 447-462.  vanJoolingen, W. R., de Jong T., Lazonder, A. W., Savelsbergh, E. R., Manlove, S. 2005.  Co-Lab: Research and development of an online learning environment for collaborative  scientific discovery learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 214, 671-688.  vanJoolingen, W. R., Zacharia, Z. C. 2009. Developments in inquiry learning. In N.  Balacheff, S. Ludvigsen, T. de Jong, A. Lazonder,  S. Barnes Eds., Technologyenhanced learning: Principles and products pp. 21-37. Dordrecht, the Netherlands:  Springer.  Webb, N. M., Ing, M., Kersting N., Nemer, K. M. 2006. Help seeking in cooperative  learning groups. In S. A. Karabenick, R. S. Newman Eds., Help seeking in academic  settings: Goals, groups, and contexts pp. 45-88. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  Webb, N. M., Mastergeorge, A. 2003.Promoting effective helping behaviour in peerdirected groups.International Journal of Educational Research, 391-2, 73-97.  Webb, N. M., Palincsar, A. S. 1996. Group processes in the classroom. In D. Berliner,   R. Calfee Eds., Handbook of educational psychology pp. 841-873. New York:  MacMillan.  Whitley, B. E. Jr. 1997. Gender differences in computer-related attitudes and behaviour: A  meta-analysis. Computers in Human Behavior, 131, 1-22.  Zhao, Y.,  Cziko, G. A. 2001. Teacher adoption of technology: A perceptual control  theory perspective. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 91, 5-30. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

In: Classrooms: Management, Effectiveness and Challenges  ISBN 978-1-61324-601-6  Editor: Rebecca J. Newley, pp. 59-75   2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 

Chapter 3 

FRAMING STUDENT ENGAGEMENT THROUGH  PERCEPTIONS OF JUSTICE: THE ROLE OF TRUST   IN AUTHORITIES IN EDUCATIONAL CONTEXTS 

Chiara Berti and Silvia Di Battista  Universit degli studi G. dAnnunzio Chieti-Pescara, Italy 

ABSTRACT 

Social psychology research provides evidence that people's engagement in groups is  related more to their perception of authorities than to economic assurances De Cremer   Tyler, 2007; Tyler  Degoey, 1995. In educational contexts, Berti, Molinari, and  Speltini 2010 have shown that a sense of justice impacts engagement as well as  students' identification, motivation, and dialogue in class. Furthermore, survey and  laboratory studies show that students who identify more closely with their university  report more engagement when university authorities treat them fairly Berti, Di Battista,   Pivetti, 2010; Smith, Olson, Agronick,  Tyler, 2009; Tyler, Boeckmann, Smith,   Huo, 1997. Among the antecedents of student engagement, teachers support is  considered essential in elementary, middle, and high school Marks, 2000 in promoting  student participation and on-task behavior Battistich, Solomon, Watson,  Schaps,  1997 and reducing the probability of dropping out of school Croninger  Lee, 2001.  Moreover, a great deal of empirical evidence has shown the significant role of trust in  authorities in building effective, productive and well-managed schools Bryk   Schneider, 1996. Trust in authorities predicts positive school climate, productive  communication, willingness to go beyond in-role behaviors, and student achievement  Tschannen-Moran  Hoy, 2000. Definitions of trust are broad, but recent studies  Colquitt, Scott,  LePine, 2007 suggest the value of distinguishing among types of  trust, such as competence and benevolence. Competence-based trust captures the  knowledge and skills needed to perform a specific job. Benevolence-based trust, by  contrast, involves authorities' fairness, caring motives, and intentions. Empirical evidence  Hoy  Tschannen-Moran, 1999 has shown that all of these and other facets of trust are  important aspects of intra-school relations, but their relative effect on engagement 

 Corresponding author: Chiara Berti, Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, via dei Vestini 31, 66013 Chieti, Italy.  Tel.: 39-0871-3556595; fax: 39-0871-3555305; e-mail: chiara.bertiunich.it   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Chiara Berti and Silvia Di Battista  60 depends on the nature of the relationships. Trust may be based on perceptions of schools'  economic motives, on institutional support conducive to building trust, on students' sense  of identification and on other factors Tschannen-Moran  Hoy, 2000. For instance,  unconditional or identification-based trust emerges in an environment where parties have  complete confidence and empathy, as well as common desires and intentions Lewicki   Bunker, 1996. In summary, this chapter reviews research about engagement and trust in  authorities in order to suggest potential determinants of a more inclusive and empowering  educational system. 

INTRODUCTION 

Much of our day-to-day life is spent within social institutions, such as schools,  courtrooms, work organizations and town or municipal meeting halls. Group membership and  interaction within groups are central to the lives of many citizens. In order to achieve the best  functioning of groups, some amount of interpersonal affiliation and cooperation is required.  However, personal and collective interests are complexly woven, and it is not always easy to  reach a compromise between self and social goals. Engagement benefits groups by enhancing  the coordination of peoples actions and goals. It reduces friction, improves group  performance, and increases efficiency Tyler  Blader, 2000. Engagement is a kind of  cooperation in which people involve themselves, in terms of time, effort, and resources, and  in return, they hope to obtain various benefits, both economic and socio-emotional. The  construct of engagement is defined as active involvement, commitment, and concentrated  attention, in contrast to superficial participation, apathy or lack of interest Newman,  Wehlage,  Lamborn, 1992, p.11.  Psychological engagement, described by Tyler and Blader 2000; 2003, is a summary  concept that involves either mandatory or discretionary cooperation, including the amount of  personal investment in making an extra effort. They define engagement as a value-added  behavior, falling along a continuum from mandatory cooperation i.e. obedience and  limitation of a groups harms to altruistic cooperation i.e. promoting groups objectives and  viability. The authors confirm that groups function better when their members engage  cooperatively.   Successful cooperation depends heavily on the motivation of those involved. Formal  organizations and groups in general benefit by their members engagement and this benefit is  maximized when engagement is based, to some extent, on intrinsic, rather than only extrinsic,  motivation. External or instrumental or self-interested motivations concern the human desire  to maximize gain and minimize loss in social exchanges. A reward-driven incentive system is  indeed necessary because it encourages desired behaviors; on the other hand, a punishmentdriven sanctioning system discourages undesired behaviors. The internal motivations are  personal reasons to adhere with and to follow a legitimate groups rules, goals, values or  attitudes. A reward-driven incentive system or a punishment-driven incentive system is more  expensive and dependent on having total control and on the ability to use resources to monitor  actions. Maintaining control through the distribution of resources and through the use or  threat of force is not always possible and effective, especially in periods of scarcity of  resources or in complex organizations, which, in many instances, call for individual  autonomy, flexibility, and responsibility. Nevertheless, instrumental motivations are weak in  increasing cooperation and engagement compared with internal motivations. In other words,   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Framing Student Engagement through Perceptions of Justice  61 people do not need to receive incentives or to face a risk of sanctions, because in engagement,  the personal reward is identity-based. Internal motivations are influenced by status judgments  such as peoples sense of pride, respect and identification that are communicated by other  members of the group and by authorities. Group authorities in particular play a fundamental  role in fostering members sense of justice, respect and identification in intra-group  conditions. Authorities treatment communicates members inclusion and importance within  the group. Numerous studies De Cremer  Tyler, 2007; Tyler  Degoey, 1995; Tyler   Lind, 1992 provide evidence that people's engagement in groups is related more to their  perception of authorities treatment than to economic assurances. Authorities treatment,  based on trustworthiness, dignity and respect, neutrality and consistency of action,  communicates to members their own value in the group Tyler  Lind, 1992. Authorities  fair treatment elevates members sense of justice, and sense of authorities legitimacy; that, in  turn, increases engagement and support for authorities, even in the face of unfavorable results.  As we know, the value of a sense of justice and engagement with respect to the efficacy of  groups in work organizations has been abundantly studied for a review see: Haslam, van  Knippenberg, Platow,  Ellemers, 2001; Greenberg  Cropanzano, 2001. The same notable  attention has not been given to educational settings Sabbagh, Resh, Mor,  Vanhuysse,  2006, despite the important role of a sense of justice and engagement within all social  settings. Educational settings are contexts in which justice norms, distribution rules, and  interpersonal elements characterize everyday life. Schools and universities need to foster a  sense of justice and, in particular, one of trust in their management in order to motivate  students willingness to go beyond the minimum requirements of learning and obedience.  Trust is one of the most important elements of a good sense of justice in authorities Tyler   Lind, 1992. Although trust appears to be difficult to achieve and maintain, it plays a pivotal  role in educational improvement Tschannen-Moran  Hoy, 2000. Students who do not trust  their teachers or professors may disengage from learning tasks and can become alienated  from school activities in general. Students who feel unsafe devote additional energy to selfprotection and less to learning or engagement, and may even exhibit aggression toward  authorities and peers Tshcannen-Moran  Hoy, 2000. Sabbagh and colleagues 2006  highlight how an elevated sense of justice and fair treatment by authorities in schools or  universities can increase students motivation, satisfaction and engagement. By contrast, a  sense of educational injustice may lead to increases in students anger, asocial behaviors, and  alienation, or even spark protests Chory-Assad  Paulsel, 2004a; 2004b. Surveys and  laboratory experiments in the educational field confirm that students report more engagement  when university authorities treat them fairly Tyler  Blader, 2000; Tyler, Boeckmann,  Smith,  Huo, 1997; Tyler  Lind, 1992. Furthermore, a great deal of empirical evidence  has shown trust in authorities predicts positive school climate, productive communication,  willingness to go beyond in-role behaviors, and student achievement Tschannen-Moran   Hoy, 2000. Thus, the role of trust in educational authorities appears vital for predicting  student engagement.  In summary, this chapter reviews contemporary research about engagement and trust in  authorities in order to suggest potential determinants of a more inclusive and empowering  educational system. Social justice research offers the theoretical basis for a rethinking of what  teachers or professors can do in class. Specifically, the focus of the work is to observe, among  the antecedents of student engagement, the significant role of students trust in educational  authorities who build effective, productive and well-managed schools and universities, and   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Chiara Berti and Silvia Di Battista  62 thereby promote student participation. Our aim is not to review the entirety of extant literature  on student engagement and trust, but to suggest how trust in authorities and students  identification can relate to engagement. We intend to highlight the importance of engagement  in elevating students motivation, achievement, and participation.   In the first section, we intend to present models of social justice that explain the role of a  sense of justice within groups, such as organizations and institutions, mainly focusing on the  fairness of treatment by authorities.   In the second section, we intend to present a definition of student engagement in terms of  how it is observed inside schools and universities. The third part constitutes a revision of the  concept of trust in authorities and trust in school authorities, as a factor that can increase  students level of engagement. We present a definition of the concept of trust in authorities as  exposed in literature, and his distinction in facets. However, we highlight how trust may not  be sufficient to elicit engagement without consideration of the role of identification.  Identification transforms students interests from the personal to the group level. A condition  of identification-based trust may offer the best prospects in an educational context.   The final section offers useful insights into how the management of schools and  universities might relate to the potential for improvement in student performance and wellbeing, and a corresponding reduction in student alienation and failure.  

1. SOCIAL JUSTICE RESEARCH ON ENGAGEMENT 

1.1. Models of Psychology of Justice on Engagement 

Justice is a theme in our daily life and intuitively related to ethical standards that describe  how we should treat others Folger  Cropanzano, 1998. One specific example of justice  involves the question of whether groups use fair procedures in making decisions and  allocating outcomes: that is procedural fairness Leventhal, 1980; Thibaut  Walker, 1975.  In terms of interpersonal justice, people infer a sense of justice from the interpersonal  treatment that they receive from the group and from the group authorities Tyler  Lind,  1992.   In social psychology, the procedural and interpersonal senses of justice have become  central to the study of motivations involving both immediate and long-term engagement  within groups, organizations, institutions, legal and educational settings, and societies Lind   Tyler, 1988; Tyler  Blader, 2000; 2003. A sense of justice or fairness leads to many  desirable social attitudes, behaviors and feelings. The likelihood that people will interact in a  positive and productive way with their fellow group members and authorities is shaped by  their sense of procedural and interpersonal fairness. A series of models have already proposed  the importance of non-instrumental value of concerns psychology of social justice. For  instance, the group value model Lind  Tyler, 1988 is focused on procedural fairness as a  signal of a symbolic message that one is a valued member of the group and that, as such, one  can use the group as a reference point to define himherself. The relational model of authority  Tyler  Lind, 1992 focuses on the psychological factors shaping reactions to fair treatment  by group authorities, and supports the idea that treatment by authorities is a key to peoples   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Framing Student Engagement through Perceptions of Justice  63 connection to the group and to group authorities. The way authorities behave is more  important than their capacity to distribute rewards and punishments and manage resources.  Authorities behaviors tell people about their own value as members of the group, on the basis  of three main elements: 1 trustworthiness and benevolence of authorities actions and  intentions benevolence; 2 dignity and authorities respect for all members status  recognition; 3 neutrality and consistency of an authoritys action neutrality. A fair  treatment communicates to members the message that they are important and included within  the group, but the same information should not be very important if one does not care about  the group. Tyler and his colleagues studies 2000; 2003; 2009 define the group engagement  model, which predicts that peoples willingness to cooperate especially in a discretionary  manner flows from the identity information they receive from the group. In their  conceptualization, identity information is hypothesized to emanate not only from material  rewards, but mainly from evaluations of procedural and interpersonal fairness. Procedures  would have the potential to motivate people toward psychological and behavioral engagement  because they are a key factor to which people look in social self-definition. Social identity is  considered to be a primary factor in the impact of procedural evaluations on attitudes, values,  and behaviors. The social identity mediation hypothesis, applied to the factors of the group  engagement model, refers to the prediction that identity evaluations mediate the relationship  between fairness and engagement. Social identity assurance is stronger in favoring a groupmode behavior, compared to an individual-mode behavior Lind, 2001. Reviewing  procedural fairness models, De Cremer and Tyler 2005 conclude that authorities  procedures and treatments undertaken within the group have an influence on the social self.  They integrate psychological models of justice into a unifying framework answering two  questions: How does fairness guide peoples behaviors such as engagement? How are these  behaviors maintained over time? Engagement seems reinforced where members have positive  expectations within the group trust and where the interests of the group are viewed as ones  own interests identification. The goal of achieving engagement is not sufficient to achieving  cooperation, because the expectation that other people will cooperate is also necessary. Thus,  having a sense of identification, having a goal of mutual cooperation and expecting others to  cooperate are functional conditions to reducing free-riding and to eliciting engagement De  Cremer  Tyler, 2005; De Cremer  Stouten, 2003; Pruitt  Kimmel, 1977. This corpus of  research is mainly performed in work organizations. Surveys and laboratory experiments in  the educational field show that students who are more closely identified with their university  report more engagement when university authorities treat them fairly as well Tyler  Blader,  2000; Tyler, Boeckmann, Smith,  Huo, 1997; Tyler  Lind, 1992.   In a study within the American university context Smith, Tyler, Huo, Ortiz,  Lind,  1998, treatment by authorities was related to discretionary behavior for closely identified  students. How fairly students felt the university staff treated them was related to feelings of  respect and, in turn, to cooperation, for highly identified students. That is, identification  played a moderating role. Moreover, a recent study Smith, Olson, Agronick,  Tyler, 2009,  with outcome favorability, quality of authorities treatment, and students affiliation as  variables, has revealed similar results: better authorities treatment is linked with a students  better reaction. Moreover, student identification with the university predicts positive  academic engagement, intention to stay and a greater feeling of respect. These results confirm  the hypothesis of the relational model of authorities Tyler  Lind, 1992 that an authority  communicates information about members value in the group and influences their   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Chiara Berti and Silvia Di Battista  64 engagement. Thus, the fairness of treatment by authorities has a variable impact on  engagement depending on the students level of identification. 

1.2. Classroom Justice 

Universities and schools are the first places where children are confronted with and  where students are engaged in making sense of research concerning justice Berti et al.,  2010. In schools, students are attentive to the legitimacy of authority and to authorities  treatment Thorkilsden, 1989. The more legitimate they consider authorities to be, the less  likely they are to engage in rule-breaking behaviors Emler  Reicher, 2005. In educational  contexts, Berti, Molinari, and Speltini 2010 have shown that a sense of justice impacts  engagement as well as students' identification, motivation, and dialogue in class. Moreover, in  a study conducted in Italy on classroom justice Gouveia-Pereira, Vala, Palmonari,  Rubini,  2003, high school students perceptions of teachers interactional justice had a significant  effect on school processes such as the development of positive attitudes towards school  authorities.  Chory-Assad and her collaborators Chory-Assad 2002; Chory-Assad and Paulsel  2004a,b; Chory, 2007 give a first definition of classroom justice. Following from  Cropanzano and Greenbergs 1997 definition of organizational justice, they define  classroom justice as perceptions of fairness regarding outcomes or processes that occur in  the instructional context Chory-Assad  Paulsel, 2004a, p. 254. Thus, classroom justice is  referred to as a sense of justice concerning procedures and distribution rules in educational  settings, those related to students learning motivation, respect and obedience, and trust of  teachers. The authors give particular consideration to the application of the three well-known  components of justice within the educational field. Distributive classroom justice is described  as students perceptions of fairness with regard to the principles of equality, equity, and need.  For example, the distribution of grades could be perceived as fair or unfair by students,  compared to those of their peers or to what they expected. The criteria of differentiation  among students evaluations could be based on students efforts, merits, or family  backgrounds and these criteria may be different in schools with specific orientations of values  and aims, such as individual and competitive values, or communitarian and supportive ones.  Procedural classroom justice refers to students perceptions of fairness regarding the criteria  and processes used by their teachers or school authorities, for instance the opportunity to have  a voice in the assignment of grades and evaluation of students. Finally, interactional  classroom justice refers to students perceptions of fairness in the interpersonal treatment  received by school authorities in terms of respect and dignity Berti et al., 2010; Sabbagh et  al., 2004.   In her studies of school settings, Chory-Assad 2007 clearly defines the role of teachers  as authorities in the educational field, who may be more or less credible in students  perceptions. Chory-Assad shows that credibility enhances the sense of justice. She defines  teachers credibility as composed of three main factors: competence, character, and caring.  Competence refers to perceived expertise and knowledge in the subjects that heshe is  teaching. Character refers to perceived trustworthiness and benevolence. Finally, caring refers  to perceived attention to and interest in students needs and welfare. Chory-Assad clarifies  that competence is related to the sense of interactional justice; caring is related to the sense of   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Framing Student Engagement through Perceptions of Justice  65 procedural and interactional justice; and character is related to every component of justice,  making it the most consistent predictor of classroom justice. Thus, the study of perceived  trustworthiness is the primary goal of the study of classroom justice. 

2. STUDENT ENGAGEMENT 

Engagement appears in the literature in a series of constructs, definitions, and measures.  In the educational context, students engagement is the tendency to be involved in academic  activities and in school activities. Finn and Rock 1997 articulated a general definition of  engagement as participation in the social, extracurricular, and athletic aspects of school life  in addition to or in place of extensive participation in academic work p. 222.  Our aim is not to revisit this literature in detail, but to provide a general definition of the  concept and some of its antecedents and consequences.  There is evidence in the research literature of the association between engagement and  positive academic outcomes Fredericks, Blumenfeld,  Paris, 2004. Engagement has also  been described as an antidote to dropping out, students disaffection and boredom Thijs   Verkuyten, 2009. Studies demonstrate a strong relationship between engagement and  performance e.g. standardized tests, grades in elementary, middle, and high school Connel,  Spencer,  Aber, 1994. Newmann 1981; 1986; 1992 explains that even students who have  the necessary academic abilities and skills may become disaffected with school. Thus,  educators cannot assume that students with a satisfactory level of academic success are also  engaged. Newmann suggests that what is needed to engage students is not necessarily  learning that is fun, but learning activities in which students may be both involved and  interested. Achievement outcomes are also found when students do more work than is  required, or participate in classroom discussions Finchman, 1989. Engaged students  demonstrate more effort, feel more positive emotions, and show more interest in their  classrooms compared with their less engaged peers Fredricks, Blumenfeld,  Paris, 2004;  Reeve, Jang, Carrell, Jeon,  Barch, 2004. Thus, engagement increases the incidence of  positive outcomes and it is also expected that positive outcomes increase engagement.  According to these views, as schools become more effective, students are more engaged and  academic performance is hence improved. Therefore, greater student engagement is a sign of  effective school improvement Zyngier, 2008.   Finn 1989 presented a model of student engagement with two central components  participation and identification that influence one another. Participation, the behavioral  component, includes behaviors such as the students acquiescence to school and class rules,  arriving in class on time, attending to the teacher, and responding to teachers directions and  questions. Other levels of participation include initiative-taking on the part of the student, and  participation in the social, extracurricular, athletic and governance aspects of school life.  Identification, the affective component, refers to students feelings of belonging in the school  setting and valuing the opportunities that school can provide, such as access to postgraduation education and employment. Students participation is linked to the development of  a sense of belonging, which, in turn, promotes positive outcomes such as student engagement.   A more specific and articulated definition of engagement approaches it as a multidimensional construct, encompassing behavioral, affective, and cognitive dimensions   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Chiara Berti and Silvia Di Battista  66 Appleton, Christenson, Kim,  Reschly, 2006; Finn, 1989; Fredricks, Blumenfeld,  Paris,  2004. The observable aspects of engagement are often referred to as behavioral engagement,  while other aspects of engagement, such as interest in school, perceptions of academic  efficacy, or intrinsic motivation, are more psychological Appleton et al., 2006; Finn, 1989.  Behavioral engagement includes participation and respect for rules, as well as  involvement in academic, social, and extracurricular activities. It entails three kind of student  conduct: 1 positive conduct with respect for norms and rules and avoidance of disruptive  behaviors; 2 involvement in learning tasks with effort, persistence, concentration, attention,  asking questions and contributing to classroom discussion; 3 participation in extra-curricular  activities such as school governance. Behavioral engagement can be also viewed as a  continuum varying from simply adhering to rules to participation in classroom activities or  even to involvement in extra-curricular activities Fredricks, Blumenfeld,  Paris, 2004.   Affective and emotional engagement encompasses the spectrum of positive and negative  reactions that influence student interest in and feelings toward the educational context, such  as a sense of belonging. It reflects students active involvement and investment in school, and  their attitudes toward academic content, teachers, and friends. It also describes feelings and  reactions to school and authorities in the classroom, such as liking or disliking school,  teachers or work, as well as student interest, anxiety, boredom, and happiness. Sometimes,  emotional engagement is defined as identification Finn, 1989, indicative of a sense of  belonging to the school or the university and value that a student has about school-related  outcomes. Four components of value can be described Eccles, 1983; Fredricks, Blumenfeld,   Paris, 2004: 1 interest in school activities; 2 attainment value involving the self-schema;  3 sense of utility of the task for the future; 4 negative cost of engaging   Finally, cognitive aspects of engagement involve the idea of investment, comprising  students motivation, effort and strategy, and beliefs relating to academic capability.  Cognitive engagement describes investment in learning, understanding and mastering  knowledge, as well as the desire to go beyond the basic requirements. It includes being  strategic and self-regulating in undertaking tasks, being flexible, demonstrating a preference  for hard work, and showing the ability to cope and respond constructively in the face of  failure Fredricks, Blumenfeld,  Paris, 2004.  Engagement is a concept that can range in intensity and duration. For example,  behavioral engagement can vary from doing homework and respecting rules to participating  in student assemblies. Emotional engagement can vary from simple liking to identification  with the institution. Finally, cognitive engagement can range from memorization of  information to a deep understanding and use of learning strategies. Research on behavioral  engagement links it to student conduct and on task behavior Karweit, 1989; Peterson, Swing,  Stark,  Wass, 1989, while emotional engagement seems to be an antecedent of student  attitudes, interests, and values Yamamoto, Thomas,  Karns, 1969, and cognitive  engagement appears to be related to motivational goals and self-regulated learning  Zimmerman, 1990; Fredricks, Blumenfeld,  Paris, 2004.   Researchers consider it important to distinguish engagement at the situational level from  engagement at the personal level Krapp, Hidi,  Renninger, 1992. According to the selfsystem model of motivation applied in the classroom setting Connell  Wellborn, 1991;  Skinner  Belmont, 1993, engagement is dependent on the extent to which an individuals  psychological needs are met. The model assumes that people need to feel competent, securely  related to their social setting, and autonomous in the activities they accept. Social settings   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Framing Student Engagement through Perceptions of Justice  67 play a crucial role in satisfying these needs, and instructors are important agents in a students  educational environment. It is notable that engagement is strongly dependent on the context  and varies with it. Engagement is the result of an interaction between students and their  educational environment. Family, peer, culture and educational context can be factors that  impact engagement in a positive or negative manner. We primarily focus on the role of school  authorities treatment and support.   Studies have found significant relationships between the dimensions of teacher behavior  and students academic engagement Furrer  Skinner, 2003. Teacher involvement or  teacher support behavior involves affection and assistance with respect to the academic and  interpersonal needs of students. This kind of support involves not only an effort to maintain  students attention, interest, and enthusiasm, but also the fostering of students involvement  and initiative. In this way, teachers appear to be facilitators in the construction of knowledge.  They show an interest in what students have to say, and adapt teaching to individual needs,  socio-cultural backgrounds, and lived experiences. A high level of teacher support is also  assumed to promote students sense of relatedness to their social environment, with the aim of  achieving the best possible relationships between students and authorities, peers, and the  institution itself Furrer  Skinner, 2003. Support for students autonomy is a fundamental  element of support as well. It consists of independent decision-making, choice, and the  absence of high external control such as could be imposed through a system of rewards or  punishments. Another relevant dimension of skillful teaching refers to the clarity of teacher  expectations for academic and social behavior and the consequences of falling short of these  expectations. It involves clear demands and expectations with respect to student performance,  as well as formal and informal rules. The elaboration of clear expectations is thought to  increase students feelings of competence and all facets of engagement Fredricks et al.,  2004.   Empirical research confirms that teacher support can elevate student engagement  Connell, Spencer,  Aber, 1994; Connell  Wellborn, 1991, and laboratory experiments  have demonstrated that high external control can diminish interest, a preference for  challenging work, and persistence, all of which are aspects of engagement Fredricks et al.,  2004.  Newmann 1992 theorized that, in an educational setting, engagement is higher when the  task is authentic; provides opportunities for collaboration; gives students a role in conceiving,  completing and evaluating their contributions; permits the expression of competence and  talent; and conveys the message that learning can be fun and meaningful. Finally, Leary  1957 suggested that teachers interpersonal styles have to consist of two orthogonal  dimensions: control i.e., power, dominance, and structure and affiliation i.e., warmth,  friendliness, and involvement. Furthermore, Skinner and Belmont 1993 have shown that  teacher involvement positively correlates with student engagement, but also that higher levels  of student engagement elicit higher levels of teacher involvement. These approaches posit  student engagement as something students do and that teachers can organize for them  Zyngier, 2008.   Research in the field Furrer  Skinner, 2003; Osterman, 2000 indeed supports the  notion that students will be more engaged in a supportive and caring classroom context and  when authorities meet each individuals need to learn and to be valued as well as each  individuals needs involving inclusion, acceptance and respect.   In the following section, we introduce the concept of trust and its role in engagement.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Chiara Berti and Silvia Di Battista  68 3. TRUST AS A PREDICTOR OF ENGAGEMENT 

In recent years, life for many has grown in complexity amid changing expectations.  Economic reality has increasingly dictated a highly skilled, resourceful, and efficient  workforce that must be able to solve complex problems, and work in groups. That is, our  complex and interdependent society has been witness to increased competition and the need  for frequent and adaptive changes. In addition to seeking more predictable outcomes  collectively, we have, at the individual level, increasingly demanded equality of opportunity  and expected that outcomes will be available to people coming from a variety of social strata.  In such a climate, trust can help schools, like other institutions and organizations, to be more  effective, cooperative, cohesive, and well-managed because this construct plays an important  role in reducing uncertainty and heightening confidence in authorities competence and good  intentions Baier, 1986. Baier described trust as reliance on others competence and good  intentions regarding the things we care about most. What we care about can be tangible e.g.  money, or intangible e.g. respect.  Trust has emerged as a subject of study in sociology Coleman, 1990, economics  Fukuyama, 1995, and organizational science Kramer  Tyler, 1996; Rousseau, Sitkin,  Ronald,  Camere, 1998. It is recognized as an important element in the functioning of  groups and organizations, and as promoting effective cooperation and communication and  productive relationships Kramer  Tyler, 1996. Researchers have shown that trust  correlates with high levels of work performance and commitment, a sense of justice in  particular interactional justice, and employee satisfaction Haslam, Van Knippengberg,  Platow,  Ellemers, 2001. Trust is recognized also as a vital element in educational contexts  Tschannen-Moran  Hoy, 2000.   The cost of distrust could be high, because in the absence of trust, people demand greater  protection and control, and insist on costly sanctioning mechanisms Tyler  Kramer, 1996.  Rousseau, Sitkin, Ronald and Camere 1998 define trust as a psychological condition based  on a positive and confident expectation of another persons intentions, and on the willingness  to be vulnerable. Trust is neither a behavior e.g. cooperation nor a choice e.g. choice to  take a risk, but is a psychological state that could be the cause or consequence of a behavior  or a choice. The objects of trust would be other members of a group, authorities such as  professors, leaders, supervisors, and also institutions and organizations. Rousseau and  collaborators 1998 highlighted that there are two essential conditions underlying the  realization of trust: a condition of risk, and an interdependent condition. Risk creates an  opportunity for trust, because trust is not necessary if one has complete knowledge of  anothers intentions. Furthermore, higher levels of risk entail a greater need for trust and a  larger impact on behaviors and attitudes. On the other hand, social certainty and higher  identification decrease the need for trust, and its impact on cooperation is diminished. Trust  also involves interdependence among members of a group because the goals of an individual  often cannot be reached without the support of other group members.   Furthermore, Colquitt, Scott, and LePine 2007 say trust is based on a cognitive process  that discriminates between people and groups that are trustworthy, distrusted, or unknown.  The authors distinguish trustworthiness the perception of ability, benevolence, and integrity  in a trustee, from trust the willingness to accept vulnerability based on positive expectations  of a trustees actions. Trustworthiness is the antecedent of trust, and is composed of two   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Framing Student Engagement through Perceptions of Justice  69 elements: the ability and character of a trustee. Competence or ability captures the knowledge  and skills needed to do a specific job. Character is a multi-faceted construct that comprises  honesty, fairness, openness, caring motives and intentions, and preventability. The authors  separate character into two other components. The first component is benevolence loyalty,  openness, caring, and supportiveness, defined as the extent to which a trustee is believed to  want to do good, distinct from any profit motives. The second component is integrity  fairness, justice, consistency, and promise fulfillment, defined as the extent to which a  trustee is believed to adhere to moral and ethical principles. Ability can be described as the  can-do component of trustworthiness by describing whether one has the skills and abilities  to act appropriately. Character is the will-do component of trustworthiness that describes  whether one will choose to use those skills and abilities to act in the best interests of others.  Mayer and Davis 1995 also define trust as composed of three facets. The first facet  comprises the ability, competence, and perceived expertise that enable a party to have  influence within some specific domain. Benevolence, loyalty, openness, caring, receptivity,  and availability are the second facet of trust, defined as the extent to which the trustee is  believed to want to do good on behalf of the trustor, aside from a profit motive. Integrity,  fairness, consistency, promise fulfillment, reliability, value congruence, and discreetness are,  finally, the characteristics of the third facet, involving the perception that the trustee adheres  to a set of principles that the trustor accepts.   It is important to observe that trust is not a static element but one that could change over  time and in different social contexts. It can increase or decrease in magnitude and strength  within a relationship Kramer  Tyler, 1996. At early stages of a relationship, trust is at a  calculus-based level calculus-based trust CBT. In other words, an individual will carefully  calculate how the other party is likely to behave in a given situation depending on the rewards  for being trustworthy and the deterrents against untrustworthy behavior. As the parties come  to a deeper understanding of each other through repeated interactions, they may become  aware of shared values and goals. This allows trust to grow to a higher and qualitatively  different level. When trust evolves to the highest level, it is said to function as identificationbased trust IBT. At this stage, trust has been built to the point that the parties have  internalized each other's desires and intentions. Identification-based trust becomes more  important for people who identify highly with a group compared with less highly identified  people Kramer  Tyler, 1996.  Tscahnnen-Moran and collaborators 2000 demonstrate that trust can be vital not only in  work organizations, but also for well-managed schools. Their review confirms that all facets  of trust are important in the functioning of schools. Willingness to risk vulnerability is a  particularly fundamental part of trust in hierarchical relationships such as those found in a  school environment. Trust is a condition of risk in interdependence wherein the interests of  one individual cannot be realized without reliance upon others. For example, students cannot  avoid depending on the work of their teachers even if they are not sure about their  competencies and intentions. Students have to maintain a certain degree of trust to achieve  their goal of adequate instruction. Confidence is another element of trust. It is the degree to  which people can stay in an uncertain condition, for a given period of time, waiting to see if  their expectations will or will not be fulfilled. The most common facets of trust in school  include benevolence, involving the expectation that others have good intentions and will not  exploit ones vulnerability, or take advantage for their own gain. Reliability is the  predictability of a behavior, but must be combined with benevolence because one can also   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Chiara Berti and Silvia Di Battista  70 predict a malicious, self-serving, or dishonest behavior. Competence is the facet of trust that  captures the knowledge and skills needed to perform a specific job. For example, a teacher  can communicate to students adequate levels of skills, knowledge, and expertise to enhance  students learning and well-being. Honesty is a component of trust referring to a persons  integrity, character, and authenticity. For example, a teacher who accepts responsibility and  does not distort the truth is considered honest. Openness is the final facet of trust. It involves  ones willingness to share information and ability to trust others.  Although every facet of trust is important, the weight of a particular facet can depend on  the particular context and nature of the relationship within the school or university. Hoy and  Tschannen-Moran 1999 suggest that all facets of trust together constitute a unitary factor of  trust in school. A person can trust another person in a certain domain of interdependence but  not in others. Furthermore, each facet has a threshold that can be variable but beyond which  trust can turn to distrust.   Benevolence is among the most important facets of trust in the educational field  Tschannen-Moran  Hoy, 2000. In such a context, trust can be based on calculative  purpose: for instance, behaving in a trustworthy manner is convenient because sanctions  exceed any benefits of an opportunistic behavior that breaches trust. In this case, teachers  punishment and deterrents have to be available in order to control behavior. In knowledgebased trust, trust emerges on the basis of the quality of recurring social exchanges between  trustor and trustee over a period of time in which each individual is careful not to violate the  others expectation of trust, such as during a course of academic study. Institution-based trust  is based on the belief that the environment will play an important role in fulfilling our  expectations because formal and informal structures such as licenses, certifications,  guarantees, insurance, contracts and others mechanisms, confer a sense of trust. Finally,  unconditional trust or identification-based trust emerges when all individuals identify with  one anothers desires and intentions and where there is a comprehension about expected  reciprocal behavior, for instance in a community in which students are highly connected and  strongly identify with their school Tschannen-Moran  Hoy, 2000.   Empirical research has shown that trust appears vital to student achievement Goddard,  Tschannen-Moran,  Hoy, in press, positive school climate Hoffman, Sabo, Bliss,  Hoy,  1994, teachers sense of efficacy in facilitating student learning and achievement Bandura,  1993; 1997; Tschannen-Moran  Goddard, 2000, productive communication, and  participative decision processes Hoy  Tschannen-Moran, 1999. On the other hand, when  trust is absent, the institution comes to rely upon a profusion of rules and norms, which can be  counterproductive with respect to school and academic engagement.  

CONCLUSION 

Have students have become disengaged and distrustful of their institutions and  authorities?   Since the late 1960s, people have gradually become disillusioned and suspicious of  institutions and their authorities. Business and religious leaders, politicians, educational  authorities, the medical field and non-profit executives are evaluated on the basis of a fragile  sense of trust. According to Barber 1983; in Tschannen-Moran  Hoy, 2000, this decline in   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Framing Student Engagement through Perceptions of Justice  71 public trust stems from three factors. The first involves the powerful knowledge and capacity  vested in these professions and authorities and their attendant ability to influence people; the  second factor involves the growing focus on equity and equality in modern society. A third  factor is increased education and collective knowledge. Thus, people look critically at the  discrepancies between the ideals and reality of equality in society, supplemented by greater  access to global information and education. In the educational field, one witnesses the same  sense of distrust. Many years after the Brown vs. Board of Education ruling 1954; in  Tschannen-Moran  Hoy, 2000, the educational system continues to be a source of public  distrust and disillusionment even if, currently, a significant proportion of students earn a  graduate specialization. Tha authors Tschannen-Moran  Hoy, 2000 suggest that schools  and universities are vested with higher ideals of equality and equal opportunity for all  students, coming from all socioeconomic strata. Within schools and universities, students and  their parents rely upon professional knowledge and expertise from those charged with  educating all learners, including those with disabilities, those who are marginalized and those  who come from lower socioeconomic levels. The values of equality promoted by schools and  universities sometimes seem at odds with the values of a different social reality. Although the  aspiration of participating in economic prosperity and an environment of equal opportunity is  widespread, and numerous innovations and reform efforts aimed at providing greater  opportunity have emerged, a sense of failure within the educational system persists in many  quarters Tschannen-Moran  Hoy, 2000. Growing distrust in schools, universities and their  authorities is evident in many Western countries, and it is a serious impediment to educational  reforms when divergent interests among competing parties produce a negative climate of  disengagement and even aggressive student behavior.  How can schools and universities facilitate student engagement, identification and trust?   It is vital to reduce student alienation by giving students a stronger voice, according them  respect and availing them of opportunities for participation and for collaborative learning.  Classrooms must be structured, to the extent possible, as fair and just environments  emphasizing students performance, predispositions, and needs. A common expectation is  that educational goods such as grades and credentials be significant and relevant to the  demands of the modern workforce. From this point of view, schools and universities have to  promote not only a meritocratic competition for best grades but capacities of collaboration,  communication and participation which impact students learning, socialization, educational  career, future work, occupation, and life chances Sabbagh et al., 2006. Tschannen-Moran  2009 highlights the need for a bureaucratic structure to organize the complex tasks of  education with a hierarchy of authority and rules. However, an authoritys professionalism  orientation that has specialized and expert knowledge and responsibility for the welfare of  students may affect the quality and vitality of the entire educational community. Furthermore,  in such a climate, students may demonstrate a greater willingness to trust their teachers or  professors, because such professional authorities exercise fair judgments in response to a  variety of student needs. Thus, the role of trust in educational authorities appears vital in  predicting student engagement. Moreover, the facets of trust are complex, articulated through  competence, benevolence and in other ways. Thus, sometimes a member of a group could  consider an authoritys competence more relevant and their benevolence less relevant,  depending on their level of identification. For this reason, the role of identification in the  positive relationship between trust and engagement could be highly variable, depending on   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Chiara Berti and Silvia Di Battista  72 what is considered more relevant and valuable for members of a group such as students.  Empirical studies may fill this gap. 

REFERENCES 

Appleton, J.J., Christenson, S.L., Kim, D.,  Reschly, A. L. 2006. Measuring cognitive and  psychological engagement instrument. Journal of School Psychology, 44, 427-445.  Battistich, V., Solomon, D., Watson, M.,  Schaps, E. 1997. Caring school communities.  Educational Psychologist, 32, 137151.  Baier, A. 1986. Trust and antitrust Ethics, 962, 231-260.  Barber, B. 1983. The Logic and Limits of Trust. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University  Press.   Bandura, A. 1993. Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive development and functioning.  Educational Psychologist, 282, 117-148.   Bandura, A. 1997. Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.   Berti, C., Di Battista, S.,  Pivetti, M. 2010. Exploring engagement in the university  context: The role of justice and social identification. Procedia Social and Behavioral  Sciences, 22, 2248-2252.  Berti, C., Molinari, L.,  Speltini, G. 2010. Classroom justice and psychological  engagement: students and teachers representations. Social Psychology Education, 13,  541-556.  Blader, S.L.,  Tyler, T.R. 2009. Testing and extending the group engagement model:  Linkages between social identity, procedural justice, economic outcomes, and extra-role  behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 942, 445-464.  Bryk, A. S.,  Schneider, B. 1996. Social trust: A moral resource of school improvement.  Chicago. University of Chicago, Center for School Improvement.   Chory-Assad, R.M. 2002. Classroom justice: Perceptions of fairness as a predictor of  student motivation, learning, and aggression. Communication Quarterly, 50, 58-77.  Chory, R.M. 2007. Enhancing student perceptions of fairness: The relationship between  instructor credibility and classroom justice. Communication Education, 56, 89-105.  Chory-Assad, R.M.,  Paulsel, M.L. 2004a. Anti-social classroom communication:  Instructor influence and inter-actional justice as predictors of student aggression.  Communication Quarterly, 52, 98-114.   Chory-Assad, R.M.,  Paulsel, M.L. 2004b. Classroom justice: Student aggression and  resistance as reactions to perceived unfairness. Communication Education, 53, 253-273.  Coleman, J. S. 1990. Foundations of social theory. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of  Harvard University Press.   Colquitt, J.A., Scott, B.A.,  LePine, J.A. 2007. Trust, trustworthiness, and trust propensity:  A meta-analytic test of their unique relationships with risk-taking and job performance.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 924, 909927.  Connell, J. P., Spencer, M. B.,  Aber, J. L. 1994. Educational risk and resilience in African  American Youth: Context, self, and action outcomes in school. Child Development, 65,  493-506.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Framing Student Engagement through Perceptions of Justice  73 Connell, J. P.,  Wellborn, J. G. 1991. Competence, autonomy, and relatedness: A  motivational analysis of self-system processes. In R. Gunnar  L. A. Sroufe Eds.,  Minnesota symposia on child psychology 23, pp. 43-77. Hillsale, NJ: Lawrence  Erlbaum Associates.  Croninger, R.G.,  Lee, V.E. 2001. Social capital and dropping out of school: benefits to atrisk students of teachers support and guidance. Teacher College Record, 103, 548-581.   Cropanzano, R.  Greenberg, J. 1997. Progress in organizational justice: Tunneling through  the maze. In C.L. Cooper  I.T. Robertson Eds., International review of industrial and  organizational psychology, Vol. 12; pp. 317-372. London: John Wiley.  De Cremer, D.,  Stouten, J. 2003. When do people find cooperation most justified? The  effect of trust and self-other merging in social dilemmas. Social Justice Research, 161,  41-52.   De Cremer, D.,  Tyler, T.R. 2005. Managing group behavior: the interplay between  procedural justice, sense of self, and cooperation. In M.P. Zanna Ed. Advances in  experimental social psychology, 37, pp. 151-218. New York: Academic Press.  De Cremer, D.,  Tyler, T.R. 2007. The effect of trust in authority and procedural fairness  on cooperation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 923, 639-649.   Eccles, J. 1983. Expectancies, values, and academic behaviors. In J. Spence Ed.  Achievement and achievement motivation. San Francisco: Freeman.  Emler, N.,  Reicher, S. 1995. Adolescence and Delinquency, Oxford, Blackwell.  Finn, J.D. 1989. Withdrawing from school. Review of Educational Research, 59, 117-142.   Finn, J.D.,  Rock, D.A. 1997. Academic success among students at-risk of school failure.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 221234.  Folger, R.,  Cropanzano, R. 1988. Organizational justice and human resource  management . Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.  Fredericks, J.A., Blumenfeld, P.C.,  Paris, A.H. 2004. School engagement: Potential of the  concept, state of the evidence. Review of Educational Research, 74, 59-109.   Fukuyama, F. 1995. Trust: The social virtues and the creation of prosperity. New York:  Simon  Schuster.   Furrer, C.,  Skinner, E. 2003. Sense of relatedness as a factor in childrens academic  engagement and performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 148-162.  Goddard, R. D., Tschannen-Moran, M.,  Hoy, W. K. in press. The relationship of trust to  student achievement in urban elementary schools: A multi-level analysis. Elementarv  School Journal.   Gouveia-Pereira, M., Vala, G., Palmonari, A.,  Rubini, M. 2003. School experience,  relational justice and legitimization of institutional. European Journal of Psychology of  Education, 18, 309-325.  Greenberg, J.,  Cropanzano, R. 2001. Advances in Organizational Justice, Standford,  California, Standford University Press.   Haslam, A.S., Van Knippengberg, D., Platow, M. J.,  Ellemers, N. 2001. Social identity at  work. Developing theory for organizational practice, New York and Hove: Psychology  Press.  Hoffman, J., Sabo, D., Bliss, J.,  Hoy, W. K. 1994. Building a culture of trust. Journal of  School Leadership, 4, 484-501.   Hoy, W. K.,  Tschannen-Moran, M. 1999. Five faces of trust: An empirical confirmation  in urban elementary schools. Journal of School Leadership, 9, 184-208.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Chiara Berti and Silvia Di Battista  74 Karweit, N. L. 1989. Time and learning: a review. In R.E. Slavin Ed., School and  classroom organization, pp. 69-95, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  Kramer, M.,  Tyler, T.R. 1996. Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.  Krapp, A., Hidi, S.,  Renninger, K. A. 1992. Interest, learning, and development. In K. A.  Renninger, S. Hidi,  A. Krapp Eds., The role of interest in learning and development  pp. 3-25. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  Leary, T. 1957. Interpersonal diagnosis of personality. New York: Ronald Press.  Leventhal, G.S. 1980. What should be done with equity theory?. In K.G. Gergen, M.S.  Greenberg  R.H. Willis Eds. Social exchance: Advances in theory and research, pp.  167-218, New York: Plenum Press.  Lewicki, R.J.,  Bunker, B.B. 1995. Trust in relationships: A model of development and  decline. In B.B. Bunker,  J.Z. Rubin Eds., Conflict, cooperation and justice, pp. 133173, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.  Lind, E.A. 2001. Fairness heuristic theory: Justice judgments as pivotal cognitions in  organizational relations. In J. Greenberg,  R. Cropanzano, Eds. Advances in  Organizational Justice, pp. 56-88, Standford, California, Standford University Press.   Lind, E.A.  Tyler, T.R. 1988. The Social Psychology of Procedural Justice. New York,  Plenum Press.  Marks, H. M. 2000. Student engagement in instructional activity: Patterns in the elementary,  middle and high school years. American Educational Research Journal, 371, 153184.  Mayer, R. C.,  Davis, J. H. 1999. The effect of the performance appraisal system on trust  for management: A field quasi-experiment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84, 123136.  Newmann, F. 1981. Reducing student alienation in high schools: Implications of theory.  Harvard Educational Review, 51, 546-564.   Newmann, F. M. 1986. Priorities for the future: Towards a common agenda. Social  Education, 50, 240-250.  Newmann, F. M. 1992. Student engagement and achievement in American secondary  schools. Teachers College Press, New York.  Osterman, K. F. 2000. Students need for belonging in the school community. Review of  Educational Research, 70, 323-367.  Peterson, P., Swing, S., Stark, K.,  Wass, G. 1984. Students cognitions and time on task  during mathematics instruction. American Educational Research Journal, 21, 487-515.  Pruitt, D.G.,  Kimmel, M 1977. Twenty years of experimental gaming: Critique,  synthesis, and suggestions for the future. Annual Review of Psychology, 28, 363-392.  Reeve, J., Jang, H., Carrell, D., Jeon, S.,  Barch, J. 2004. Enhancing students' engagement  by increasing teachers' autonomy support. Motivation and Emotion, 28, 147-169.  Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Ronald, S. B.,  Camerer, C. 1998. Not so different after all:  a cross-discipline view of trust. Academy of Management Review, 233, 393-404. 

Sabbagh, C., Resh, N., Mor, M.,  Vanhuysse, P. 2006. Spheres of Justice within schools:  reflections and evidence on the distribution of educational goods. Social Psychology of  Education, 9, 97-118.  Skinner, E. A.,  Belmont, M. J. 1993. Motivation in the classroom: Reciprocal effects of  teacher behavior and student engagement across the school year. Journal of Educational  Psychology, 85, 571-581.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Framing Student Engagement through Perceptions of Justice  75 Smith, H.J., Olson, G., Agronick, G.,  Tyler, T.R. 2009. Everyday interactions with  university authorities: Authority treatment quality, outcome favorability and first year  students university adjustment. Group Processes  Intergroup Relations, 122, 209226.  Smith, H.J., Tyler, T.R., Huo, Y.J., Ortiz, D.J.,  Lind, E.A. 1998. The self-relevant  implications of the group-value model: Group membership, self-worth, and procedural  justice. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 34, 470-493.   Thibaut, J.,  Walker, L. 1975. Procedural justice. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  Thijs, J.,  Verkuyten, M. 2009. Students anticipated situational engagement: The roles of  teacher behavior, personal engagement, and gender. The Journal of Genetic Psychology,  1703, 268-286.  Thorkildsen, T.A. 1989. Justice in the classroom: The students view. Child Development,  60, 323-334.  Tschannen-Moran, M.,  Goddard, R. 2001, April. Collective efficacy and trust: A multilevel analysis. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational  Research Association, Seattle, WA.   Tschannen-Moran, M.,  Hoy, W. K. 2000. A multi-disciplinary analysis of the nature,  meaning, and measurement of trust. Review of Educational Research, 704, 547-593.  Tschannen-Moran, M 2009. Fostering teacher professionalism in schools: The role of  leadership orientation and trust. Educational Administration Quarterly, 452, 217-247.  Tyler, T.R.,  Degoy, P. 1995. Collective restraint in social dilemmas: Procedural justice  and social identification effects on support for authorities. Journal of Personality and  Social Psychology, 69, 482-497.  Tyler, T. R.,  Degoey, P. 1996. Trust in organizational authorities: The influence of  motive attributions on willingness to accept decisions. In R. Kramer  T. Tyler Eds.,  Trust in organizations pp. 331-356. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.   Tyler, T.R.,  Blader, S.L. 2000. Cooperation in groups. Procedural Justice, social  identity, and behavioral engagement, New York University, Essays in Social Psychology.  Tyler, T.R.,  Blader, S.L. 2003. The group engagement model: Procedural justice, social  identity, and cooperative behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 7, 349361.  Tyler, T.R., Boeckmann, R., Smith, H.J.,  Huo, Y.J. 1997. Social justice in a diverse  society. Denver, CO : Westview.  Tyler, T.R.,  Lind, E.A. 1992. A relational model of authority in groups. Advances in  Experimental Social Psychology, 25, 115-191.  Yamamoto, K., Thomas, E.C.,  Karns, E.A. 1969. School-related attitudes in middleschool-age students. American Educational Research Journal, 6, 191-206.  Zyngier, D. 2008. Re Conceptualizing student engagement doing education not doing  time. Teaching and Teacher Education: an International Journal of Research and  Studies, 24, 1765-1776.  Zimmerman, B. J. 1990. Self-regulated learning and academic achievement: An overview.  Educational Psychologist, 21, 3-17. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

In: Classrooms: Management, Effectiveness and Challenges  ISBN 978-1-61324-601-6  Editor: Rebecca J. Newley, pp. 77-92   2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 

Chapter 4 

TEACHER-CHILD INTERACTION TRAINING:  DESCRIPTION, HISTORICAL UNDERPINNINGS AND  CASE EXAMPLE 

Jocelyn O. Stokes, Ashley B. Tempel, Karishma Chengappa,  Amanda H. Costello, and Cheryl B. McNeil  West Virginia University, USA 

ABSTRACT 

Behavior that disrupts the learning of the student or surrounding students e.g.,  arguing, being out-of-seat, not following directions is a prominent concern of teachers  Axup  Gersch, 2008; Ennis, 1996, and 50-68 of teachers believe they spend too  much time managing problematic classroom behavior Beaman, Wheldall,  Kemp,  2007. Disruptive behavior is stable without treatment Campbell, 1995; McNeil, Capage,  Bahl,  Blanc, 1999, and young children who display disruptive behavior may develop  delinquent and antisocial behavior as adolescents or adults Farrington, 1995; Loeber,  Burke, Lahey, Winters,  Zera, 2000. Such students score lower on standardized tests  than their compliant peers Finn, Pannozzo,  Voelkl, 1995. In addition to the disruptive  behavior of a child impacting his or her own academic achievement, a students  disruptive behavior adversely affects the whole class by requiring the teachers attention  resulting in decreased instructional time Carr, Taylor,  Robinson, 1991. Additionally,  teachers report that they feel overwhelmed and unprepared to handle the behavior  problems that they face in the classroom Kurtz, Fernandez, Miller, Madigan, Firpo,  Dimotta, et al., 2010. Teachers report that disruptive behavior increases their job-related  stress and believe that effective behavior management would decrease their stress levels  Axup  Gersh.  Teacher-Child Interaction Training TCIT is an emerging program to help teachers  of young children effectively manage the behavior in their classrooms. Proponents of  TCIT have adapted Parent-Child Interaction Therapy PCIT, an evidence-based  treatment program for parents of children ages threethrough six-years with disruptive  behavior Eyberg, Nelson,  Boggs, 2008; Hood  Eyberg, 2003; Nixon, 2001, for use  with teachers. PCIT, and subsequently TCIT, is based on the two-phase model of parent  training initiated by Constance Hanf in Oregon Costello, Chengappa, Stokes, Tempel,    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Jocelyn O. Stokes, Ashley B. Tempel, Karishma Chengappa et al.  78 McNeil, in press; Hanf, 1969. Specifically, child-focused play skills that foster a warm,  nurturing environment in the classroom are combined with consistent consequences to  handle misbehavior. TCIT is being implemented primarily in preschools and  kindergartens.   Given that TCIT is a relatively new program, research groups differ in the  approaches they have used to adapt the characteristics of PCIT to a classroom setting. For  example, some train teachers in the classroom with students present, others train during  workshops or in-service days, and others during the school day but outside of the typical  classroom. Additionally, TCIT has been implemented as both a targeted intervention to  improve the behavior of an identified child who causes significant disruption in the  classroom and as a universal teacher training program to improve behavior management  skills across the board for use with all students. One of the main challenges of adaptation  is that PCIT focuses on the interactions of one parent with one child while teachers are  responsible for many children at once and have as many as 30 children in one classroom.  The differences in implementation of TCIT will follow.  

GOALS AND SKILLS OF TCIT 

Child-Directed Interaction 

Following the Hanf model and reflecting PCIT, the skills of TCIT are taught in two  phases. The goal of the first phase, called Child-Directed Interaction CDI, is to create a  warm classroom environment in which the students enjoy spending time. Characteristics of  such a classroom might be students feeling comfortable approaching the teacher to ask  questions, as well as frequent shared laughter and smiles between the teacher and students.  The focus of this phase is building a strong positive relationship between the teacher and  students. Such a relationship is a critical but often ignored characteristic of effective behavior  management Budd, Watkin, Legato,  Feuer, 2010. Consistent with PCIT, this positive  relationship and corresponding classroom environment is established with the use of five  skills, referred to as the PRIDE skills, which are praise, reflection, imitation, description, and  enthusiasmenjoyment.   Praise is a statement containing a positive evaluation about a child Eyberg, Nelson,  Duke,  Boggs, 2005. One type of praise is unlabeled praise which is a general positive  statement Eyberg, et al., 2005, such as good job, terrific work, or way to go. This  type of praise makes the child feel good, but TCIT encourages teachers to use labeled praise.  Labeled praise is a positive evaluation about a specific action or product of a child, such as  good job standing in line quietly while we wait for the doors to open, terrific work making  your letter A, and way to go for cleaning up so quickly after play time was over. Labeled  praise tells children exactly what they did to receive recognition, and it has been shown to  increase the frequency of the behavior praised Bernhardt  Forehand, 1975. Teachers are  taught to target desirable, prosocial behaviors with labeled praise and to use labeled praise at  the frequency of about two per minute during practice sessions.  Reflections are statements that repeat or paraphrase the appropriate vocalizations of the  child without changing the meaning of the childs statement Eyberg, et al., 2005.  Reflections affirm a childs speech, provide attention for a childs appropriate vocalizations,  and provide an opportunity for the teacher to model correct pronunciation and grammar,   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Teacher-Child Interaction Training  79 while also incorporating new vocabulary words Eyberg, 1988; Tempel, Wagner,  McNeil,  2008. For example, a child may say, Dee car go fast, vroom-vroom, and the teacher may  reflect, The cars engine goes vroom-vroom as it goes fast down the street.  Imitation is a motor action that mimics the action of a child Eyberg, et al., 2005.  Similarly to how reflections repeat and provide attention for a childs appropriate verbal  behavior, imitations repeat and provide attention for a childs appropriate nonverbal behavior.  The goal of imitation is to have the teacher physically join the play with the child without  directing the play.  Description is a verbal statement that provides a commentary on the childs actions.  Because the goal is to improve child behavior, TCIT emphasizes the use of behavioral  descriptions in which the focus is on specific, ongoing or just completed, appropriate actions  of the child Eyberg, et al., 2005. In this way, behavioral descriptions become a method for  providing differential reinforcement of appropriate behavior, as positive and neutral behaviors  are being reinforced with verbal attention. Examples of behavioral descriptions are You put  the toy in the green bin, Everyone is waiting patiently for their turn, and John is sitting  with his legs crossed and ready for the story to begin. Behavior descriptions increase on-task  behavior Tempel, Wagner,  McNeil, 2010 and provide attention for appropriate behaviors.   Enthusiasm involves changing the voice pattern and pitch to express interest and  enjoyment. Enthusiasmenjoyment can be conveyed with an energetic tone of voice, a  positive facial expression, or attentive body language Filcheck, McNeil,  Herschell, 2001.  The purpose of enthusiasm is to bring warmth and excitement to all of the other PRIDE skills.  Enthusiasm may increase a childs attention to the task as it makes the play more fun. In  addition to using the PRIDE skills, parents in PCIT are taught to avoid using certain types of  statements: negative talk, commands, and questions.   TCIT research groups have approached use of commands and questions in different  ways. Negative talk is the only type of teacher statement that all research groups teach  teachers to reduce to near zero. Negative talk is any statement about an aspect of a child that  contains a negative evaluation or implies that the child engaged in an inappropriate behavior  Eyberg, et al., 2005. Statements that contain the words no, dont, stop, quit, or  not in reference to an action or characteristic of the child are considered negative talk.  Stop talking, that is not very nice, and please dont move that, are examples of negative  talk. Sometimes teachers inadvertently use negative talk when they are trying to use a labeled  praise, such as, Thank you for not screaming inside. Thus, teachers are given practice  identifying the positive opposite of a misbehavior in order to quickly identify the praiseworthy behavior; in the case of the previous example, thank you for using your inside voice  would be a labeled praise statement. Even though teachers reduce their use of negative talk,  they continue to set limits in the classroom by praising the positive opposite of a problem  behavior, using positively stated commands that are incompatible with the problem behavior,  and redirecting negative attention-seeking behavior with neutral or positive behavior and  praising the positive alternative behavior once the child has ceased the problem behavior.  While it is beneficial to bring questions and commands to near zero in a parent-child  interaction to allow maximum relationship-building, it is not optimal in a classroom setting to  eliminate all questions and commands. Various implementers of TCIT have different  approaches to questions and commands. Commonly, teachers are encouraged to reduce  rapid-fire questions to which children do not have adequate time to think and formulate a  response Tiano, 2010. Teachers are taught to wait at least 5-seconds between questions to   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Jocelyn O. Stokes, Ashley B. Tempel, Karishma Chengappa et al.  80 allow time for response formulation during structured learning with the entire class Tiano.  Commands are not necessarily addressed in the CDI component of TCIT Budd, et al., 2010.  However, some TCIT researchers suggest that it can be beneficial to have teachers practice  reducing commands to zero during one-on-one analog situations. This allows them to practice  their PRIDE skills and using redirection and praising the opposite behavior to handle minor  misbehaviors; thereby realizing that commands are not always necessary for behavior  management Tiano.  Lastly, as part of CDI, teachers are given practice combining ignoring and the PRIDE  skills to manage minor misbehavior i.e., misbehavior that does not harm the student, another  person, or property. The PRIDE skills are used to provide attention to appropriate, prosocial  behavior such as paying attention, raising ones hand, sitting quietly, etc. At the same time,  inappropriate minor misbehavior, such as interrupting or arguing, is ignored. One benefit of  the classroom setting is that appropriately behaving peers may model desirable classroom  behavior. Teachers may use the PRIDE skills to identify appropriate behaviors of other  children in the classroom. The emphasis on providing labeled praise for the positive opposite  of misbehavior continues throughout TCIT.  

Teacher-Directed Interaction TDI 

The second phase of TCIT is called Teacher-Directed Interaction TDI, which is similar  to the Parent-Directed Interaction PDI of PCIT. The goal of TDI is to create a structured  classroom environment that facilitates learning by effectively reducing the frequency of  noncompliance and aggression i.e., hitting, kicking, biting. First, teachers are taught to give  commands which are directly-stated e.g., clear that the student should complete the action,  specific, positively-stated, respectful, and singular i.e., requesting one action at a time. For  example, the ineffective command of Lets all put away our pencils, books, and line up,  would be re-stated to the more effective command of Please put away your pencils,  followed by two additional commands addressing books and lining up. Teachers are taught to  wait 5 seconds following a command to give a child time to begin to comply with the  instruction. Teachers provide attention with a labeled praise for the appropriate behavior of  compliance e.g., Good job of following directions.   If a child fails to comply or initiate compliance behavior e.g., moving towards door to  line up within 5 seconds, the teacher provides a warning statement. Compliance with the  warning statement results in a labeled praise. In contrast, failure to comply with the warning  statement within 5 seconds results in a consequence in which the child remains in a defined  location and the teacher removes attention from the child for a limited period of time. Such  areas must have clearly defined boundaries to easily identify when a child is within the area  or when the child has left, and the areas can be known as a time-out chair, a calm-down area,  a thinking zone, a quiet chair, or sit-and-watch. Some schools or teachers do not approve of  time-out as a disciplinary practice. In fact, many implementers of TCIT do not use the word  time-out at all Budd, et al., 2010; Tiano, 2010. Instead, words are used with which the  school, parents, and teachers are comfortable. For example, Time-out chair may be renamed as a Thinking Chair Tiano, 2010, or the teacher may have the child Sit and  Watch the classroom activities but not participate for a period of time Budd, et al., 2010.  Thus, teachers may be able to develop a procedure functionally similar to time-out in which a   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Teacher-Child Interaction Training  81 time-limited removal of access to privileges i.e., activities and attention occurs as a  consequence to defiance, aggression, and or breaking a classroom rule.  The duration of attention removal is designed to be developmentally appropriate for each  child and is typically established as 3 minutes plus 5 seconds of quiet; however, a shorter  period may be used with younger children or children with developmental delays. If the child  leaves the designated area without teacher consent, then a back-up procedure is implemented  to teach the child to stay in the area. Once the time-out has finished and the child is quiet,  the teacher tells the child that he or she may leave the area and the child is directed to comply  with the original command. Requiring compliance with the original command prevents  removal of attention from inadvertently allowing the child to escape a demand or a request  Everett, Olmi, Edwards, Tingstrom, Sterling-Turner,  Christ, 2007. Additionally,  immediately following compliance with the original command, teachers provide a simple,  follow-up command to have the child over-practice compliance. When children have  learned to remain in the designated area as a consequence for noncompliance, time-limited  removal of attention in a specified location is implemented as a consequence for aggression.  Generally, this procedure is used for only two behaviors in the classroom: blatant defiance to  a teachers warning and hurting another person. Occasionally, another rule may have to be  implemented for a particular child, such as no profanity or no breaking objects, but most  classrooms can be maintained by reserving this consequence for only a defiance to adult  commands and b aggression.  It is important that this procedure is implemented in accordance with the regulations and  values of the schools administration and the classrooms teacher. Thus, the location for  removal of attention and the back-up procedures are individualized to each teacher and  school. It may be more acceptable to use TDI only with children whose noncompliance and  or aggression causes a chronic problem in the classroom and has not responded to other  disciplinary procedures. With such students, written parental permission in the form of a  behavior plan, a classroom safety plan, or an Individualized Education Plan IEP for the use  of time-out with a particular student may make the procedure more acceptable Tiano,  2010. The teacher and TCIT trainer work together to determine the best area with clearly  defined boundaries for removal of attention and the back-up procedure in the context of each  individual classroom. Some teachers are comfortable with a chair or table positioned away  from the group; others may prefer that children sit in a specified area of the classroom, such  as a carpet square.   Back-up procedures may involve sending the student to another classroom, to stand in the  hallway, or to an administrators office. The important feature of the back-up procedure is  that it must be less rewarding to the child than the first location. For example, if a student is  sent to the principals office for refusing to sit in the calm down chair, it is important that  the principal not engage in friendly conversations, reprimands, or other interactions with the  child. The back-up procedure is implemented to teach the child to accept the first  consequence. When used appropriately, use of the back-up procedure will reduce as children  learn to remain in the calm down chair. Appropriate use of the back-up procedure should  not result in large amounts of time spent away from instruction or out of the classroom. For  children with difficult classroom behavior, negative attention often is reinforcing. For this  reason, it is important that staff remain neutral in demeanor when sending the child to the  designated area and when implementing the back-up procedure. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Jocelyn O. Stokes, Ashley B. Tempel, Karishma Chengappa et al.  82 Teaching the Goals and Skills of TCIT 

The first and most important step in TCIT is to build rapport with the teacher because  teachers are unlikely to implement procedures that they do not accept. Budd and colleagues  2010 reported that some teachers are skeptical and wary of outsiders who are not from  their school being able to help them, which highlights challenges that must be overcome.  School-based intervention research suggests facilitating working partnerships, evaluating  prior intervention attempts, and using staffs past experiences to inform interventions e.g.,  McIntosh et al., 2000; Rork  McNeil, 2008; Tiano  McNeil, 2006. Additionally, Tempel  and McNeil 2010 found that teachers were more accepting of TCIT trainers who  emphasized their past experience in classrooms rather than the research basis of the program.  Evaluating behavioral strategies that are in place in classrooms prior to introducing TCIT  allows for an assessment of the presenting problems and environmental contingencies  maintaining difficult behavior as well as allowing for rapport building with the teaching staff.  During the initial meeting with staff, information should be gathered regarding discipline and  limit-setting in the classroom. It is important to know and follow facility regulations  regarding discipline strategies. Teaching staff often report use of calm down areas, quiet  areas, time outs, or sit and watch as a consequence for disruptive classroom behavior  Tempel  McNeil, 2010. Regardless of the name used to describe discipline strategies, the  actual application of each strategy often varies across classrooms and among staff members.  Ideally, all members of the teaching staff will be involved in TCIT. Inclusion of the entire  staff should provide the greatest chance for consistency among teaching staff members.  Additionally, the role that individuals serve on the teaching staff may be related to their use of  behavior management techniques Tempel  McNeil, 2010. Some TCIT implementers  devote a 1-2 hour orientation session to developing rapport with teachers Campbell, Martin,  West, Hubel, Flood,  Hansen, 2010, while others are less structured with the time they  devote to this aspect. No matter how much time is formally dedicated to rapport-building,  TCIT will likely not be successful without sufficient engagement and partnership with the  teachers and administrators.   Each phase of treatment begins with a didactic explanation of the goals and skills. Given  time limitations and administrative support, 1-2 hour group sessions may be devoted to each  didactic Campbell, et al., 2010 during a teacher in-service day, or goals and skills can be  explained during unstructured classroom time with the teacher pulled to a quiet corner of the  classroom from which he or she can still monitor the students while the co-teacher supervises  the class.  In PCIT, parents practice and are coached in skills specific to each phase until they  achieve predetermined mastery criteria at which point they progress to the next phase if  they are in CDI or complete treatment if they are in PDI. Parents have attained the CDI  mastery criteria when they are able to provide 10 labeled praises, 10 reflections, 10 behavioral  descriptions, and three or fewer combined negative talk, questions, and commands during a 5minute observation. Mastery of PDI is when at least 75 of all commands are effective, the  child complies with at least 75 of effective commands, and parents follow-through with  contingent consequences for at least 75 of commands during a 5-minute observation. Thus,  PCIT is considered a data-driven approach because parents progress based on their  demonstration of skill use.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Teacher-Child Interaction Training  83 Implementers of TCIT differ in their criteria for progressing to TDI or completion of the  training program. Tiano 2010 keeps the mastery criteria the same for TCIT as in PCIT.  Kurtz and colleagues 2010 consider mastery to be when a teacher provides 30 combined  labeled praises, reflections, and or behavioral descriptions in a natural classroom setting, and  at least 20 of these statements are specific to a pre-determined target behavior, such as paying  attention. Budd and colleagues 2010 do not set mastery criteria and instead use a timelimited approach in which teachers remain in each phase of training for a predetermined  number of sessions. Campbell and colleagues 2010 use a mix of data-driven and timelimited approaches in that teachers aim for a predetermined goal but receive a maximum of  14 total sessions. In the latter model, teachers skill use is coded while the teacher and one to  three students are pulled out of the classroom to a more controlled setting, such as a  designated carpet area in an unoccupied room.  After the didactic introduction to each phase and its skills, the teachers are provided  instruction and feedback on their skills in the form of coaching until they reach the  predetermined mastery criteria or the set number of sessions. In PCIT, the therapist coaches  the parent in the clinic from behind a one-way mirror and provides instruction and feedback  to the parent via a bug-in-the-ear device. Such a controlled environment is rarely possible  in a school setting. Implementers of TCIT have confronted this challenge in different  manners. Most implementers of TCIT shadow teachers and provide in-vivo feedback during  regular class time e.g., Budd, et al., 2010; Kurtz, et al., 2010; Tiano, 2010. In contrast,  Campbell and colleagues 2010 pull the teacher out of the classroom and coach the teacher in  skill use with one to three children at a time. The number of children increases as the  teachers skill level increases. 

REVIEW OF RESEARCH LITERATURE AND DEVELOPMENT OF TCIT 

Given its efficacy in reducing disruptive and noncompliant behavior in young children in  the clinic and at home Eyberg, et al., 2008, research on Parent-Child Interaction Therapy  PCIT has moved toward studying treatment effects on child behavior in multiple settings.  As behavior problems in young children often present at school, studying the generalizability  of the effects of PCIT in this setting is particularly salient. Research has progressed from  examining the generalizability of PCIT to the school setting, to adapting PCIT as a specific  teacher training program and implementing it in preschool and elementary school classrooms  with TCIT.  McNeil and colleagues 1991 conducted an early study examining the generalizability of  PCIT treatment effects from the home to the school setting. The authors acknowledged that  children in PCIT often demonstrated a behavioral contrast effect i.e., a resurgence of  disruptive behavior problems at school following a decrease at home after completion of  treatment McNeil, et al. To address this effect, the authors implemented a controlled trial  studying the effects of PCIT on disruptive and noncompliant behavior in children across the  home and school settings. Children with disruptive behavior disorders whose parents received  PCIT not only showed improved behavior at home but decreased noncompliance and  disruptive behavior at school McNeil, et al. Additionally, maternal and teacher reports were  strongly correlated, indicating agreement across both settings. It was proposed that the   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Jocelyn O. Stokes, Ashley B. Tempel, Karishma Chengappa et al.  84 emphasis on training general skills e.g., compliance to all parental requests and teaching  compliance so that it becomes a habit, as compared to focusing on specific behavior problems  e.g., only focusing on child participating in bedtime routine, may have led to  generalizability of the treatment program McNeil et al.   Progressing from the study by McNeil and colleagues 1991, emphasis was placed on  training teachers directly in PCIT skills. In a study conducted by Filcheck and colleagues  2004, a preschool teacher was trained in a whole-class token economy the Level System;  see Ficheck et al., 2004 and TCIT utilizing a single-subject treatment comparison design.  During training in TCIT, the teacher was trained in both the Child-Directed Interaction CDI  and Parent-Directed Interaction PDI phases. In CDI, the teacher was taught to engage in at  least 15 praises, and 25-30 behavioral descriptions and reflections. Coaching began with one  child and the number of children progressively increased until the teacher interacted with  three children at one time. In PDI, the teacher was trained to implement the standard time-out  procedure, and was subsequently coached in this procedure in the classroom. During the  implementation of TCIT, the teacher was observed and provided with immediate feedback  during the first two days. Child disruptive behavior decreased when the Level System was  implemented and further decreased during the implementation of TCIT. Additionally, teacher  criticism decreased, and praise increased.   Tiano and McNeil 2006 trained Head Start teachers were trained in a group setting. The  CDI and PDI phases were taught during two 2-hour workshops. Teachers received live,  progressive coaching e.g., coaching was conducted with one child and progressed to the  entire classroom and mastery criteria were consistent with standard PCIT Tiano  McNeil.  Additionally, teachers were coached in the use of specific group behavior modification skills,  including an ignoring signal, the use of When-Then statements e.g., When everyone  pushes in their chair, then we will have snack time, and differential reinforcement of  appropriate behavior Tiano  McNeil. The time-out chair was renamed as the Thinking  Chair, Tiano  McNeil. The back-up procedure involved placing an additional Thinking  Chair in the hallway Tiano  McNeil. Teachers in the TCIT group maintained higher  positivity in the classroom as compared to teachers in the control group by using more  positive behavior management strategies e.g., praise and a decreasing need for the use of  time-out Tiano  McNeil. In these studies, it was demonstrated that training teachers was  effective in increasing and maintaining positive teacher behavior and appropriate child  behavior.   Several other research teams also have adapted PCIT as a training program for teachers.  McIntosh and colleagues 2000 utilized Teacher-Child Interaction Therapy in a case study  with a 2-year old child with severe disruptive behavior problems. Treatment was divided into  the standard CDI phase and a Teacher Directed Interaction TDI phase. CDI consisted of  training the teacher in DRIP skills e.g., descriptions, reflections, imitation, praise, and the  teacher was taught effective commands and the time-out sequence in TDI. As with other  studies of PCIT and TCIT, the Dyadic Parent-Child Interaction Coding System DPICS;  Eyberg  Robinson, 1983 was utilized as the behavioral coding system, but in this study it  was renamed the Dyadic Teacher-Child Interaction Coding System DTICS to  acknowledge teacher use of skills McIntosh et al., 2000. Consistent with PCIT, the teacher  was encouraged to engage in the five minutes of special play time required of parents in  traditional PCIT in which the teacher played with the referred child individually and used a  high frequency of DRIP skills. The teacher was able to maintain a high level of DRIP   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Teacher-Child Interaction Training  85 skills during the CDI and TDI phases, and when the TDI phase was implemented the  teachers use of commands decreased and the childs disruptive and noncompliant behavior  decreased McIntosh et al., 2000.   Recently, Lyon and colleagues 2009 and Gershenson and colleagues 2010 trained  teachers in an ethnically diverse, low-income preschool classroom in Teacher-Child  Interaction Training TCIT. Gershenson 2010 described the development and  implementation of the training program, while the Lyon study provided more detailed teacher  and child outcomes. Teachers were shadowed and coached by research assistants, and  children were given a modified time-out procedure. In TDI, children were instructed to be  seated in a Sit and Watch chair, and no back-up procedure was used Gershenson et al.  Additionally, increased emphasis was placed on working collaboratively with teachers with  the use of team-building exercises, increasing teacher motivation, and focusing on the  diversity in the classroom Gershenson et al. Although teachers trained in TCIT showed  moderate changes in skill use e.g., slight to moderate increase in praise across classrooms;  slight decrease in critical statements, they reported a high level of satisfaction with the  training Lyon et al, 2009. Also, the authors demonstrated efficacy of treatment effects in a  predominantly low-income, urban population.   Multiple research groups e.g., Budd, et al., 2010; Campbell, et al., 2010; Kurtz, et al.,  2010; Tempel  McNeil, 2010 are currently examining the implementation of TCIT in  preschool and early elementary school classrooms. Within these studies, implementation  issues e.g., teacher collaboration, acceptability of TCIT procedures, logistical concerns,  practicality of training teachers and treatment outcome effects e.g., teacher use of skills,  changes in child disruptive and noncompliant behaviors are being examined Campbell, et  al., 2010; Budd, et al., 2010; Kurtz et al., 2010; Tempel  McNeil, 2010. Additionally,  Campbell and colleagues 2010 have developed a TCIT manual Campbell, Martin, Hubel,  Asawa, Flood,  Hansen, 2010 and are testing the effectiveness of TCIT based on this  manual. 

CASE ILLUSTRATION OF TCIT 

Presenting Problems 

The Kindergarten class taught by Mrs. Wilson at Lake View School was referred by the  school counselor for Teacher-Child Interaction Training. Mrs. Wilson reported that she and  the assistant teacher, Mrs. Patrick, were having particular difficulties managing defiant and  noncompliant behaviors of two children, Luke and Jerry, which affected the behavior of her  whole class.   Luke was a 5-year-old child with developmental delays and limited speech. As part of his  Individualized Education Plan IEP, Luke received services at school from a speechlanguage pathologist and physical therapist. Luke frequently displayed aggression such as  hitting, kicking, biting, and hair pulling towards Mrs. Wilson, Mrs. Patrick, and the other  children in his class. He refused teacher requests and hit the teachers if they insisted that he  follow instructions. For instance, when Mrs. Patrick told him to wear his coat before going   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Jocelyn O. Stokes, Ashley B. Tempel, Karishma Chengappa et al.  86 outside, he refused by saying no and I dont want my coat. When Mrs. Patrick persisted  with him and held his coat out for him to wear, he hit her arm. Mrs. Patrick responded by  taking him to a corner of the room called the Calming Corner and saying, You have not  been very good today. However, he persisted to throw books off the book rack in the  Calming Corner, and then ran from the corner to join his classmates on the playground. When  she noticed Luke leaving the Calming Corner she let him continue to the playground because  her attention was directed towards another child needing assistance. Luke also got into  physical fights with other children and pushed or kicked them if they did not give him what  he wanted. He used rough play with other children and turned toys into guns and cars that  rammed into and destroyed other toys. He often broke toys and other materials in the class  and sometimes knocked other children down because of his rough play.   Jerry was a 5-year-old in the class who frequently interrupted his teachers and talked  excessively to other children. He continually asked the staff for help with toys and frequently  asked them questions while they were leading group activities or conducting circle time. He  often ran around the children or roamed the classroom during circle time. His teacher often  told him to quit talking or to stop interrupting others. When the teacher got frustrated  with his talking to other children she said, Jerry, do your work and I mean it. He was  frequently off-task and distracted other children from doing activities by making funny faces  or by clowning around. He often pretended that he did not hear Mrs. Wilson or Mrs. Patrick  when they gave him instructions; and he continued to talk to other children during circle time,  nap time, and meals.   Mrs. Martin reported that she and Mrs. Patrick were overwhelmed with the disruptive  classroom behaviors of Luke and Jerry. They felt that they were giving most of their time and  attention to these children while the other children were being ignored. The staff reported that  each of the boys did well if given individual attention but that this was not possible because  they also had to take care of the other children. Mrs. Patrick reported that they had tried  rewards, praise, and spending more time with each child, yet nothing seemed to change the  disruptive behaviors.  

Pre-Training Assessment of Skills 

Structured one-on-one observations of child-led and teacher-led play were conducted to  examine the skills displayed by each staff member prior to receiving TCIT. Mrs. Wilson and  Mrs. Patrick were asked to complete the structured observation with the child that they felt  had the most difficult behavior. During free-play time, Mrs. Wilson and Mrs. Patrick took  turns interacting with Luke in a corner of the classroom. During the first child-led play  session, Mrs. Wilson used 3 unlabeled praises, 0 labeled praises, 0 behavior descriptions, 0  reflections, 16 questions, 7 commands, and 4 criticisms. Mrs. Patrick had 5 unlabeled praise,  0 labeled praise, 0 behavior descriptions, 0 reflections, 10 questions, 12 commands, and 8  criticisms. During teacher-led play, Mrs. Wilson provided 0 direct commands and 16 indirect  commands such as Would you please sit down and I want you to listen. She provided no  effective consequences for either compliance or noncompliance to commands i.e., praise for  compliance and physical guidance for noncompliance. Mrs. Patrick used 7 direct commands,  12 indirect commands, and had no effective consequences for noncompliance with  commands.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Teacher-Child Interaction Training  87 CDI 

The CDI didactic was conducted one hour before school with Mrs. Wilson and Mrs.  Patrick. At the end of the session the TCIT trainer modeled CDI skills and had the staff role  play the skills with the help of toys. The staff was assigned homework to practice the CDI  skills for 5 minutes every day, and directed to initially practice the skills with one child at a  time. In the CDI coaching session with Mrs. Wilson and Luke, she described his rough play  while he banged the toys on the table. Mrs. Wilson was coached to turn around and ignore  Lukes undesirable behaviors and attend only to positive behaviors. Luke became louder in  his play and started throwing the toys. She gave him the command, Stop it, Luke, but was  instructed by the TCIT trainer to ignore and redirect his behavior with enthusiastic play, as his  rambunctious behavior was not dangerous or destructive in that moment. Eventually, Luke  calmed down and went back to the table to play with Mrs. Wilson. Mrs. Wilson was  instructed to immediately give him labeled praises for coming back to the table, for  playing so quietly, and for being gentle with the toys, because these were behaviors that  she wanted Luke to increase.   During her CDI coaching session with Jerry, Mrs. Patrick had difficulties decreasing her  use of questions. She was also instructed to change questions, such as Are you building a  tower? into statements, such as You are building a tower. Behaviors that were inconsistent  with Jerrys problem behaviors were praised whenever they occurred. These included sharing  toys, asking nicely, using nice hands, and keeping hands to yourself.  Both teaching staff members reported that they found themselves using these skills  throughout the day and in interactions with other children in their classroom. Once the staff  met mastery of the CDI skills with one child, they were instructed to begin practicing their  skills during interactions with several children and to selectively use the CDI skills for  desirable behaviors. Both Mrs. Wilson and Mrs. Patrick achieved mastery of CDI on the  fourth session. Therefore, in a 5-minute period, they were able to give 10 labeled praises, 10  reflections, and 10 behavior descriptions while having fewer than 3 questions, criticisms, or  commands. 

Preparation for TDI 

Given that Lukes behavior was the most problematic, the teachers would learn and  master TDI skills with Luke first and then apply their skills with Jerry. As the teaching staff  approached mastery of the CDI skills, the TCIT trainer and teaching staff requested a meeting  with Lukes mother and his Individualized Education Plan IEP team. The TCIT trainer  discussed the need for a safety plan that could be consistently implemented for Lukes  disruptive classroom behaviors as well as for the other children in the classroom with  identified behavioral concerns. The trainer specified that TCIT aligned with the Positive  Behavior Supports program that was currently underway as a school wide, universal system  for behavior management at Lake View. Specifically, the trainer discussed CDI as similar to  the universal program providing positive supports to all children in the classroom and TDI as  a specialized intervention developed for children displaying unsafe or aggressive behavior in  the classroom, such as not listening to staff, hitting, climbing on book cases, or running from  the classroom. The TCIT trainer addressed particular questions related to the TDI phase of   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Jocelyn O. Stokes, Ashley B. Tempel, Karishma Chengappa et al.  88 treatment. Following the meeting, the trainer provided each professional with a clearly written  behavioral safety plan to enhance consistency and communication between professionals.   An in-class listening square was selected as a safe, consistent, and predictable  consequence for inappropriate classroom behavior. A back-up procedure was not  implemented, because the Lake View school system prohibited any removal of a child from a  classroom due to misbehavior. Instead staff returned the child to the listening square for  leaving during a listening sequence. Due to Lukes aggressive behaviors, the teaching staff  and Lukes mother agreed that Lukes teachers would first practice TDI during one-on-one  interactions with him. A square marker was placed on the floor similar to the circle spot that  children in the Kindergarten class were expected to sit on during daily circle time. The area  around the listening square was cleared of all unnecessary furniture, toys, and wall  decorations to prevent the possibility of Luke tearing materials from the wall as he often did  after being told he could not do something.  

TDI 

During the first TDI teaching session, the TCIT trainer met with Mrs. Wilson and Mrs.  Patrick before school for one hour. During this time the trainer taught the staff the specific  TDI skills and modeled, role-played, and provided feedback related to the staffs use of these  skills during role-play situations. The TCIT trainer taught the staff how to provide effective  commands and the appropriate response for child compliant or noncompliant behaviors  following an effective command. The TCIT trainer discussed with the staff the importance of  consistency among staff members as well as the predictability of consequences to reduce  problem behaviors.   Mrs. Wilson voiced the relief she felt for finally having a safe way to support children in  her classroom. She pointed out that for years she had felt that it was necessary to teach kids  how to follow classroom rules by pulling children aside and talking to them about classroom  expectations and rule-breaking immediately following misbehavior. She described her Aha!  moment as she realized that for some attention-seeking children this may actually have served  as a reward. Mrs. Patrick agreed that she was motivated to make necessary changes to  improve class behavior but was hesitant to believe that changes could be made.   During the role-plays the staff practiced providing positively-stated, direct commands  and enjoyed taking turns demonstrating disruptive child behavior. Mrs. Wilson volunteered to  first role-play the teacher. She provided a command, Would you please hand me the red  truck? and quickly corrected herself by saying, I mean, please hand me the red truck. She  laughed at how logical effective commands seemed yet how easy it was to fall into her habit  of indirectly asking the child to listen. Mrs. Patrick quickly caught on to the command  sequence. Following Mrs. Wilsons noncompliance after Mrs. Patrick provided a direct  command and warning statement, she guided Mrs. Wilson to the listening square. She moved  through the listening sequence with little assistance and ended the sequence with an  enthusiastic labeled praise for compliance with a second equivalent command, saying Great  job putting the truck in the garage so quickly!  The children arrived in the classroom shortly after the completion of the role-plays, and  the TCIT trainer stayed in the classroom to work directly with the staff during the first TDI  coaching day. The TCIT trainer coached Mrs. Wilson as she introduced the listening   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Teacher-Child Interaction Training  89 practice and the staff took turns working one-on-one with Luke during free-play times  throughout the day to be observed and coached as they practiced listening skills. A clipboard  was hung by the listening square and used by staff to document and monitor each command  sequence. Additionally, the clipboard assisted in removing the attention directed towards  Luke while he was at the listening square. The staff identified the problem behavior as well as  antecedents i.e., what happened before and consequences i.e., what happened after to  assist with monitoring and evaluating difficult classroom behaviors, the frequency of use of  the listening square, and potential environmental factors that may have been maintaining  behaviors.   As the teaching staff mastered their TDI skills with Luke, the staff used Mr. Bear to  individually introduce Jerry to listening practice, the command sequence, and the listening  square. Although the staffs use of effective commands during listening practice had  increased, the TCIT trainer worked with the staff to move towards providing effective  commands that targeted the specific disruptive behaviors of each child during class activities  throughout the day e.g., Please put the car back on the shelf rather than Dont play with  the car. You are not allowed to play right now. The staff felt confident with the use of  effective commands after a few weeks of practice; in addition, the coding of staff behavior  during teacher-led play indicated that Mrs. Wilson and Mrs. Patrick were able to provide four  effective commands with 100 effective follow-through to both compliance and  noncompliance during one-on-one interactions with Luke and Jerry. Following the mastery of  the TDI skills with one child at a time, the staff worked to incorporate the TDI skills in  interactions where two or more children were present. Additionally, the TCIT trainer  continued to coach Mrs. Wilson and Mrs. Patrick on their use of alternative behavior  management strategies such as selectively attending and redirecting other children in the  classroom during misbehavior.   The Sutter-Eyberg Student Behavior Inventory-Revised SESBI-R; Eyberg  Pincus,  1999 was completed by staff for each child during each classroom visit throughout the  course of TCIT. TDI mastery criteria were as follows: a child behavior within normal limits  on the SESBI-R, b the teaching staff felt confident in managing classroom behavior, and c  the teachers were able to consistently provide at least 4 effective commands with at least 75  effective follow through during teacher-directed interactions involving several children. Once  the staff successfully completed TDI, the TCIT trainer worked with the teachers to schedule a  follow-up classroom visit to monitor their maintenance of TCIT skills after treatment  completion and to provide the teaching staff with any needed support. 

CONCLUSION 

TCIT is an emerging training program to help teachers reduce noncompliant, aggressive,  and other dangerous behaviors that disrupt classroom activities and contribute to teacher  stress. TCIT borrows the two-phase treatment model of PCIT in which the first phase focuses  on promoting positive relationships and providing differential reinforcement of appropriate  behavior and the second focuses on consistent consequences for compliance, defiance, and  aggression. Additionally, TCIT trainers provide in-vivo instruction and feedback to teachers  on their use of behavior management skills to reach specified goals of skill use. As TCIT has   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Jocelyn O. Stokes, Ashley B. Tempel, Karishma Chengappa et al.  90 been implemented in more classrooms, slight variations in delivery have emerged due to  challenges unique to working in the classroom with multiple children and in school settings  with philosophies that differ about the inclusion of a time-out component. Research studies  are currently being conducted to answer questions regarding the effectiveness of TCIT in  decreasing disruptive behavior in the classroom, acceptability of program procedures, and  practicality of implementation. However, TCIT shows promise in providing teachers with the  behavior management skills to enhance the learning environment for their students. It is  possible that TCIT may remediate the disruptive behavior of young children, and, thus  prevent the academic and social problems associated with challenging behavior in later  elementary and secondary schools as well as the related stress experienced by teachers. 

REFERENCES 

Axup, T.,  Gersch, I. 2008. The impact of challenging student behaviour upon teachers  lives in secondary school: Teachers perceptions. British Journal of Special Education,  35, 144-151.  Beaman, R., Wheldall, K.,  Kemp, C. 2007. Recent research on troublesome classroom  behaviour: A review. Australasian Journal of Special Education, 31, 45-60.  Bernhardt, A. J.,  Forehand, R. 1975. The effects of labeled and unlabeled praise upon  lower and middle class children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 19, 536-543.  Budd, K., Watkin, S. C., Legato, L.,  Feuer, R. M. 2010, Novemeber. Development and  pilot dissemination of teacher-child interaction training as a universal prevention model.  In C. Campbell  D. J. Hansen Chairs, An innovative application of evidence-based  practices to unite cognitive-behavioral therapists and teachers: Teacher-child interaction  training. Symposium conducted at the meeting of the Association for Behavioral and  Cognitive Therapies, San Francisco, CA.  Campbell, C., Martin, E. K., Hubel, G. S., Asawa, L. E., Flood, M. F.,  Hansen, D. J.  2010. University of Nebraska  Teacher-Child Interaction Training UNL  TCIT:  Therapist Manual. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska-Lincoln Department of  Psychology.  Campbell, C., Martin, E. K., West, T., Hubel, G. S., Flood, M. F.,  Hansen, D. J. 2010,  November. Applying evidence-based practices to improve social and behavioral  competence in preschoolers: Evaluating the effectiveness of teacher-child interaction  training in head start settings. In C. Campbell  D. J. Hansen Chairs, An innovative  application of evidence-based practices to unite cognitive-behavioral therapists and  teachers: Teacher-child interaction training. Symposium conducted at the meeting of the  Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies, San Francisco, CA.  Campbell, S. B. 1995. Behavior problems in preschool children: A review of recent  research. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 36, 113149.  Carr, E. G., Taylor, J.C.,  Robinson, S. 1991. The effects of severe behavior problems in  children on the teaching behavior of adults. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 24,  523-535.  Costello, A. H., Chengappa, K., Stokes, J. O., Tempel, A. B.,  McNeil, C. B. in press.  Parent-child interaction therapy for oppositional children: Integration of child-directed   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Teacher-Child Interaction Training  91 play therapy and behavior management training for parents. In A. A. Drewes, S. Bratton,   C. E. Schaefer Eds., ParentChild Interaction Therapy for Oppositional Behavior in  Children: Integration of ChildDirected Play Therapy and Behavior Management  Training for Parents. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.  Ennis, C. D. 1996. When avoiding confrontation leads to avoiding conflict:Disruptive  students impact on curriculum. Journal of Curriculum and Supervision, 11, 145-162.  Everett, G. E., Olmi, D. J., Edwards, R. P., Tingstrom, D. H., Sterling-Turner, H. E.,   Christ, T. J. 2007. An empirical investigation of time-out with and without escape  extinction to treat escape-maintained noncompliance. Behavior Modification, 31, 412434.  Eyberg, S. M. 1988. Parent-child interaction therapy: Integration of traditional and  behavioral concerns. Child  Family Behavior Therapy, 10, 33-46.  Eyberg, S. M., Nelson, M. M.,  Boggs, S. R. 2008. Evidence-based psychosocial  treatments for children and adolescents with disruptive behavior. Journal of Clinical  Child and Adolescent Psychology, 37, 215-237. DOI: 10.108015374410701820117  Eyberg, S. M., Nelson, M. M., Duke, M.,  Boggs, S. R. 2005. Manual for the dyadic  parent-child interaction coding system 3rd ed. Retrieved October, 4, 2009 from  www.pcit.org.  Eyberg, S.  Pincus, D. 1999. Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory  Sutter-Eyberg Student  Behavior Inventory-Revised: Professional Manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological  Assessment Resources.  Eyberg, S. M.,  Robinson, E. A. 1983. Dyadic parent-child interaction coding system: A  manual. San Rafael, CA: Social and Behavioral Science Documents.  Farrington, D. P. 1995. The development of offending and antisocial behavior from  childhood: Key findings from the Cambridge study in delinquent development. Journal  of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 36, 929-964.  Filcheck, H. A., McNeil, C. B.,  Herschell, A. D. 2001. Types of verbal feedback that  affect compliance and general behavior in disruptive and typical children. Child Study  Journal, 31, 225-247.  Filcheck, H. A., McNeil, C. B., Greco, L. A.,  Bernard, R. S. 2004. Using a whole-class  token economy and coaching of teacher skills in a preschool classroom to manage  disruptive behavior. Psychology in the Schools, 41, 351-361.  Finn, J. D., Pannozzo, G. M.,  Voelkl, K. E. 1995. Disruptive and inattentive-withdrawn  behavior and achievement among fourth graders. The Elementary School Journal, 95,  421-434.  Gershenson, R. A., Lyon, A. R.,  Budd, K. S. 2010. Promoting positive interactions in the  classroom:Adapting parent-child interaction therapy as a universal prevention program.  Education and Treatment of Children, 33, 261-287.  Hanf, C. 1969. A two-stage program for modifying maternal controlling during motherchild M-C interaction. Paper presented at the meeting of the Western Psychological  Association, Vancouver.  Hood, K. K,  Eyberg, S. M. 2003. Outcomes of parent-child interaction therapy: Mothers  reports of maintenance to six-years after treatment. Journal of Clinical Child and  Adolescent Psychology, 32, 419-429.  Kurtz, S. M., Fernandez, M. A., Miller,, S., Madigan, R. J, Firpo, Y., DiMotta, R., Owens,  M.,  Golub, S. 2010, November. Extant issues in the implementation of teacher-child   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Jocelyn O. Stokes, Ashley B. Tempel, Karishma Chengappa et al.  92 interaction training by other disciplines in other settings. In C. Campbell  D. J. Hansen  Chairs, An innovative application of evidence-based practices to unite cognitivebehavioral therapists and teachers: Teacher-child interaction training. Symposium  conducted at the meeting of the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies, San  Francisco, CA.  Loeber, R., Burke, J. D., Lahey, B. B., Winters, A.,  Zera, M. 2000. Oppositional defiant  and conduct disorder: A review of the past 10 years, part I. Journal of the American  Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 39, 1468-1484.  Lyon, A. R., Gershenson, R. A., Farahman, F. K., Thaxter, P. J., Behlig, S.,  Budd, K. S.  2009. Effectiveness of teacher-child interaction training TCIT in a preschool setting.  Behavior Modification, 33, 855-884.   McIntosh, D. E., Rizza, M. G.,  Bliss, L. 2000. Implementing empirically supported  interventions: Teacher-child interaction therapy. Psychology in the Schools, 37, 453-462.  McNeil, C. B., Capage, L. C., Bahl, A.,  Blanc, H. 1999. Importance of early intervention  for disruptive behavior problems: Comparison of treatment and wait-list control group.  Early Education and Development, 10, 445-454.  McNeil, C. B., Eyberg, S. M., Eisenstadt, T. H., Newcomb, K.,  Funderburk, B. 1991.  Parent-child interaction therapy with behavior problem children: Generalization of  treatment effects to the school setting. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 20, 140-151.   Nixon, R. D. V. 2001. Changes in hyperactivity and temperament in behaviourally disturbed  preschoolers after parent-child interaction therapy PCIT. Behaviour Change, 18, 168176.  Rork, K. E.,  McNeil, C. B. 2008. A behavioral model of school consultation. Behavior  Therapist, 31, 69-73.   Tempel, A.,  McNeil, C. B. 2010, November. The implementation of teacher-child  interaction training in a rural head start setting. In C. Campbell  D. J. Hansen Chairs,  An innovative application of evidence-based practices to unite cognitive-behavioral  therapists and teachers: Teacher-child interaction training. Symposium conducted at the  meeting of the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies, San Francisco, CA.  Tempel, A. B., Wagner, S. W.,  McNeil, C. B. 2008. Parent-Child Interaction Therapy and  Language Facilitation: The Role of Parent-Training on Language Development. Journal  of Speech-Language Pathology and Applied Behavior Analysis, 3, 78-94.   Tempel, A. B., Wagner, S., McNeil, C. B. 2010. Parent-child interaction therapy: The  effects of parental attention components on childrens verbalizations and attending-totask behaviors. Manuscript submitted for publication.  Tiano, J. D. 2010. Teacher-child interaction therapy for preschool classrooms. In C. B.  McNeil  T. Hembree-Kigin Eds.: Parent-Child Interaction Therapy 2nd ed. pp. 385391. New York: Springer.  Tiano, J. D.,  McNeil, C. B. 2006. Training Head Start teachers in behavior management  using parent-child interaction therapy: A preliminary investigation. Journal of Early and  Intensive Behavior Intervention, 3, 220-233.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

In: Classrooms: Management, Effectiveness and Challenges  ISBN 978-1-61324-601-6  Editor: Rebecca J. Newley, pp. 93-114   2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 

Chapter 5 

URBAN CLASSROOM PEDAGOGY:   THE ROLE OF SCHOOL-WIDE TEACHER-DIRECTED  CONSULTATION 

Phillip J. Belfiore and Ruth Auld  Mercyhurst College  Erie, Pennsylvania, USA 

ABSTRACT 

Teachers establish beliefs and skills during the first few years on the job. Even the  most dedicated teachers in urban school face daily challenges in the classroom that can be  defeating. Teaching requires much more than dedication. Many teachers in urban schools  select the job because of availability, not first choice. Many teachers lack the contextual  or personal experience to understand the culture of urban schools. The high turn-over rate  of teachers in urban schools is one consequence of the under-preparedness and limited  supports available to novice teachers in urban settings. Yet, this consequence continues to  be a foundational problem within the school. If schools have only novice teachers, there  by availability and not by choice, who are learning how to teach, how can the school  meet the goals and objectives of improving student learning outcomes and meeting  adequate levels of academic and social proficiency? It is a self-perpetuating cycle that  perplexes and frustrates urban school administrators.   In this study, the administrative staff of an urban elementary school with a student  population at a 99 poverty level set about to cultivate a new culture within the school.  Their ambition was to build a climate of support for teachers by starting with the goal of  improving teacher effectiveness in the classroom. In order to improve their instructional  skill set, urban teachers volunteered to participate in a 2-year teacher-directed  consultation designed to improve instructional efficacy in the urban classroom. The study  began with novice teachers less than 3 years urban teaching experience completing a  teacher survey which assessed their beliefs about urban students abilities to learn.  Following the survey, teachers were observed monthly throughout the school year using  an Urban Classroom Checklist UCC. The UCC, an ecological assessment, evaluated  classroom environment, instruction, research-based practices, and feedback. After each  observation, the authors consulted with teachers to provide a specific instructional  feedback on their teacher behaviors during instructional time, b instructional   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Phillip J. Belfiore and Ruth Auld  94 recommendations, and c a written formative summary, from the UCC. Specific and  individualized targeted pedagogical skills such as teacher transition time, teacher  proximity, a ratio of positivenegative comments, and student opportunities to response  were measured and discussed with the novice teachers. The strategy of a regular, ongoing, monthly observations and b ongoing consultation, and c performance feedback  and dialog, suggests that heightening teachers self-awareness of their performance was  an effective method for making measurable gains in teaching practices. 

INTRODUCTION 

Parker Palmer 1998 states good teaching is the intentional act of creating an educational  environment that helps students learn. Unfortunately, many poor-urban schools abandon  sound pedagogical practices and professional development in favor of what Martin  Haberman, in 1991, called a pedagogy of poverty. Researchers in urban schools and  classrooms have noted that in spite of multiple forms of sound, evidenced-based teaching  practices available e.g. direct instruction, cooperative learning, differentiated instruction,  applied behavior analysis, scientific inquiry; there is an accepted basic form of teaching in  urban schools Belfiore, Auld,  Lee, 2005; Carey, 2004; Haberman, 1991. Nygreen 2006  noted that decades of sound educational research has done little to disrupt familiar schooling  patterns of school failure. Through a series of classroom observations, Haberman 1991  documented a number of education practices that taken separately, and used occasionally may  have some fundamental educational effect see Table 1.  Haberman 1991 does not suggest that these basic educational practices exhibited by  urban teachers, and constitute the core functions of urban teaching p. 291 are unnecessary  or obsolete. Only when these practices are chosen and performed in the classroom at the  systematic exclusion of other, evidenced-based, best teaching practices do teachers begin to  approach and embrace this pedagogy of poverty.  

Table 1. Basic Educational Practices That Constitute the Core Function of Urban  Teaching adapted from Haberman, 1991 

Ask Questions in Classroom  Give Directions to Students  Develop and Deliver Assignments  Monitor Independent Seatwork  Review Student Assignments  Give Information to Students  Give and Review Tests and Quizzes  Assign, Collect, and Review Homework  Settle Classroom Disputes  Punish Student Noncompliance  Give Student Grades  Mark Student Written Assignments 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Urban Classroom Pedagogy  95

At the core of this curricular deconstruction is the widespread teacher belief, that students  enrolled in poor-urban schools cannot be successful Carey, 2004; Hilliard, 2003; Nygreen,  2006; Rist, 1972; Terrill  Mark, 2000; Warren, 2002 andor this lack of student success is  not the fault of the instructional environment McLaren, 2003; Thompson, Warren,  Carter,  2004. Lack of parental support, lack of parent education, lack of technology, lack of  schoolcommunity funding, andor economic struggles at home are just a few of the held  beliefs as to why students underachieve. Often times these untrue and unfounded, yet  pervasive beliefs by teachers are based on a teachers lack of contextual and personal  experiences to understand the culture of the urban school and community Thompson, et al.,  2004. It is these beliefs that drive the behavior of teachers to create what Belfiore et. al.,  2005 and others Carey, 2004; Haberman, 1991 identify as watered-down pedagogical  practices and curriculums where students can do nothing more than underachieve. For  example, following a series of teacher interviews in urban schools, Warren 2002 reported  that low teacher expectations, and lack of accountability often resulted in lowering teaching  standards, less teacher effort, and a watered-down academic curriculum for underachieving  students. This was especially true in poor-urban schools Warren, 2002.   The result of repeated exposure to poor educational practices and a watered-down  curriculum, is student under-performance as evidenced by a lack of academic and social  competency. If, for example, teachers believe students in their classroom cannot achieve, then  teacher expectations are lowered and curriculum is watered-down to meet the teacherperceived low academic level of students. Students repeated exposure to a less-than  challenging academic curriculum results in real student underachievement, which in turn  reinforces a teacher belief that some students require less academic challenge, and b  teacher behavior to maintain instructional delivery at the water-down, less rigorous level. This  final outcome, a self-fulfilling prophecy is described by Belfiore et al. 2005 and Carey  2004, but originally identified by Rist in 1970 as the self-fulfilling prophecy in ghetto  education p.411. Additionally, Lane 2008 stresses that such repeated exposure to poor  pedagogical practices and academic failure results in student expecting to fail before ever  trying.  In contrast to this rather nihilist, banking approach to educational, Freire 1998 and  others Conroy, Sutherland, Snyder,  Marsh, 2008; hooks, 2003; Kunjufu, 1985; McLaren,  2003 insist on a pedagogy that establishes dialog as the foundation. Freire 1998 suggests  that a dialogic pedagogy occurs when two learners occupy a connected, but somewhat  different space in an ongoing educational interaction. In such a dialogical pedagogy, teachers  are providing instruction to, and learning from, their students. Such an ongoing reciprocal  interaction between student and teacher establishes a dynamic classroom environment that  includes effective class-wide pedagogical practices Conroy et. al., 2008. Conroy, et al.  2008 continues by suggesting such a classroom is more likely to a have positive teacherstudent interactions, b promote student engagement, and c minimize problem classroom  behaviors.  

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Phillip J. Belfiore and Ruth Auld  96 EVIDENCED-BASED PEDAGOGICAL PRACTICES IN THE CLASSROOM 

While non-urban and non-poor schools continue to take for granted rich, meaningful  academic curricular opportunities Cuban, 2004, poor-urban schools continue providing  increased paper and pencil practice in test-specific content e.g. reading and mathematics.  Poor teaching practices, requiring only the basic levels of knowledge comprehension by  students, undercut any real teaching and learning accountability efforts Hilliard, 2003, and  urban schools employing such poor teaching practices should be called to question Belfiore,  et al., 2005.   Conversely, in describing a pedagogy of risk-taking, Belfiore et al., 2005 demonstrated  that student academic achievement was a result of such evidenced-based, pedagogical  practices as increasing active student participation, placing students in small ability-level  group, and implementing differentiated instruction. Belfiore et. al., 2005 showed that using  curriculum-based assessment data to guide teachers in a determining student abilitygrouping and b differentiate academic instruction resulted in increased early literacy skills,  as measured by the Woodcock Reading Mastery Test RevisedNU Woodcock, 1998, for  students enrolled in two, K-8 urban schools. The use of curriculum-based assessment data as  a foundation to differentiated academic instruction is the only choice for teachers who will  not accept a classroom where more and more students are becoming less and less successful  George, 2005.  In general, instructional environments, including urban classrooms, where such  evidenced-based practices as teacher-centered classroom practices and positive behavior  supports have been incorporated, teachers have been successful, and students have increased  learning e.g. Alvarado-Gomez  Belfiore, 2000; Auld, Hayes,  Belfiore, 2009; Belfiore,  Lee, Spicer,  Dexter , 2008; Campbell-Whatley  Comer, 2000; Hutchinson  Belfiore,  1998; McCurdy, Kunsch, and Reibstein, 2007; Shippen, Houchins, Steveton,  Sartor, 2005;  Trussell, 2008.  

Teacher-Centered Classroom Practices 

n an analysis of elementary school teachers, Thompson, Ransdell,  Rousseau 2005  found that effective teachers whose students scored high on achievement tests in urban school  settings actively engaged their students in learning in a teacher-centered classroom.  Educational practices often associated with the teacher-centered classroom include  components of direct instruction and academic engagement, including a small group  instruction, b multiple opportunities for student responding to academic-specific content, c  immediate and instructional teacher feedback, d increased student time on meaningful  academic tasks, e explicit teacher directions and prompts, f teacher modeling of correct  academics, g positive consequences following student response, h instructional pacing, i  wait time, j teacher proximity Auld, et al., 2009; Belfiore  Agramonte, 2002; Engelmann,  Becker, Carnine,  Gersten, 1988; Hoadley, 2003; Thompson et al., 2005.   If students learn by doing, and learn more by doing more, it makes educational sense that  if classroom teachers increase the number of opportunities for students to do academics  then more student learning will occur. At the heart of the teacher-centered classroom is the   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Urban Classroom Pedagogy  97 goal of systematically increasing the opportunities students have to academically respond in  the classroom. Greenwood, Delquadri, and Hall 1984, define student opportunity to respond  as an interaction between teachers instructional prompts, materials, andor questions, and the  success of those strategies to establish and increase student responding. Greenwood et al.,  1984 also stress the importance of active, not passive, student responding. Examples of  active student responding may include a student academic writing as prompted by a guided  notes format, graphic organizers, or web maps b student academic talk such as answering  academic-specific questions or engaging in class-wide, small group, or peer mentoring  discussion or debate, c student academic choral responding, where whole class or small  groups verbally respond to academic-specific questions, and d student presentation of  response cards e.g., pre-printed true-falseyes no cards, individual sized dry erase boards in  response to teacher-delivered questions Alvarado-Gomez  Belfiore, 2000; Blackwell   McLaughlin, 2005; Conroy et al., 2008; Greenwood et al., 1984; Nies  Belfiore, 2006.  Conversely, passive student responding includes a students looking at a teacher lecture, b  students watching a video or power point presentation, andor c students waiting for teacher  assistance during in-seat assignments.   Increasing student opportunities to respond in the teacher-centered classroom becomes  much more of a learning situation when teacher corrective feedback follows. Teacher  feedback takes the form of corrective feedback when a student actively responds in error to  the academic cue. For example, if the academic cue is What is the state capital of  Pennsylvania? and the student response is Bethlehem then teacher corrective feedback  may be No, the state capital of Pennsylvania is Harrisburg. Additionally, teachers might ask  the student or class i.e., choral responding to repeat the correct answer, once the teacher  provided the correct answer. Corrective feedback may be provided by the classroom teacher,  or embedded in a lesson where response cards in the form of individual dry erase boards are  used by the student. In a study by Nies and Belfiore 2006, students acquired and retained  more spelling words when they were instructed to cover the correct word written on a dry  erase board, write their answer, make a visual discrimination of accuracy between the prewritten correct word and their written word i.e., self-evaluation, and if incorrect, correct the  error immediately i.e., self-correction. 

Positive Behavior Support 

Teachers in urban settings must be more knowledgeable and better prepared in classroom  management strategies that create a supportive academic environment than those teachers  working in non-urban settings McKinney, et al., 2005. One set of strategies that establish  management and support in the classroom is positive behavior supports PBS. Trussell  2008 suggests that the fundamental intent of PBS is to establish an instructional  environment that a supports and teaches social and academic behaviors, while b  preventing the occurrence of problem behaviors. PBS provides teachers specific techniques to  assist students to learn the appropriate skills, rather than allowing teachers to continually react  to the problem behaviors.   Unfortunately, many classroom teachers continue to respond after the problem behavior  has occurred, utilizing consequential, correction strategies to manage their classroom rather  than develop positive, pre-correction strategies. McCurdy, et al., 2007 identify such   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Phillip J. Belfiore and Ruth Auld  98 default strategies as reactive and typically involve punishment, including verbal  reprimands, time-out, response-cost, detention, in-school suspension, and expulsion. In  addition to the limited learning effectiveness to the targeted student, these punitive practices  may cause a ripple effect to the behaviors of other students in the classroom, and ultimately  may result in diminishing the overall success of the classroom Soodak, 2003.   The emphasis in PBS is on teaching the student to use more appropriate strategies to  handle his or her classroom behaviors, rather than teachers responding with the more  traditional method of reacting to inappropriate behaviors by applying punishment Auld,  Belfiore,  Scheeler, 2007; McKinney, et al., 2005. The result is an improved learning  environment for all students. Within a model of PBS teachers are directed to establish classwide or individualized interventions that increase effective instruction and teach andor  maintain positive behaviors while incorporating social skills training in a culturally  responsive pedagogy McKinney et al., 2005. Auld et al., 2007 suggests the intention of  PBS is for teachers to instruct students to use appropriate skills to achieve the same outcome  as the inappropriate skills they have been using. For example, if students are continually  engaging in talking out behavior inappropriate skill, then the teacher might develop a  systematic program to teach and reinforce hand raising appropriate skills. In such a situation  the teacher would ignore student talking out behavior while differentially reinforcing an  alternative behavior DRA, hand raising. Talking out and hand raising may be functional  equivalent i.e., to access teacher attention, but hand raising is certainly a more appropriate  classroom skill to gain teacher attention.  Although sound pedagogical practices, as defined as evidenced-based or research-based,  exist, translating that research into everyday classroom applications appears to be lacking  Goldenbrg, Kunz, Hamburger,  Stevenson, 2003. Reinke, Lewis-Palmer, and Merrell  2008 add that even when evidenced-basedresearch-based strategies are translated into  classroom practices, class-wide implementation of those strategies is difficult. Additionally,  this inability to translate and implement evidenced-based strategies into classroom practices  that are both academically rigorous and culturally responsive contributes to the high attrition  rates among teachers in urban schools McKinney et. al., 2005.  

TEACHER RETENTION AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

Ingersoll 2004 reported that annual public teacher turnover in urban, high-poverty  school was at 22.0, whereas low-poverty teacher turnover was at 12.8 annually, and the  overall annual all public teacher turnover was at 15.1. Additionally, low-income and highminority schools are consistently staffed by the highest number of under-prepared teachers  National Commission on Teaching and Americas Future, 2002. For example, in California,  schools with 76-100 of their students eligible for free or reduced-priced lunches had a  teaching staff where 22 were without full credentials, whereas schools with 0-25 of their  students eligible for free or reduced-priced lunches had a teaching staff where only 7 were  without full credentials National Commission on Teaching and Americas Future, 2002.  Additionally, in California, schools with a minority student population of 91-100 had a  teaching staff where 26 were without full credentials, whereas schools with a minority   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Urban Classroom Pedagogy  99 student population of 0-30 had a teaching staff where only 5 were without full  credentials.   Professionals in the field of education have been repeatedly suggested that more needs to  be done to increase and retain the numbers of accomplished teachers in urban settings  Abbate-Vaughn, Frechon,  Wright, 2010; National Commission on Teaching and  Americas Future, 2002. Ingersoll 2004 and others McKinney et al., 2005 indicates that  qualified urban teachers are scarce, and poor teacher retention exacerbates the problem.  Quality teaching is grounded in preparation, initially at the pre-service level, but continuing,  and on-going, at the in-service level Auld, et al., 2010; Carey, 2004. Ultimately, the  Ingersoll 2004 report concludes by suggesting the recruitment of more teachers will not  solve staffing inadequacies, rather it is an issue of retention.   It is difficult to retain teachers in urban schools when they are under-prepared and undercertified to provide the quality education expected Carey, 2004; National Commission on  Teaching and Americas Future, 2002. Hurwitz and Hurwitz 2005 stress that even with the  best pre-service education carried out in institutions of higher education by schools of  education, most novice teachers enter their first classroom under-prepared for the academic  and social demands of helping children learn. The solution often recommended and carried  out by a majority of K-12 schools is the pre-school year in-service where the teaching and  school administrative staff gather for several days engaging in school policy and professional  development. Additionally, several additional days are set aside throughout the school year  for additional policy and practice discussions. Carey 2004 suggests that too often such K-12  in-services are temporary and scattershot. p. 22. Other criticism of the traditional  approach to school in-services include a the use of in-services as add-ons, not truly  integrated into the structure of the schools practice or school policy, b the focus on  individual students as targets for intervention, not class-wide ecologies, c the lack of followup to monitor if best-practices introduced to teachers early in the school year are part of the  classroom pedagogy throughout the year, d the under-utilization of corrective feedback on  teacher instructional performance, and e a lack of on-going professional development  throughout the school year Carey, 2004; Hurwitz  Hurwitz, 2005; Kennedy  Shiel, 2010;  Mautone, Luiselli,  Handler, 2006; Reinke et al., 2008.  Conversely, Kennedy and Shiel 2010 describe a collaborative teacher in-service  program that a links school-wide practices with individual teacher preparation, b  differentiates instruction to students needs, and c links classroom-based assessment with  instruction through a sustained, intensive on-site professional development. Additionally,  Hurwitz and Hurwitz 2005 recommend that any professional development in-service should  be integrated into the current pedagogical practices of the school, should include both novice  and experienced teachers, and should include release time and stipends for those teachers  serving a mentorship role.   Both Mautone et al., 2006 and Reinke et al., 2008 suggest that a vital component of  any effective professional in-service must include on-going teacher directed consultation.  Fundamental to any consultation is the frequent use of performance feedback. Prescriptive,  individualized, performance feedback provided routinely during on-going consultation  encourages dialog among teachers and consults, as well as provides a blue print from which  to build better pedagogical classroom skills.  The purpose of this project was to examine the impact of a direct classroom  observations, b on-goingyear-long consultation, and c individualized performance   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Phillip J. Belfiore and Ruth Auld  100  feedback within a close time frame to our direct classroom observations on the pedagogical  classroom practices of novice teachers in an urban school.  

METHODOLOGY 

Participants and Setting 

Participants in this study included teachers with less than 3 years of urban teaching  experience plus one teacher with extensive experience who voluntarily chose to participate  with the intention of receiving performance feedback that would help them to improve their  teaching effectiveness. The first year of the study began with a cohort of nine teachers. The  year ended with seven of the nine teachers remaining in the cohort. The second year began  with a cohort of ten different teachers volunteering to participate, with nine of the ten  completing the year.   The study took place in an urban K-8 school for students from homes identified in the  99 poverty level. Nearly every classroom had several students identified as English  language learners, and the school had high levels of transiency among the student population.  The school building was nearly 70 years old, and in need of significant structural repairs.  Class size ranged from 22 28 students, with one self-contained teacher. Rarely were teachers  provided any classroom aides to assist in the classroom.   The initial invitation to participate was presented to the entire teaching staff at the first  professional development in-service training for the teachers in August. A brief overview of  the use of positive behavior supports and successful classroom management strategies was  presented by the two authors, along with an invitation to participate in this unique  professional development opportunity.   At the outset of the planning for the year-long consultation, the authors met with the  schools administrative team co-principals to discuss observation schedules, implementation  plans, survey instruments, and classroom observation tools. Following the meeting, the coprincipals decided they would incorporate our models of evidence-based practice into their  annual teacher evaluations.    One further interesting dimension of this consultation was the level of support provided  by the co-principals. The administration approached the authors seeking a unique plan for  professional development wherein novice teachers who expressed an interest in improving  their performance could participate in cohesive, on-going professional development  throughout the school year. Their long-term plan was to imbed professional development  practices into daytoday teaching best practices, replacing the typical one-size-fits-all  professional development model common within most school district, which often has no  measurable impact from the dollars and time invested.   Both the authors and co-principals were in agreement that we would not share any  specific observational data or details with the administrators, so as to preserve the level of  trust the authors had attained with the classroom teachers.  

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Urban Classroom Pedagogy  101 Table 2. Teacher Belief-Instructional Behavior Survey   Developed by Belfiore  Auld 2006 

Please check the response indicating the extent to which you believe each of the  following statements are relevant as teachers in your school. 

SD-Strongly Disagree  D-Disagree U-Uncertain A-Agree 

SA-Strongly Agree 

SD  D  U  A  SA  1. Children are eager to learn new things 

2. 2.Children are naturally curious 

3. Children achieve as a direct result of teacher expectations 

4. Once a student begins to experience success, they continue to  strive for success 

5. A teacher is very influential in cultivating a students  confidence level 

6. The classroom environment needs to be controlled to make  success possible for some students 

7. Teachers should strive to help each child reach hisher fullest  potential 

8. The educational background of the parent greatly influences  how successful a student will be in the classroom 

9. It is the teachers responsibility to nurture a culture of respect  in the classroom 

10. One of the teachers many jobs is to be responsive to students  parents  

11. Students from single parent homes struggle in school 

12. Teachers should allow students to have opinions in the  classroom, even if they differ from the teachers 

13. Students work is a demonstration of students competency,  and as such should be valued 

14. Competition between students in the classroom can be very  damaging to students 

15. Students who excel at non-academic skills should be  recognized for their accomplishments 

16. Sometimes a teacher must put a students needs over personal  preference of staff 

17. All people deserve respect, and in such teachers must model  this in the classroom 

18. Students from economically poor environments can  demonstrate excellence and high level learning 

19. All human beings are learning organisms 

20. 20 Healthy school environments can help students to  overcome limitations from their home environment 

21. Success in school builds a sense of efficacy in students 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Phillip J. Belfiore and Ruth Auld  102  Instructor   Curriculum Area   Date   Observation Time    Number of Observations this Month  

Environment 

Yes  No  Additional Comments  At least 90 of the students are engaged asking  questions, raising hands, on-task 

Room noise level is conducive to learning 

Best student works displayed  

Daily and or weekly schedule displayed 

Classroom rules are displayed 

Groupindividual contingency plans are designed and  displayed 

Students are asking questions related to topic 

Teacher displays good proximity  

Instructional Practices  

Yes  No  Additional Comments  Directions are given in clear and precise manner 

The teacher knows the subject material 

Multiple methods of instruction are used lecture,  discussion, small group 

Teacher allows 5-10s after asking academic question  before moving on 

Pre-correction or preview strategies are observed 

Pacing of lesson is appropriate for students skill level 

Smooth transitions, including precise closure,   directions for new lesson 

Research-Based Practices  

Yes   No  Additional Comments  The lesson utilizes Professional Development  strategies 

StudentTeacher Interactions use seating chart 

Frequency  Additional Comments  Teacher assistance given A 

Teacher-initiated questions asked T 

Feedback  

Additional Comments  General classroom feedback   e.g. the class is working hard today, everyone  get quiet 

Individual feedback e.g. John, I like the way  you are working, John, stop that 

Graduate Special Education, Mercyhurst College 2006  Figure 1. Urban Classroom Checklist: Developed by Belfiore and Auld 2006.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Urban Classroom Pedagogy  103 Data Collection 

Teacher Beliefs  The Teacher BeliefInstructional Behavior Survey TB-IBS Table 2, used to measure  urban teachers beliefs undergirding daily classroom practices, was issued to teachers at the  introductory meeting, before the first in-classroom observation sessions were held. Pre  September and post May TB-IBS data were collected. The study took place across two  years at the same school. However, each subset of data pre and post survey were selfcontained, different teachers participated each of the two years i.e., Year 1-Teacher Cohort 1;  Year 2-Teacher Cohort 2. One of the first year participants was asked to continue on for a  second year.  

Classroom Direct-Observations  Monthly in-class 20-minute direct observations were scheduled in participating teachers  classrooms on Tuesdays using the author-created Urban Classroom Checklist UCC see  Figure 1. This observation tool, which was a type of ecological assessment, was divided into  five sections measuring a classroom environment, b instructional practices, c teachers  use of research-based practices d teacher-student interactions, and e teacher feedback.  Methods of classroom instruction varied during each observation. A follow-up consultation  was held within two days of observations each month. 

Procedures 

School-Wide In-Service  The two authors were asked by the co-principals to present an overview of the proposed  school-wide consultation to the entire faculty, staff, and administration of the school during  the schools professional development prior to the start of the academic school year. The brief  presentation included three general areas for discussion a ground rulesnon-negotiables  e.g., there is no teaching without learning, learning occurs when good teachers talk to each  other about good teaching, we are responsible for the successes and failures of all our school  children, the gap is one of potential-all children have potential, and good teaching is the most  creative way to manage and engage a class, b assessing where to begin e.g., curriculum  match-not mismatch-the role of curriculum-based assessment, do we know who we teach?,  and c try prevention, not reaction e.g., reprimands may be rewards, positive parent  communication, catch children being good, class-wide: tokensrafflesred-yellow-green,  consider non-contingent reinforcement, first hour needs, and peers are powerful. The purpose  of the brief 30-minute in-service to the school was to introduce pedagogical expectations and  recruit volunteers. 

Classroom Direct Observations  Classroom teachers identified their preferences for the observation times, and as a result  they were aware that the observation was scheduled. All teachers were asked to provide a  seating chart of students for use by the authors in the data collection process during the 20minute observation. The classroom seating charts allowed the authors to monitor the a   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Phillip J. Belfiore and Ruth Auld  104  frequency of students opportunities to respond teacher questions and teacher assistance  given, and b distribution of teacher questions and assistance across the classroom. Data  were gathered using the UCC on conditions of the classroom environment and instructional  practices, such as teachers posting of classroom rules and consequences, teachers display of  student work, student behavior charts, instructional pacing, and teacher proximity See Figure  1. In addition to student-teacher interaction data gathered from the seating charts, classroom  observations included a percentage of yesno items from the UCC, and b teacher feedback  defined as positive and negative comments from the teacher. Observations involved the  authors entering the classroom during instructional times. During these observations,  interactions between the researcher and the teacher were kept to a minimum so as not to  disrupt the flow of teaching.  

On-Going Consultation  Following each session, the two authors tabulated data from the UCC, identifying  common patterns and concerns among the classroom. The authors prepared prescriptive  individualized performance feedback reports for each teacher. In addition, the authors  prepared a brief 10-15 minute professional development workshop discussion to take to the  teachers. The on-going consultations and performance feedback built the connection among  identified pedagogical issues, classroom data gathered, data-based instructional decision  making, and planning for more effective classroom practices. Consultations held with the  teachers were useful to provide positive supports, feedback, and practical answers to the  teachers in a responsive, timely manner. Overall, sample topics discussed during consultation  addressed classroom management strategies which are typically the most challenging  dimension of teaching for any beginning teacher, but conditions in urban setting often  exacerbate novice teachers abilities to effectively manage student behaviors. Specifically the  range of topics focused on increasing opportunities to respond, pacing, transitions, strategies  for responding to student behaviors, and increasing academic engagement.   During on-going consultation, each teacher was given a written 1-2 page summary of  the previous classroom observations, and specific tips and suggestions for improvements.  Consultations were held in the schools library, immediately after the school day ended, and  lasted typically 30 minutes. Additionally, teachers were given a short research-based article to  read on the topic of discussion for that month. Table 3 provides a list of topics and articles  provided. Among the objectives for this project, the administrative staff had expressed an  interest in building a professional community among the teaching staff, one in which teachers  would have common positive experiences and a willingness to discuss classroom practices  openly in positive, effect terms. The regular monthly meetings were intentionally designed to  facilitate such conversations and dialogs, and hopefully inspire common bonds that would be  repeated throughout the school. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

The purpose of this project was to improve teacher efficacy by providing a direct  classroom observations, b on-going consultation, and c performance feedback within a  close time frame to our direct observations. The results of this two-year school-wide teacherEBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Urban Classroom Pedagogy  105 directed consultation are discussed in three dimensions. First, a pre and post assessment tool,  the Teacher BeliefInstructional Behavior Survey TB-IBS was administered to participating  cohorts of teachers from Year 1 and Year 2. The TB-IBS gathered data addressing teacher  beliefs and perceptions of their preparedness and teacher efficacy. Second, we evaluated the  data from the Urban Classroom Checklist UCC of evidenced-based practices from  individual teachers classroom observation sessions and aggregated for the purpose of  drawing generalizable conclusions. Lastly, we discuss the results of several individual  teachers cases from the consultation.  

TEACHER BELIEFINSTRUCTIONAL BEHAVIOR SURVEY 

Several experts in urban education have suggested that the teachers beliefs often sell the  students short of successful academic performance e.g., Rist, 1970; Thompson et al., 2004;  Warren, 2002. The surprising results of the TB-IBS indicated that among the novice teachers  surveyed, most believed that student success was attainable within their classroom. Most  teachers answered the survey questions with equally strong indications preand post-survey  results that the teacher was responsible to demonstrate respect, cultivate habits for success in  the students and establish a healthy classroom environment for learning. These teachers did  not cite the typical excuses of poor parenting, economic limitations or poor school resources  as causation for the poor student academic performance e.g., Questions 8 and 11. In  contrast, these teachers answered the survey indicating that the individual teachers  expectations of student behaviors were directly responsible for the students performance  e.g., Questions 3 and 5. The response to these questions was consistent from preand postsurvey results.    Overall, there was little measurable change between the pre-professional development  program and the post-professional development survey results. This trend held fast within the  Year 1 Cohort as well as within the Year 2 cohort of teachers. If the teachers believe the  students could perform successfully, then the problems might potentially lie within the  teachers ability to manage day-to-day classroom challenges. This became the starting point  for our year-long school-wide consultation.  

Urban Classroom Checklist UCC 

Overall impact of teaching effectiveness was measured by the percent correct on the  UCC used to measure various aspects of the classroom learning environment. The classroom  teacher and the two authors entered into an unwritten contractual arrangement wherein the  teacher opened the classroom for observation and professional performance feedback. All  participants held current teaching certificates, which included training in classroom  management. From the first observation, specific feedback was provided to each individual  teacher to enhance teaching efficacy as well as management practices, as reflected in the  increases in percent correct on the UCC and increase in teacher use of positive comments  toward student behaviors. There was a measurable improvement across all teachers.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Phillip J. Belfiore and Ruth Auld  106  Table 3. Mercyhurst College Graduate Education Program: School-Wide Consultation  Professional Development Overview 

Month  Professional  Development  Teachers  Attending Resources Provided  Year 1 

August  Classroom  management  strategies and  positive behavior  supports  Schoolwide  Mercyhurst College Classroom Management  Guidebook. Developed by Belfiore  Auld. 

October  Whole group  management  10   Friend, M.,  Pope, J., 2005. Creating schools  in which all students can succeed. Kappa Delta  Pi Record, 41, 56-61. 

November  Academic  engagement and  positive  communications  10   George, P.S., 2006. A rationale for  differentiating instruction in the regulate  classroom. Theory into Practice, 44, 185-193. 

January  Pacing of lessons  and transitions  9  Hoadley, U., 2003. Time to Learn: pacing and  the external framing of teachers work. Journal  of Education for Teaching, 29,265-274. 

February Giving precise  directions  9  Catt, S., Miller, D.,  Schallenkamp, K., 2007.  You are the key: Communicate for learning  effectiveness. Education, 127, 369-377. 

April  Motivation,  feedback and  student attention  8   McKinney, S., Campbell-Whately,  Kea, C.,  2005. Managing student behavior in urban  classrooms: The role of teacher ABC  assessments. The Clearing House, 79, 1620. 

May  Aligning  appropriate  engaging  activities to  students present  level of  performance  8  Henjum, A., 2001. Lets select self-actualizing  teachers. Education, 104, 5155.  Year 2 

September  Classroom  management  strategies and  positive behavior  supports 
Catt, S., Miller, D.,  Schallenkamp, K.  2007.You are the key: Communicate for  learning effectiveness. Education, 127 369-377. 

Mohr, K.,  Mohr, E. 2007. Extending Englishlanguage learners classroom interactions using  the response protocol. The Reading Teacher, 60,  440-450. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Urban Classroom Pedagogy  107 Table 3. Continued 

October  Effective  communication,  think a-louds,  inclusion, and  English language  learners 
Smith, L., 2006. Think-aloud mysteries: Using  structured, sentence-by-sentence text passages to  teach comprehension strategies, The Reading  Teacher 59, 764-772.  

November  Responding to  student behaviors and creating  positive learning  environments 
Rhode, G., Jenson, W.,  Reavis, H.K. 1993.  The tough kid book; Practical classroom management  strategies. Longmont, CO: Sopris West.  

January  Giving precise  directions  8   Simpllico, J., 2008. Miscommunication in the  classroom: what teachers say and what students  really hear. Retrieved from:  http:findartciles.comparticlesmiqa3673is2 00204ain90346448. 

February Using your voice  as an effective  management tool 8 

March  Strategic  planning for high  levels of student  engagement  during small  group and  independent  instructional  times.  8  Merritt, M., and Humphrey, F. 2001. Teacher,  talk and task: Communicative demands during  individualized instruction time. TIP, VIII 4,  298-303.  

April  Maximizing new  opportunities for  learning late in  the school year  8  Blackwell, A.,  McLaughlin, FT., 2005. Using  guided notes, choral responding and response  cards to increase student performance The  International Journal of Special Education, 20,  1-5. 

May  Keeping above  the fray in your  classroom  8  Michie, G., 2002. Teaching in the undertow.  Rethinking Schools, The New Teacher Book.  Retrieved from:  www.rethinkingschools.orgstaticpublicationne wteacherNTUndertow.pdf 

Overall Teaching Effectiveness 

During the first session, Year 1 Cohort teachers demonstrated a mean of 51 overall  teacher effectiveness range of 29  84 which was determined by the percent of yes   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Phillip J. Belfiore and Ruth Auld  108  answers on the UCC. See Figure 1 for details. Final session of Year 1 Cohort results  indicate 86 mean teacher effectiveness range of 67 100. Year 2 Cohort participants  teaching effectiveness measured during first session was 66 range of 37 87; final  session mean was 87 range of 70 94. 

Figure 2. Results from the Urban Classroom Checklist UCC: Percentage of YesNo Questions as  Observed Evidence-Based Practices for Year 1 and Year 2 Classroom Teacher Cohorts from First  Session September and Last Session May. 

Use of Positive or Negative Comments  

Several specific teacher behaviors were also measured during the monthly classroom  observations. The authors requested a seating chart be available for every observation. This  chart was used to track teacher  student interactions and the nature of those interactions  whether comments were positive or negative toward the student. Year 1 Cohort for the first  observation session September, mean teacher use of positive comments was 7.0, range of  1.0 25.0. The final two sessions April and May, mean teacher use of positive comments  was 8.3 and 6.0, respectively, range of 2.0 14.0. Year 2 Cohort for the first observation  session, mean teacher use of positive comments addressing student behaviors was 6.0, range  of 1.0 15.0. The final two sessions, mean teacher use of positive comments was 22.0 and  21.0, respectively, range of 5.0 41.0.  In addition, teachers use of negative comments was also recorded during monthly  classroom observations. Year 1 Cohort for the first observation session September, mean  teacher use of negative comments was 5.0, range of 0-15.0. The final two sessions April  and May, mean teacher use of negative comments was 1.5 and  1.0, respectively, range of   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Urban Classroom Pedagogy  109 0 5.0. Year 2 Cohort for the first observation session, mean teacher use of negative  comments was 6.0, range of 0 15.0. The final two sessions, mean teacher use of positive  comments was 1.3 and 1.4, respectively, range of 0 4.0. Use of negative comments during  the final two sessions demonstrates the consistent application by teachers of the evidencedbased practices discussed during monthly consultations. 

Figure 3. Results from the Urban Classroom Checklist: Mean Frequency of Negative Comments  from Classroom Teacher Cohorts from First Session September and Last Two Sessions April and  May. 

Figure 4. Results from the Urban Classroom Checklist: Mean Frequency of Positive Comments  from Classroom Teacher Cohorts from First Session September and Last Two Sessions April and  May. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Phillip J. Belfiore and Ruth Auld  110  Individual Teacher Performance 

Many of the participating teachers began the on-going professional development process  with considerable personal strengths, and according to the Belief  Instruction Survey  results very strong positive beliefs about the impact good teaching has upon students.  Although the teachers met the criteria we set of less than 3 years teaching experience in an  urban setting, both their responses to the BeliefInstruction Survey as well as their  performance on the UCC were positive indicators of their teaching effectiveness. There were  others who demonstrated significant gains through the observations. One common shift in  teacher efficacy was the overall reduction of the teachers use of negative comments toward  students. 

Individual Case Studies 

While every teacher in the study possessed considerable strengths and showed  measurable improvement, for the purpose of illustrating some of the specific improvements,  two teachers professional developmental gains are noteworthy enough to discuss. Dorothy  Joseph was a third year teacher, new to the grade she was teaching, and new to this building.  Mrs. Joseph possessed many strengths; she was astute in responding to student needs, planned  excellent highly engaging lessons, used effective strategies to manage the large group of  students she had in her intermediate grade level. Her classroom had several non-English  speaking students in the room. Mrs. Joseph gave serious thought and preparation to the floor  plan and the visuals displayed on the walls. She worked to cultivate an environment that was  warm and conducive to learning with minimal distractions. All of these conditions suggest  signs for success. After the first observation, when feedback from the UCC data helped Mrs.  Joseph realize that she only interacted with 5 of the 26 student in the class, she was very  distraught. When she learned that 81 of her students were not actively engaged in the  activity, she quickly responded by changing instructional strategies e.g., increased the  frequency of teacher-initiated questions to engage more students. This is a typical example of  how individualized performance feedback can help novice teachers make rapid improvements  to their classroom.  A second illustration was found in Nellie Darlings classroom. Ms. Darling had taught  before in a parochial setting, however, in this urban classroom she was challenged and often  feeling under-prepared for the experiences she had with this population of primary-grade  students. Her comments were often wrought with questions about why the students were not  able to be successful. Ms. Darling frequently found that the strategies she had used in a  previous setting were quickly rendered ineffective in this urban setting. One such habit was to  tell the students what they were doing wrong, with the expectation that they would already  know what the correct behavior was, and would then comply to her comments with the  appropriate behaviors. It is easy to understand how such expectations could seem acceptable.  However, in this urban setting, Ms. Darling found herself needing to develop a more  effective, more specific skills set for communicating student expectations. After several  consultation sessions, Ms. Darling began to shift her focus from attention toward the problem  behavior to attending to the appropriate behaviors. This change was noted on the monthly  written feedback reports. Additionally, she became aware of the need to state what it was that   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Urban Classroom Pedagogy  111 she wanted the student to do rather than state what not to do. This minor shift in the  teachers use of air time allowed the young students in this primary grade to hear what was  expected, and to respond successfully to the teachers directive. In essence, Mrs. Darling  represents a classic case for preparing teachers in effective use of positive behavior supports,  wherein teachers refrain from focusing upon and punishing inappropriate behaviors, and  find constructive methods for teaching students strategies to learn to do the more appropriate,  successful expected behaviors. Students in this urban environment come to school with sets  of underdeveloped skills. When they are taught those alternative, more appropriate skills for  classroom success, they begin to use them, generalize them, and their classroom performance,  academically and socially, improves. As suggested by Soodak, 2003 the outcome in Mrs.  Darlings case, was a change in the learning environment for all students. Teachers often find  themselves focused upon the problem behaviors of one or two students, to the neglect of the  other 2022 students who are mostly doing just what the teacher wants them to do, yet  receiving virtually no teacher attention for it! 

CONCLUSION 

Good teaching is difficult work in todays classroom environment. Good teaching for a  master teacher in a supportive classroom environment is an arduous dynamic interpersonal  experience. Good teaching for novice teachers in classroom environments in which both the  teacher and the students may arrive with underdeveloped skill sets is a potentially powerful  experience; powerfully dangerous, if not recognized and handled with exactitude and care.  The results of our 2-year project suggest pedagogical expertise can be cultivated in even the  most wanting of schools, when the conditions of teacher interest, specific performance  feedback, and repeated measures align.  It is not enough to implore novice teachers to believe in high expectations and that all  students are entitled to a quality education. Teachers must be provided pedagogical practices,  backed by evidential effectiveness. Best practices coupled with beliefs of high expectation,  re-constructs a classroom pedagogy were success in students and teachers can be witnessed.  

REFERENCES 

Abbate-Vaughn, J., Frechon, O.,  Wright, B.L. 2010. Accomplished urban teaching.  Theory Into Practice, 49, 185-192.  Alvarado-Gomez, M.,  Belfiore, P.J. 2000. Effects of error correction on Spanish spelling  words for students whose primary language is Spanish. Journal of Behavioral Education,  10, 213-222.  Auld, R.G., Belfiore, P.J. Scheeler, M.C. 2010. Increasing Pre-service Teachers Use of  Differential Reinforcement: Effects of Performance Feedback on Consequences for  Student Behaviors. Journal of Behavioral Education, 19, 169-183.  Auld, R.G., Belfiore, P.J.,  Scheeler, M.A. 2007. Preparing pre-service teachers to use  positive behavior supports in general education classrooms. Pennsylvania Teacher  Educator, 6, 50-57.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Phillip J. Belfiore and Ruth Auld  112  Auld, R.G., Hayes, R.,  Belfiore, P.J. 2009. Listening comprehension in urban high school  students with learning disabilities: The role of listening while reading silently. Journal of  Evidenced-Based Practices for Schools, 10, 124-142.  Belfiore, P.J.,  Agramonte, V. 2002. Using mnemonics to increase early literacy skills in  at-risk, urban kindergarten students. Journal of Behavioral Education, 11, 181-190.  Belfiore, P.J., Auld, R.G.,  Lee, D.L. 2005. The disconnect of poor-urban education:  Equal access and a pedagogy of risk taking. Psychology in the Schools, 42, 855-863.   Belfiore, P.J., Lee, D.H. Spicer, E.,  Dexter, D. 2008. Resiliency in the classroom: The  role of behavioral momentum. In School psychology: 21st century issues and challenges.  D.H. Molina Ed. pp.213-233. Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publishers.  Blackwell, A.,  McLaughlin, FT., 2005. Using guided notes, choral responding and  response cards to increase student performance. The International Journal of Special  Education, 20, 1-5.  Campbell-Whatley, G.D.,  Comer, J. 2000. Self-concept and African-American student  achievement: Related issues of ethics, power and privilege. Teacher Education and  Special Education, 23, 19-31.  Carey, K., 2004. The real value of teachers: Using new information about teacher  effectiveness to closing the achievement gap. Thinking K-16, 8, 3-32.  Conroy, M.A., Sutherland, K.S., Snyder, A.L.,  Marsh, S. 2008. Classwide interventions:  Effective instruction makes a difference. Teaching Exceptional Children, 40, 24-30.   Cuban, L. 2004. Meeting challenges in urban schools. Educational Leadership, 81, 64-69.  Engelmann, S., Becker, W.C., Carnine, D., Gersten, R. 1988. The direct instruction Follow  Through model: Design and outcome. Education and Treatment of Children, 11, 303317.  Freire, P. 1998. Pedagogy of freedom: Ethics, democracy, and civic courage. NY: Rowan   Littlefield.  George, P.S., 2005. A rationale for differentiating instruction in the regular classroom.  Theory Into Practice, 44, 185-193.   Greenwood, C.R., Delquadri, J.C.,  Vance Hall, R. 1984. Opportunities to respond and  student academic performance. In W.L. Hewrd, T.E. Heron, D.S. Hill,  J. Trap-Porter  Eds., Focus on behavior analysis in education pp58-88. Columbus, OH: Merrill.   Goldenberg, I.I., Kunz, D., Hamburger, M.,  Stevenson, J.M. 2003. Urban education:  Connections between research, propaganda, and prevailing views of education.  Education, 123, 628-634.   Haberman, M. 1991. The pedagogy of poverty versus good teaching. Phi Delta Kappan, 4,  290-294.  Hilliard, A. 2003. No mystery: Closing the achievement gap between Africans and  excellence. In T. Perry, C. Steele,  A. Hilliard eds. Young, gifted and black:  Promoting high achievement among African-American students, pp. 131-166. Boston:  Beacon Press.  Hoadley, U., 2003. Time to Learn: pacing and the external framing of teachers work.  Journal of Education for Teaching, 29,265-274.  hooks, b. 2003. Teaching community: A pedagogy of hope. NY: Routledge.  Hurwitz, N.,  Hurwitz, S. 2005. The challenge of teacher quality: High standards and  expectations must apply to teachers as well as to students. American School Board  Journal, April, 38-41.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Urban Classroom Pedagogy  113 Hutchinson, J.M.,  Belfiore, P.J. 1998. Adding a sequence of high-preference mathematic  problems to increase low-preference mathematics problems performance. Proven  Practices, 1, 12-16.  Ingersoll, R.M. 2004. Why do high-poverty schools have difficulty staffing their classrooms  with qualified teachers? Washington DC: Center for American Progress and Institute for  Americas Future.   Kennedy, E.,  Shiel, G. 2010. Raising literacy levels with collaborative on-site  professional development in an urban disadvantaged school. The Reading Teacher, 63,  372-383.   Kunjufu, K. 1984. Developing positive self-images and discipline in black children.  Chicago: African American Images.  Lane, G.M. 2008. Reflections on 30 years of teaching in East Harlem. Livermore CA:  WingSpan Press.   Mautone, J.A., Luiselli, J.K.,  Handler, M.W., 2006. Improving implementation of  classroom instruction through teacher-directed behavioral consultation: A single-case  demonstration. International Journal of Behavioral and Consultational Therapy, 2,432438.  McCurdy, B.L., Kunsch, C.,  Reibstein, S. 2007. Secondary prevention in the urban  school: Implementing the behavior education program. Preventing School Failure, 51,  12-19.   McKinney, S.E., Campbell-Whately, G.D.,  Kea, C.D. 2005. Managing student behavior  in urban classrooms: The role of teacher ABC assessments. The Clearing House, 79, 1620.   McLaren, P. 2003. Life in schools: An introduction to critical pedagogy in the foundations  of education. Boston: Allyn  Bacon.  National Commission for Teaching and Americas Future 2002. Unraveling the teacher  shortage problem: Teacher retention is the key. Washington DC: U.S. Government  Printing Office.   Nies, K.A.,  Belfiore, P.J. 2006. Enhancing spelling performance in students with learning  disabilities. Journal of Behavioral Education, 15, 163-170.  Nygreen, K. 2006. Reproducing or challenging power in the questions we ask and the  methods we use: A framework for activist research in urban education. The Urban  Review, 38, 1-26.   Palmer, P. 1998. The courage to teach: Exploring the inner landscape of a teachers life.  San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.  Perry, T. 2003. Up from the parched earth: Towards a theory of African-American  achievement. In T. Perry, C. Steele,  A. Hilliard eds. Young, gifted and black:  Promoting high achievement among African-American students, pp 1-10. Boston: Beacon  Press.  Rist, R.C. 1970. Student social class and teacher expectations: The self-fulfilling prophecy  in ghetto education. Harvard Educational Review, 40, 411-451.  Shippen, M.E., Houchins, D.E., Steventon, C.,  Sartor, D. 2005. A comparison of two  direct instruction reading programs for urban middle school students. Remedial and  Special Education, 26, 175-182.  Soodak, L. C. 2003. Classroom management in inclusive settings. Theory into Practice, 42,  327-333.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Phillip J. Belfiore and Ruth Auld  114  Terrill, M.,  Mark, D. 2000. Preservice teacher expectations for schools with children of  color and second-language learners. Journal of Teacher Education, 57, 149-155.  Thompson, G.L., Warren, S.,  Carter, L. 2004. Its not my fault: Predicting high school  teachers who blame parents and students for students low achievement. The High School  Journal, FebMarch, 5-14.   Thompson, S., Ransdell, M., Rousseau, C. 2005. Effective teachers in urban school settings:  Linking teacher disposition and student performance on standardized tests. Journal of  Authentic Learning, 2, 22-36.  Trussell, R.P. 2008. Classroom universals to prevent problem behavior. Intervention in  School and Clinic, 43, 179-185.  Warren, S.R. 2002. Stories from the classroom: How expectations and efficacy of diverse  teachers affect the academic performance of children in poor urban schools. Educational  Horizons, 80, 109-116.  Woodcock, R. W. 1998. Woodcock Reading Mastery Test -Revised NU. Circle Pines, MN:  American Guidance Service. 

Reviewer: David H. Lee, Ph.D. The Pennsylvania State University 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

In: Classrooms: Management, Effectiveness and Challenges  ISBN 978-1-61324-601-6  Editor: Rebecca J. Newley, pp. 115-132   2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 

Chapter 6 

THE RACIST TEACHER REVISITED:   RACE AND SOCIAL SKILLS IN A NATIONALLY  REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE OF AMERICAN CHILDREN 

Kevin M. Beaver1, John Paul Wright2 and Matt DeLisi3  1Florida State University, USA  2University of Cincinnati, USA  3Iowa State University, USA 

ABSTRACT 

A long line of research finds consistently that African American students are  significantly more likely than white students to be subjected to a range of negative school  sanctions. Several researchers attribute this differential to racially biased appraisals of  African Americans behaviors by teachers and school administrators. Using data from the  ECLS-Kthe largest sample of kindergarten and first grade students ever createdwe  test whether there are statistically significant differences in social skills between whites  and African Americans at the start of their educational careers. We then evaluate whether  teacher characteristics, including their race, have any impact on their evaluations of  student social skills. The findings provide no evidence suggesting that teachers are biased  against black students. The data do reveal, however, that black students enter school with  substantial social skills deficits. 

INTRODUCTION 

One of the most pressing issues in contemporary educational research is the  disproportionate disciplinary infractions that exist between black and white students  Garibaldi, 1992; Skiba and Leone, 2001; Skiba, Michael, Nardo, and Peterson, 2002;  Townsend, 2000. A long line of research consistently finds that black students are  significantly more likely to be subjected to a range of negative school sanctions Garibaldi,  1992; Skiba, Simmons, Staudinger, Rausch, Dow, and Feggins, 2003 Virtually every  punitive sanction that is at the disposal of teachers and school administrators is   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kevin M. Beaver, John Paul Wright and Matt DeLisi  116  disproportionately employed against black students. Black students, for example, are  significantly more likely to be removed from the classroom, to be sent to the principals  office, and to be suspended or expelled Skiba, Peterson, and Williams, 1997even in  grades as early as kindergarten Gilliam, 2005; McFadden and Marsh, 1992.   Despite a vast array of research investigating the causes of punishment disparities, the  factors accounting for these differences remain unclear. Two prominent explanations have  been advanced, however. On the one hand, some researchers argue that racial disparities in  school punishment are the result of a silent conspiracy levied against minorities Johnson,  Boyden, and Pittz, 2001; Skiba and Leone, 2001; Skiba, Michael, Nardo, and Peterson, 2002;  Skiba et al., 2003; Townsend, 2000. According to this argument, anti-minority values and  sentiments flow through the educational system, resulting in a sublime form of institutional  racism Gordon, Piana, and Keleher, 2000. The disproportionate recognition and labeling of  minority students behavior as deviant, and the subsequent sanctions that emerge out of these  differential interpretations, are, according to this position, indisputable evidence of racism.   On the other hand, insight from various disciplines hints at the possibility that  punishment disparities could actually reflect the differential rates of misbehavior observed  between black and white students Epstein, March, Conners, and Jackson, 1998; Thernstrom  and Thernstrom, 1997. Although Skiba and his colleagues 2002:335 conclude that no  previously published research studying differential discipline and rates of behavior by  race has found any evidence that the higher rates of discipline received by African American  students are due to more serious or more disruptive behavior, a large pool of research  examining antisocial behavior suggests otherwise DeLisi and Regoli, 1999; Gottfredson and  Hirschi, 1990; Sampson, Morenoff, and Raudenbush, 2005; Walsh, 2004; Wilson, 1987;  Wilson and Herrnstein, 1985. Evidence garnered from a variety of sources, including selfreport data, parental data, teacher data, and official crime data all point in the same  directionnamely, that African Americans are disproportionately over-involved in disruptive  and rule-violating behaviors. Moreover, these differences emerge very early in life; they are  detectable as early as kindergarten Gilliam, 2005; Krishnakumar and Black, 2002. From this  viewpoint, African American and white youth differ in the prevalence and incidence in which  they import behavioral problems into schools.   Suspensions, expulsions, and other sanctions are employed at the end of an intricate chain  of events. In order for a suspensionexpulsion to be enforced, someone, presumably a teacher,  must first recognize the students misconduct and interpret such behavior as problematic. The  teacher must evaluate the students action and determine whether it is serious enough to bring  to the principals, or another school administrators, attention. Usually the decision of  whether to suspendexpel a student rests in the hands of school administrators, not teachers.  The process leading up to the decision to suspend or expel the student, however, begins with  the teachers subjective evaluation of the students conduct. If, for whatever reason, the  teacher fails to interpret the event as warranting punishment, or fails to inform administrators  of the behavior, then the students action will remain unpunished. In this sense, teachers can  be viewed as the gatekeepers of exclusionary disciplinary practices. Only when a teacher  appraises the students behavior as troublesome, dangerous, or otherwise disruptive enough to  warrant further disciplinary action by school administrators, will the student have the  potential to receive a suspension or expulsion. Suspensions and expulsions thus hinge on  teachers subjective appraisals of their students behaviors, social skills, and other observable  classroom interactions.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

The Racist Teacher Revisited  117 Using the largest nationally representative sample of kindergarten and first grade  students, we test two hypotheses. First, we ascertain whether there are statistically significant  differences in social skills between whites and African Americans at the start of their  educational careers. Secondly, we evaluate whether teacher characteristics, including their  race, have any impact on their evaluations of student social skills. If proponents e.g., Skiba et  al., 2002; Skiba et al., 2003; Skiba and Leone, 2001 of the teacher bias argument are  correct, and racism is deeply embedded in the educational system, then white teachers would  rate the social skills of black and white students differentially. Together, these two hypotheses  form the backbone of the present paper. 

LITERATURE REVIEW 

Differential Social Control by Race 

In comparison to white students, African Americans fare much worse at school Farkas,  2003; McWhorter, 2000; Thernstrom and Thernstrom, 2003. Black students are more likely  to drop out of school, to earn lower grades, and to fail to obtain their high school degrees. On  standardized tests, black students score significantly lower on assessments of mathematical  and reading comprehension, and on knowledge of science Farkas, 2003; Rathbun, West, and  Hausken, 2004. These findings hold regardless of the sample employed, the grade level  examined, or the location studied. Black-white differences, however, are not limited merely to  academic achievements. Rather, black students also are disproportionately represented in  exclusionary disciplinary practices Skiba et al., 1997; Skiba et al., 2002; Townsend, 2000.  These widespread and pervasive black-white disparities have led some to conclude that the  behaviors of black students are detected, labeled, and processed differentially.   One line of inquiry has recently presented findings purportedly showing that racism is the  sole cause of punishment disparities between black and white students Skiba et al., 1997;  Skiba et al, 2002; Skiba et al., 2003; Skiba and Leone, 2001. Using data collected from  11,001 sixth, seventh, and eighth, and ninth grade students enrolled in an urban school  district, Skiba and his colleagues 2002 examined whether African Americans were  disproportionately subjected to suspensions and expulsions. Their data revealed that although  black students made up only fifty-six percent of the school enrollment, they accounted for  over sixty-eight percent of all suspensions and over eighty percent of all expulsions. They  Skiba, Michael, Nardo, and Peterson, 2002:322 also noted that prior investigations of  behavior, race, and discipline have yet to provide evidence that African American students  misbehave at a significantly higher rate than other students. Based on the extant research and  their own analyses, Skiba and his associates conclude that racism is a main factor in blackwhite differences in exclusionary disciplinary actions.   Skiba points out that suspensions and expulsions usually originate in the classroom, with  a teacher subjectively appraising the behavior of black students as problematic and reacting to  it differentiallyperhaps by recommending that the student be removed from the class or  even the school. For a student to be referred to the central office by a teacher, notes Skiba  and his colleagues 2003:5, there must be a judgment made by the teacher that a behavior is  too severe to be handled at the classroom level. According to Skiba and colleagues Skiba et   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kevin M. Beaver, John Paul Wright and Matt DeLisi  118  al., 2002; Skiba et al., 2003, disciplinary actions emerge out of the way in which teachers  evaluate and appraise the behaviors of their students. According to proponents of the racist  conspiracy doctrine, white teachers are more likely to judge the actions of black students as  threatening, troublesome, and dangerous. They argue that these appraisals, in all likelihood,  translate into more suspensions and expulsions for African American students. It is important  not to casually gloss over this point. Teacher perceptions and ratings of students set into  motion a series of events that may ultimately lead to an expulsion or suspension. Only when a  teacher interprets a students action as troublesome, dangerous, or otherwise disruptive will  the student possibly receive a disciplinary infraction. And, if teachers differentially assess  black students behaviors and social skills as more bothersome, then this could start to explain  the black-white gap in disciplinary sanctions.  Recently, Downey and Pribesh 2004 provided a sophisticated analysis examining  whether teacher evaluations of students behavior are dependent upon the race of the teacher.  To address this issue, Downey and Pribesh analyzed a sample of kindergartners from the  Early Childhood Longitudinal StudyKindergarten Class ECLS-K and a sample of eighth  grade students from the National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 NELS. For the  kindergarten sample, they examined whether teacher evaluations of externalizing problem  behaviors and approaches to learning were influenced by the teachers race once relevant  school characteristics, teacher characteristics, and student characteristics were controlled.  Analysis of the ECLS-K data revealed average levels of behavioral differences between white  and black students varied by the race of the teacher. However, black teachers rated black  students behaviors more positively when compared with the ratings of white students  behaviors by white teachers. White teachers, on the other hand, rated black students as having  more problem behaviors. Students, especially black students, benefited from having a samerace teacher.   Similar results were garnered using the older sample of students from the NELS. Using  slightly different teacher ratings of students effort and students disruptiveness, Downey and  Pribesh 2004 found that when they did not control for the race of the teacher, black students  were rated as more disruptive and rated as exerting less effort than were white students.  Additional analyses, however, revealed that once the race of the teacher making the  evaluation was taken into account, black students were rated quite differently. Indeed, black  students matched with black teachers were evaluated as demonstrating more effort than white  students matched to white teachers. Results for the models predicting disruptiveness also  were very telling. When students were matched with their same race teacher, the results  suggested that white students and black students were rated equivalently on the disruptiveness  scale.   Not all research, however, reveals that white teachers evaluate black students more  negatively Chang and Sue, 2003; Pigott and Cowen, 2000. For example, Farkas 1996  examined the relationship between the teachers race and subjective evaluations of their  students. Farkas employed a sample of 486 students and their teachers from the Dallas  Independent School District DISD. Using an analytical strategy closely akin to Downey and  Pribeshs 2004, Farkas examined whether the race of the teacher was predictive of two  dependent variables: teacher ratings of student disruptiveness and teacher ratings of student  appearance and dress. Their analysis did not reveal that white teachers were biased against  black students on either outcome measure. Contrary to the results garnered by Downey and  Pribesh 2004, Farkass examination of the DISD data demonstrated that African   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

The Racist Teacher Revisited  119 American teachers consider African American students to be much more disruptive than do  white teachers Farkas, 1996:102.  

Differential Behavior by Race 

There are at least four reasons to believe that black students may arrive at school with  more social deficiencies. First, many of the known risk factors for antisocial behavior are  heavily saturated in poor, black, urban communities Wilson, 1987. Black children, for  example, are more likely than their white counterparts to grow up in poverty, to reside in  violence-ridden areas, to have little or poor healthcare coverage, and to have received  inadequate prenatal care Brown and Bzostek, 2003; Currie, 2005; Echevarria and Frisbie,  2001; Wilson, 1987. African Americans are more likely to be born prematurely, to be born  with a low or very low birth weight Hessol, Fuentes-Afflick, and Bacchetti, 1998; Sastry and  Hussey, 2003, and to be exposed to neurotoxins that interfere with healthy human development. The confluence of these factors place African American children in a disadvantaged  position, both academically and behaviorally.   Second, black children also enter school less well-prepared than white children.  Compared to white parents, black parents talk less to their children, read less to their children,  and are less likely to expose their children to the necessary information needed for normal  language acquisition and the opportunity to excel at school Brooks-Gunn and Markman,  2005. The end result is that black students, even as early as kindergarten, may be more likely  to engage in socially-taxing behaviors and to have comparatively limited social functioning.  Third, once children arrive at school, there is evidence that black students are less  interested in learning and less concerned about earning high grades but see Tyson, 2002.  Steinberg 1996, for example, presents data revealing that African American students spend  less time studying and more time watching television than white and Asian students. These  findings should by no means be trivialized. As other researchers have noted, excelling at  school, at least for some black students, may be interpreted as acting white Fordham and  Ogbu, 1986 and result in African American students being ostracized by their peers. Indeed,  many black students struggle with the prospect of being labeled too white Steinberg,  1996. To reinforce and preserve their identity, black students may publicly denounce the  importance of school by being combative toward their teachers, by breaking school rules, and  by intentionally taking a lackadaisical approach to academics.   Fourth, black-white differences in suspensions and expulsions mirror the racial disparities  found for juvenile delinquency and for adult criminal behaviorhinting at the possibility that  black-white differences in behavior extend outward over the life course. African Americans  are disproportionately over involved in crime, delinquency, and antisocial behavior DeLisi  and Regoli, 1999; Hawkins, Laub, and Lauritsen, 1998. In the words of Wilson and  Herrnstein 1985:461 No matter how one adjusts for other demographic factors blacks tend  to be overrepresented by a factor of four to one among persons arrested for violent crimes,  and by a factor of nearly three to one among those arrested for property crimes.   The pattern of results garnered from self-report surveys also show racial disparities  similar to those of official crime data except the differences are somewhat attenuated Walsh,  2004. Keep in mind that African American youth tend to underreport their involvement in all  forms of delinquency, particularly the most violent acts Hindelang, Hirschi, and Weis, 1981.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kevin M. Beaver, John Paul Wright and Matt DeLisi  120  Even so, self-report data consistently reveal black-white differences in delinquency. For  example, evidence from the National Youth Survey NYSone of the largest and most  widely-used criminological data setsreveals that African Americans are disproportionately  over-involved in misbehavior Elliott, 1994. Such results are not isolated. The Office of  Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention OJJDP, 1999:5 conducted an independent  analysis of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth NLSY and found self-reported  delinquent and deviant behaviors of youth varied by race One noteworthy finding from  the OJJDPs examination of the NLSY was that 21 percent of all black males aged 12-16  years old indicated they committed assault in the previous year compared to 15 percent of  white males OJJDP, 1999. Self-report data also show that low SES young black males are  significantly more likely to engage in violent acts e.g., attacked somebody with the intent to  inflict injury than are young white males from low SES Paschall, Flewelling, and Ennett,  1998. Of course the above sets of findings are by no means exhaustive but they do highlight  the robustness of black-white differences in misbehavior. 

CURRENT FOCUS 

Downey and Pribeshs 2004 findings suggest that white teachers have a working bias  against black students, at least when evaluating their behaviors and learning strategies. In the  current paper we also use the ECLS-K and seek to build upon and to extend Downey and  Pribeshs 2004 previous work in three important ways. First, unlike Downey and Pribesh,  we use information collected about the children in kindergarten and in first-grade. By  capitalizing on the longitudinal design of the ECLS-K we are able to establish temporal  ordering among the variables and determine if a bias exists in first grade teacher evaluations  of students social skills. Second, and unlike previous work, we use a more global outcome  measure that taps into general problems that the student exhibits within the classroom. Prior  research tends to use disaggregated measures of social skills e.g., externalizing problem  behaviors and approaches to learning that do not tap into the full range of behavioral  problems that are evident in the most troublesome students Campbell, 1995. Third, we use a  slightly different analytic strategy to examine whether the teacher bias is sensitive to different  methodological and statistical procedures. For example, Downey and Pribeshs 2004; see  also Farkas, 1996 analysis is based on a matching design wherein they examine a series of  interactions based on the teachers and students race e.g., black teacher-black student, white  teacher-black student. In contrast, we use a more parsimonious model that uses a  dichotomous measure of the teachers race i.e., black teacher; white teacher. Each model is  calculated for the full sample, a black sub-sample, and a white sub-sample.  

METHODS 

Sample 

Data for this paper come from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten  Class of 1998-1999 ECLS-K. The ECLS-K is a large, longitudinal nationally representative   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

The Racist Teacher Revisited  121 sample of kindergarten children, their parents, their teachers, and their schools. The ECLS-K  used a dual frame, multi-stage sampling design that included over 21,000 kindergartners in  approximately 1,000 different schools. To date, information has been garnered about the same  children, through extensive interviews with their parents, their teachers, and their school  administrators. Four waves of data have been collected thus far. The first wave of data was  collected in the fall of kindergarten 1998. The second wave of data was gathered in the  spring of kindergarten near the end of the students first year of formal education. Waves  three and four of the ECLS-K were collected in the fall 1999 and spring of first grade  2000. However, in the fall of their first grade only a small sub-sample of students was  assessed. We, therefore, use data only from the three waves for which the total sample was  interviewed. After deletion of missing cases, our final analytical sample consisted of 6,969  students embedded in 1,114 schools. 

Measures 

Dependent Variable  Social Skills. The ECLS-K used an adapted version of the Social Skills Rating Scale  SSRS developed by Gresham and Elliot 1990 to measure social skills in kindergarten and  first-grade students. The SSRS includes a number of subscales that indexes a variety of social  skills, including misbehavior. Although both parent and teacher SSRS reports are available,  we focused on the teacher reports because of our research question i.e., are teachers racially  biased?. The wave 2 and wave 4 social skills scales are each comprised of the three  following subscales: teacher reports of self-control, teacher reports of approaches to learning,  and teacher reports of the students externalizing problem behaviors wave 2  .84; wave 4   .84. The self-control subscale was designed to measure the childs ability to control and  regulate their own behavior. The approaches to learning subscale indexed how well the child  concentrated and remained focused on difficult tasks. The externalizing problem behaviors  subscale captured the frequency with which the child fights, argues, acts impulsively, and gets  angry. Overall, then, this scale encapsulates not only behavioral problems but also more  subtle social deficiencies that may lead to poor achievement and the inability to thrive in the  classroom. Items for the social skills scale are scored 1never, 2sometimes, 3often, and  4very often. Previous investigations of the SSRS has found the scales and subscales to be  reliable and valid Benes, 1995; Gresham, 2001. Higher scores represent less social skills.   The social skills measure is a unique scale that allows us to examine a wide array of  potential problems exhibited by kindergarten and first-grade students. At all ages, but  particularly in very young children, social skills are important tools needed to form  relationships, to deal with complex social interactions, and to abide by school rules. Children  with deficient or limited social skills may consistently violate social expectations, which, in  turn, heightens their risk of school failure and increases their odds of displaying observable  maladaptive behavioral patterns at school. The sensitivity of this scale to detect minor  differences gives teachers much discretion in how to deal with their students. And since most  suspensions and expulsions flow directly from teacher-student encounters Skiba et al., 2003,  this scale is a useful way to gauge whether teachers, in the very beginning of the disciplinary  process, appraise white students and black students differentially. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kevin M. Beaver, John Paul Wright and Matt DeLisi  122  Level-1 Predictors 

Teacher Characteristics  To determine if student evaluations are contingent upon certain characteristics of the  teacher making the judgment, we employed three teacher measures. To assess whether white  teachers are racially biased against black students, we included a dummy measure of the  teachers race 0black; 1white. In addition, our analyses also incorporate a measure of the  teachers highest education level and the number of years of teaching experience.  

Cognitive Complexity  Intelligence has been found to be a strong predictor of behavioral problems Hirschi and  Hindelang, 1977; Wilson and Herrnstein, 1985. To take this finding into consideration, we  utilized a cognitive complexity scale. A cognitive assessment battery was administered to the  ECLS-K children in the spring of kindergarten. The assessment battery was comprised of  three distinct parts: language and literacy, mathematical skills, and general knowledge. To  create the cognitive complexity scale, these three scores were combined  .84.  

Control Variables  Three control variables were also included in our analyses. Gender 1female; 2male  and race 0black; 1white were coded as dummy variables. We also developed a  neighborhood disadvantage scale to capture the extent of neighborhood problems faced by the  ECLS-K children. Five items, reported by the parents during the wave 2 interview, were  summed together to form the neighborhood disadvantage scale. Parents were asked how safe  is it for your child to play outside, whether garbage and litter are visible on the street, whether  there are problems with people selling and using drugsalcohol in the neighborhood, whether  there are problems with burglaries and robberies in the neighborhood, if there are problems  with violent crime, and if there are vacant houses nearby. Higher scores indicate more  problems in the neighborhood  .76.  

Level-2 Predictors 

Percent Minority  Students attending schools with high concentrations of minority students tend to score  lower on standardized tests and, more generally, have lower educational achievements  Bankston and Caldas, 1996; Roscigno, 1998. To examine the potential effects of the  percentage of minority students at a school on student misbehavior, we include a measure of  percent minority attending the school. At wave 4, school administrators were asked to  indicate the percentage of minorities currently enrolled at their school. However, to help  ensure anonymity, the percentage of minorities at each scale was collapsed into five  categories. The coding scheme was: 10 to less than 10 percent, 210 to less than 25 percent,  325 to less than 50 percent, 450 to less than 75, and 5more than 75 percent.  

School Crime  To determine the extent of crime within the school, teachers were asked at wave 4 if  children carried weapons to school, if there was widespread theft committed by students, and   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

The Racist Teacher Revisited  123 if physical attacks and fights were a problem within the school. If the teacher responded yes  then each component item was scored 1; if they responded no the item was coded 0. The  additive scale, therefore, ranged between 0 and 3, with higher scores representing more  school crime  .52  

Public School  To take into account potential differences between public and private schools, we  included a dummy measure for the type of school the child was attending during the spring of  their first grade. Private schools were assigned a score of 2 and public schools were coded as  1.  

Analytical Plan  The analysis proceeds in two stages. First, prior researchers have maintained that black  students and white students do not differ in terms of their behaviors and observable social  skills Skiba et al., 2002. To test this hypothesis and examine whether African American and  white students differ on the measures that will be included in the multivariate models, we  conduct a series of t-tests. The estimates gleaned from the t-tests will provide us with initial  information about whether black and white students differ significantly on a variety of  characteristics, including the social skills scale.  The next step in the analysis is to determine whether teachers, particularly white teachers,  are biased in their assessments of black students social skills. Since we are dealing with a  data set that contains information at multiple levels of analysis i.e., the child-level and the  school-level, a number of the assumptions of ordinary least squares OLS regression are  violated and we are forced to use a different statistical procedure. Fortunately, Hierarchical  Linear Modeling HLM was developed to account for the clustering of students within  schools, the loss of independence, and other problems that surface with non-randomly  distributed observations Bryk and Raudenbush, 1988; Bryk and Raudenbush, 1992.  Moreover, by calculating multilevel models, we are able to partial out the effects of broader  environmentaland school-level influences that may potentially influence the students  development of and capacity to use social skills effectively. All of the parameter estimates are  generated from the statistical software package HLM5.   HLM, and multilevel models in general, can be thought of as series of interlocking  equations operating at two different levels: the individualor student-level Equation 1 and  the aggregateor school-level Equation 2 Bryk and Raudenbush, 1992. These two  equations can easily be combined to construct the reduced form equation Equation 3. In  matrix notation, the multilevel equations can be expressed as:  

Equation 1   yj  Xjj  rj  Equation 2 j  Wj  uj  Equation 3   yj  XjWj  Xjuj  rj 

where yj is the response vector for the social skills scale for group j, Xj is the design matrix  for the student-level predictors, Wj is the design matrix for the school-level predictors,  is  the vector containing the fixed regression coefficients, uj is the vector for the school-level  error variances, and rj is the vector of student-level residuals Curran, 2003.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kevin M. Beaver, John Paul Wright and Matt DeLisi  124  Before proceeding to the analysis, it is important to note that we divided our full sample  into two different groups: a black subsample n1,036 and a white subsample n5,933.  Each of our equations, therefore, was calculated on three different samples, the full sample,  the black subsample, and the white subsample. We also note that we calculated two different  equations for all three samples. The first equation, with the wave 4 social skills scale as the  dependent variable, includes all of the student-level variables except the wave 2 social skills  scale prior levels of social skills and includes all of the schoolclassroom predictors. The  second equation is an exact duplicate of the first equation but now it includes the measure of  deficient social skills measured one year earlier. Including this measure changes the outcome  variable from deficient social skills to change in deficient social skills between wave 2 and  wave 4. Essentially, the wave 2 social skills measure strips away any variation in the wave 4  scale that is accounted for by stability, leaving only variation that can be attributed to change.  This process provides a very conservative estimate of the predictors in each model.  

RESULTS 

We begin our analysis by calculating a series of t-tests. As revealed in Table 1, there are  marked and statistically significant differences for all of the measures. Black students are  more likely to have black teachers, to have teachers with lower levels of education, and to  have teachers with less experience in the workforce. As can be seen in the middle section of  the table, blacks also score substantially lower on cognitive assessments and tend to reside in  more disadvantaged neighborhoods.  

Table 1. Mean Differences between Whites and Blacks on Selected ECLS-K Variables  t-Tests 

Variables  White Mean  Black Mean  T-Value  Teacher Measures 

Race of Teacher  .98  .70  19.09  Highest Education Level  3.12  2.95  5.23  Years as a Teacher  15.03  12.91  6.14  Individual Measures 

Cognitive Complexity  161.80  141.18  26.26  Neighborhood Disadvantage  6.44  7.23  14.52  First-Grade Social Skills  5.25  6.02  12.37  Kindergarten Social Skills  5.05  5.87  13.78  School Measures 

Percent Minority  1.78  4.04  58.32  School Crime  .42  .81  13.58  Public School  1.26  1.12  12.39   Significant at the .05 level. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

The Racist Teacher Revisited  125 Table 2. HLM Fixed Effects Models Predicting Deficient Social Skills   for First Grade Students 

Variables  Full Sample  Black Sample  White Sample  Teacher Measures  Race of  Teacher  .12  .02  .42  .28  -.01  -.10 

.16  .15  .23  .20  .19  .18  Highest  Education  Level  -.01  -.01  .03  .02  -.01  -.02 

.04  .04  .12  .11  .04  .04  Years as a  Teacher  -.00  -.00  .01  .01  -.00  -.00 

.00  .00  .01  .01  .00  .00  Individual Measures  Gender  -.71  -.32  -.62  -.22  -.73  -.34 

.04  .03  .11  .11  .04  .04  Race  -.44  -.24 

.11  .09 

Cognitive  Complexity  -.03  -.01  -.03  -.01  -.03  -.01 

.00  .00  .00  .00  .00  .00  Neighborhood  Disadvantage  .04  .02  -.03  -.03  .06  .04 

.02  .01  .04  .03  .02  .02  Kindergarten  Social Skills 

.57 

.55 

.56 

.01 

.04 

.01  School Measures  Percent  Minority  .12  .12  .00  .01  -.01  -.00 

.02  .02  .06  .06  .03  .03  School Crime  .04  .04  -.12  -.13  .07  .07 

.04  .04  .08  .08  .05  .05  Public School  -.11  -.12  -.62  -.61  -.05  .06 

.07  .07  .21  .21  .07  .08   Significant at the .05 level.  Beta values reported standard errors. 

Most noteworthy for the current purposes, however, are the mean differences for the  kindergarten and first-grade social skills scales. The t-values for these scales reveal that black  students are more likely to be characterized as having less social skills than white students.  African Americans score over thirteen standard deviations higher on the kindergarten wave  2 social skills scale and over twelve standard deviations higher on the first-grade wave 4   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kevin M. Beaver, John Paul Wright and Matt DeLisi  126  social skills scale1, accordingly, these data suggest that African American children arrive at  school with substantial deficits in social skills.   To explore more fully the possibility that white teachers have a working bias against  minorities, we calculated three different HLM statistical models. Table 2 displays the results  of these findings. The first equation in model 1, depicted on the left-hand side of the table,  regresses the wave 4 social skills scale on the teacher measures, the individual measures, and  the aggregate school measures. Of particular interest are the findings associated with the  teacher characteristics, especially their race.  In the first equation none of the teacher characteristic variables reached conventional  levels of statistical significance, suggesting that the race of the teacher is not a salient  predictor of their students social skills. Only four of the measures in the first equation  exerted an independent and statistically significant effect on the outcome measure.  Specifically, males, black students, and children attending schools with a high percentage of  minority students score higher on the social skills scale. Likewise, students with low  cognitive capabilities are more likely to be classified as having limited social skills.   The results for the second equation in model 1, which residualizes the deficient social  skills scale, are similar to those garnered in the first equation. Again, none of the teacher  measures are predictive of students social skills. Of all the independent variables, only  gender, race, cognitive complexity, prior misbehavior, and the percentage of minority  students attending the school predict student social skills.  We next turn attention to the findings generated from the analysis of the sample of black  children. The pattern of results is almost identical to those found with the full sample. For  both equations, gender, cognitive complexity, and the measure of public school are  significant, while the measure of prior social skills is also significant. None of the teacher  measures maintain a significant relationship with the outcome measure for either of the  models.  The last model, depicted on the right-hand side of the table, is estimated by using the  white sample. Similar to the findings for the full and black samples, both gender and  cognitive complexity are salient predictors of social skills for both equations. Unlike the two  previous models, however, students residing in disadvantaged neighborhoods were  significantly more likely to be characterized as having deficient social skills. The results for  the teacher measures parallel those of the previous models; none of the teacher measures  reached conventional levels of significance.2   To summarize the findings, we find no compelling evidence demonstrating that teacher  characteristics, including their race, have any effect on their appraisals of student social skills. 
To rule out the possibility that all teachers, regardless of their race, rated blacks as having more limited social  skills than whites, we also used two social skills scales based only on parent responses to the SSRS. The parent  scales were closely akin to the teacher scales. For both wave 2 and wave 4, four items were used: parents  assessments of their childs self-control, their childs approaches to learning, their childs activity level, and their  childs social interactions with others. Using these scales, we calculated t-tests to ascertain if parental responses  also revealed substantive differences between whites and blacks. Similar to the findings reported for the teacher  scales, we found that blacks, in comparison to whites, scored almost nine standard deviations higher for the wave  2 social skills scale t8.80, p.001, and over six standard deviations higher for the wave 4 scale t6.14,  p.001. Given that such significant differences exist even when parents are asked about their own children, it  seems unlikely that our results can be attributed solely to racially biased teachers.  2 It is important to point out that we also calculated all of the multilevel models using the parental scale of social  skills see endnote 1 in place of the teacher social skills measure. The pattern of results was virtually identical;  none of the teacher characteristics, including their race, reached statistical significance analyses not presented.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

The Racist Teacher Revisited  127 This finding holds across the full sample, the black subsample, or the white subsample.  Noteworthy, however, are the results revealing that compared to white children, black first  graders in the ECLS-K sample employ a restricted range of social skills while at school. We  speak to these findings in the conclusion section. 

CONCLUSION 

One of the more startling observations about the American educational system is that  African American students are disciplined at rates that far-exceed those of white students.  Two explanations have been advanced to account for this black-white disparity. First, some  scholars have advocated the position that black students are disciplined disproportionately  due, in large part, because teachers assess their behaviors differentially. According to this  argument, teachers and school administrators, either consciously or unconsciously, evaluate  black students as lacking social skills. The second explanation for the black-white gap is that  black students have acquired fewer social skills and, therefore, are more likely to be  disruptive.   Using the largest longitudinal sample of kindergarten and first grade students, we tested  these two competing perspectives. We first addressed the question of whether black students  engaged in more problematic behaviors than did white students. T-tests revealed substantial  differences, wherein white students scored significantly higher on measured social skills than  black students. We should also note that to collaborate this finding, we analyzed parental  reports of child social skills. The results gleaned from the t-tests using parental reports of  child social skills produced virtually identical results analyses not presented; see endnote 1.  In both instances, black children were characterized as having a limited set of social skills.   To test the possibility that white teachers are biased against black students, we examined  whether the teachers race had an appreciable effect on their evaluations of black and white  students social skills. In the multilevel tests, the ECLS-K data provided no evidence that  white teachers differentially rate black students as demonstrating more deficient social skills.  Indeed, the teacher characteristics did not have a measurable impact on the subjective  appraisal of their students social skills. The findings reinforce prior research showing that  teachers provide accurate, reliable, and valid assessments of their students Cairns and Cairns,  1994; Perry and Meisels, 1996.   The multilevel models also revealed that student race, even in multivariate equations,  continued to be a significant predictor of limited social functioning. Stated differently, the  race of the student predicted variation in social skills, net of teacher characteristics Pigott and  Cowen, 2000; Zimmerman, Khoury, Vega, Gil, and Warheit, 1995. This finding is  noteworthy because it hints at the possibility that black students enter school with a restricted  range of social skills. Although prior research has tended to explain black-white disparities in  terms of a teacher bias against black students, the current results take a cautious first step  towards debunking this hypothesis.   Although much of the extant research examining black-white differences in suspensions  and expulsions appears to reveal that white teachers are biased against black students, most of  this work employs descriptive statistics, leaving open the possibility that the findings are  misspecified Skiba et al., 1997; Skiba et al., 2002. This line of research, for example,   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kevin M. Beaver, John Paul Wright and Matt DeLisi  128  compares frequencies, proportions, percentages, and other univariate statistics to bolster a  racist conspiracy argument Harry and Anderson, 1994; Skiba et al., 1997; Skiba et al.,  2002. There is good reason to believe, however, that racial differences in the subjective  appraisals of students made by teachers may be explained away when controlling for  additional covariates. Even if race is a significant predictor, it does not necessarily mean that  racism is at the heart of the problem. Just because a demographic variable, such as race, is a  predictor of a certain outcome it tells us very little about the underlying mechanisms  accounting for the relationship. These variables e.g., race, notes Walsh 2002:7 are  predictors, not explanations. Explanations, not predictors, are needed to understand the  dynamic processes that unfold and place African Americans at a high risk for school failure  Steinberg, 1996.   Research supporting the notion that teachers are prejudiced against black students is also  reported in such a way as to show that findings are in line with, and supportive of, the extant  literature. For instance, Skiba and Leones 2001:35 claim that there is no evidence  whatsoever that African American or other students of color exhibit higher rates of  misbehavior is quite the opposite conclusion established in criminology where great  efforts have been taken to understand and explicate the causes of racial differences in  adolescent delinquency and adult crime e.g., Cerknovich, Giordano, and Rudolph, 2000;  McNulty and Bellair, 2003; Paschall, Flewelling, and Ennett, 1998; Walsh, 2004. To pretend  that black Americans and white Americans engage in crime equally is to turn a blind eye to a  major social problem endemic to Americanamely, that on any given day 1 out of 3 African  American males in their twenties is under some type of surveillance by the criminal justice  system Bennett, DiIulio, and Walters, 1996; McWhorter, 2000.  The current findings do not dismiss that racism is still evident in contemporary America,  but rather question whether racism is so pervasive that it can account for black-white  differences in teacher evaluations of their students social skills. The findings are aligned  closely with McWhorters 2000 recent analysis of African Americans. In his book,  McWhorter challenges and questions conventional wisdom holding that African Americans  limited academic achievement is the result of a deep-seated bias against minorities. He traces  blacks school problems, what he calls the cult of anti-intellectualism, to the African  American culture see also Steinberg, 1996. McWhorter continues by arguing that African  Americans have been socialized to accept little responsibility for school problems, and more  importantly, to attribute these problems to racism. McWhorter argues that racism, including  racially-biased teachers, is not able to account for black-white differences in school  performance. The current findings bear this point out.   Still, we are left to reconcile why the current findings are somewhat contrary to the  findings of Downey and Pribesh 2004 even though both studies use the ECLS-K. While not  exhaustive, we offer two reasons. First, Downey and Pribesh used an imputation algorithm to  replace missing values. This procedure increased their sample size and, in turn, their  statistical power to detect significant coefficients. Second, Downey and Pribesh only used  data collected from the first wave of the ECLS-K, which was collected in the fall of the  students kindergarten year. Our sample, in contrast, employed a longitudinal design that used  data collected during the spring of kindergarten and spring of first-grade. Their work,  however, was based on data collected during the very first few months of school. These two  key differences, coupled to those previously mentioned, may partially explain the discrepancy  between our findings and those of Downey and Pribesh.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

The Racist Teacher Revisited  129 Although our findings fail to reveal that white teachers are biased against black students,  we would be remiss if we did not touch upon the major limitation of our studythe inability  to measure official disciplinary sanctions levied against the students. Unfortunately, the  ECLS-K did not include any measures pertaining to disciplinary sanctions, such as  suspensions and expulsions. Ideally we would have examined the interrelationships among  the race of the teacher, the race of the student, the students social skills, and the ultimate  outcome of classroom disruptiveness. Even so, we were able to address some of the issues  raised by prior research e.g., black students do not misbehave more frequently than white  students and found no evidence supporting the claim that white teachers favor white students  at the expense of black students. Future research may wish to build upon our study and  examine whether black students are punished more severely once taking into account their  individual characteristics, such as their social skills and behaviors. As for now, our findings  draw attention to the danger in making sweeping generalizations about teachers without  grounding such statements in empirical evidence.  

REFERENCES 

Bankston, Carl and Stephen J. Caldas. 1996. Majority African American schools and social  injustice: The influence of de facto segregation on academic achievement. Social Forces  75:535-555.  Benes, Kathryn M. 1995. Review of the social skills rating system. In Conoley and Impara  eds., Twelfth Mental Measurements Yearbook. Lincoln, NE: Buros Institute of Mental  Measurement, pp. 964-967.  Bennett, William J., John J. DiIulio, Jr., and John P. Walters. 1996. Body  Count:  Moral  PovertyAnd How to Win Americas War against Crime and Drugs. New York: Simon  and Schuster.  Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne and Lisa B. Markman. 2005. The contributions of parenting to ethnic  and racial gaps in school readiness. The Future of Children 15:139-168.  Brown, Brett V. and Sharon Bzostek. 2003. Violence in the lives of children. Cross Currents  Child Trends August:1-13.  Bryk, Anthony S. and Stephen W. Raudenbush. 1988. Toward a more appropriate  conceptualization of research on school effects: A three-level hierarchical linear model.  American Journal of Education 97:65-108.  Bryk, Anthony S. and Stephen W. Raudenbush. 1992. Hierarchical Linear Models:  Applications and Data Analysis Methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.  Cairns, Robert D. and Beverley D. Cairns. 1994. Lifelines and Risks: Pathways of Youth in  Our Time. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  Campbell, Susan B. 1995. Behavioral problems in preschool children: A review of recent  research. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 36:113-149.  Cernkovich, Stephen A., Peggy C. Giordano, and Jennifer L. Rudolph. 2000. Race, crime,  and the American Dream. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 37:131-170.  Chang, Doris F. and Stanley Sue. 2003. The effects of race and problem type on teachers  assessments of student behavior. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 71:235242.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kevin M. Beaver, John Paul Wright and Matt DeLisi  130  Curran, Patrick J. 2003. Have multilevel models been structural equation models all along?  Multivariate Behavioral Research 38:529-569.  Currie, Janet. 2005. Health disparities and gaps in school readiness. The Future of Children  15:117-138.  DeLisi, Matt and Bob Regoli. 1999. Race, conventional crime, and criminal justice: The  declining significance of skin color. Journal of Criminal Justice 27:549-558.  Downey, Douglas B. and Shana Pribesh. 2004. When race matters: Teachers evaluations of  students classroom behavior. Sociology of Education 77:267-282.  Echevarria, Samuel and W. Parker Frisbie. 2001. Raceethnic-specific variation in adequacy  of prenatal care utilization. Social Forces 80:633-655.  Epstein, Jeffery N., John S. March, C. Keith Conners, and Don L. Jackson. 1998. Racial  differences on the Conners teacher rating scale. Journal of Abnormal Child psychology  26:109-118.  Farkas, George. 1996. Human Capital or Cultural Capital? Ethnicity and Poverty Groups in  an Urban School District. New York: Aldine De Gruyter.   Farkas, George. 2003. Racial disparities and discrimination in education: What do we know,  how do we know it, and what do we need to know? Teachers College Record 105:11191146.  Fordham, Signithia and John U. Ogbu. 1986. Black students school success: Coping with  the burden of acting white. The Urban Review 18:176-206.  Garibaldi, Antoine M. 1992. Educating and motivating African American males to succeed.  Journal of Negro Education 61:4-11.  Gilliam, Walter S. 2005. Prekindergartners left behind: Expulsion rates in state  prekindergarten programs. Foundation for Child Development Policy Brief Series, No. 3  May:1-7.  Gordon, Rebecca, Libero Della Piana, and Terry Keleher. 2000. Facing the Consequences:  An Examination of Racial Discrimination in U.S. Public Schools. Available online at:  http:www.arc.orgdownloadsARCFTC.pdf.  Gottfredson, Michael and Travis Hirschi. 1990. A General Theory of Crime. Stanford, CA:  Stanford University Press.  Gresham, Frank M. and Stephen N. Elliott. 1990. The Social Skills Rating System. Circle  Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.  Harry, Beth and Mary G. Anderson. 1994. The disproportionate placement of African  American males in special education programs: A critique of the process. Journal of  Negro Education 63:602-619.  Hessol, Nancy A., Elena Fuentes-Afflick, and Peter Baccchetti. 1998. Risk of low birth  weight infants among black and white parents. Obstetrics and Gynecology 92:814-822.  Hirschi, Travis and Michael J. Hindelang. 1977. Intelligence and delinquency: A revisionist  review. American Sociological Review 42:571-587.  Johnson, Tammy, Jennifer Emiko Boyden, and William J. Pittz Eds. 2001. Racial Profiling  and Punishment in U.S. Public Schools: How Zero Tolerance Policies and High Stakes  Testing Subvert Academic Excellence and Racial Equity. Available online at:  http:www.arc.orgeraseprofilingnr.html  Krishnakumar, Ambika and Maureen M. Black. 2002. Longitudinal predictors of competence  among African American children: The role of distal and proximal risk factors. Applied  Developmental Psychology 23:237-266.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

The Racist Teacher Revisited  131 McFadden, Anna C. and George E. Marsh. 1992. A study of race and gender bias in the  punishment of school children. Education and Treatment of Children 15:140-146.  McNulty, Thomas L. and Paul E. Bellair. 2003. Explaining racial and ethnic differences in  serious adolescent violent behavior. Criminology 41:709-748.  McWhorter, John H. 2000. Losing the Race: Self-Sabotage in Black America. New York: The  Free Press.  Paschall, Mallie J., Robert L. Flewelling, and Susan T. Ennett. 1998. Racial differences in  violent behavior among young adults: Moderating and confounding effects. Journal of  Research in Crime and Delinquency 35:148-165.  Perry, Nancy E. and Samuel J. Meisels. 1996. How Accurate are Teacher Judgments of  Students Academic Performance? NCES 96-08. U.S. Department of Education,  National Center for Education Statistics. Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing  Office.  Pigott, Rowan L. and Emory L. Cowen. 2000. Teacher race, child race, racial congruence,  and teacher ratings of childrens school adjustment. Journal of School Psychology  38:177-196.  Rathbun, Amy, Jerry West, and Elvira Germino Hausken. 2004. From Kindergarten through  Third Grade: Childrens Beginning School Experiences NCES 2004-007. U.S.  Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. Washington DC: U.S.  Government Printing Office.  Roscigno, Vincent J. 1998. Race and the reproduction of educational disadvantage. Social  Forces 76:1033-1060.  Sampson, Robert J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Stephen Raudenbush. 2005.  Social anatomy  of racial and ethnic disparities in violence. American Journal of Public Health 95:224232.  Sastry, Narayan and Jon M. Hussey. 2003. An investigation of racial and ethnic disparities in  birth weight in Chicago neighborhoods. Demography 40:701-725.  Skiba, Russell J. and Peter E. Leone.  2001. Zero tolerance and school security measures: A  failed experiment. In Johnson, Boyden, and Pittz Eds., Racial Profiling and Punishment  in U.S. Public Schools: How Zero Tolerance Policies and High Stakes Testing Subvert  Academic  Excellence  and  Racial  Equity.  Available  online  at:  http:www.  arc.orgeraseprofilingnr.html  Skiba, Russell J., Robert S. Michael, Abra Carroll Nardo, and Reece L. Peterson. 2002. The  color of discipline: Sources of racial and gender disproportionality in school punishment.  The Urban Review 34:317-342.  Skiba, Russell J., Reece L. Peterson, and Tara Williams. 1997. Office referrals and  suspension: Disciplinary intervention in middle schools.   Education and Treatment of  Children 20:295-315.  Skiba, Russell J., Ada Simmons, Lori Staudinger, Marcus Rausch, Gayle Dow, and Renae  Feggins. 2003. Consistent removal: Contributions of school discipline to the schoolprison pipeline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Civil Rights Project.   Steinberg, Laurence. 1996. Beyond the Classroom: Why School Reform has Failed and What  Parents Need to Do. New York: Simon and Schuster.   Thernstrom, Abigail and Stephan Thernstrom. 2003. No Excuses: Closing the Racial Gap in  Learning. New York: Simon and Schuster.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kevin M. Beaver, John Paul Wright and Matt DeLisi  132  Thernstrom, Stephan and Abigail Thernstrom. 1997. America in Black and White: One  Nation, Indivisible. New York: Simon and Schuster.  Townsend, Brenda L. 2000. The disproportionate discipline of African American learners:  Reducing school suspensions and expulsions. Exceptional Children 66:381-391.  Tyson, Karolyn. 2002. Weighing in: Elementary-age students and the debate on attitudes  toward school among black students. Social Forces 80:1157-1189.   Walsh, Anthony. 2002. Biosocial Criminology: Introduction and Integration. Cincinnati:  Anderson.  Walsh, Anthony. 2004. Race and Crime: A Biosocial Analysis. New York: Nova.  Wilson, William Julius. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and  Public Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  Wilson, James Q. and Richard J. Herrnstein. 1985. Crime and Human Nature: The Definitive  Study of the Causes of Crime. New York: The Free Press.   Zimmerman, Rick S., Elizabeth L. Khoury, William A. Vega, Andres G. Gil, and George J.   Warheit. 1995. Teacher and parent perceptions of behavior problems among a sample of  African American, Hispanic, and Non-Hispanic students. American Journal of  Community Psychology 23:181-197. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

In: Classrooms: Management, Effectiveness and Challenges  ISBN 978-1-61324-601-6  Editor: Rebecca J. Newley, pp. 133-161   2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 

Chapter 7 

CLASSROOM ACOUSTICS: MEASUREMENTS,  SIMULATIONS AND APPLICATIONS 

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin,   Carolina Reich Marcon Passero, David Queiroz de SantAna,  Fernando Bunn, Paulo Eduardo Kirrian Fiedler   and Andressa Maria Coelho Ferreira  Laboratory of Environmental and Industrial Acoustics, and Acoustical Comfort,  Federal University of Parana, Brazil 

ABSTRACT 

In every society  past, present and probably also future , knowledge was, is, and  will undoubtedly continue to be transmitted through the process of speaking and  listening, i.e., a person transmitting knowledge orally to others who receive it.  Notwithstanding current requirements for a variety of knowledge transmission techniques  involving multimedia technologies, nothing can replace the teacher-student relationship  that is basically involved in classrooms. It is therefore crucial for classrooms to provide  optimal conditions for the development of activities inherent to education, which include  the quality of classroom acoustics.   The quality of transmitted and perceived verbal information is linked intrinsically to  the acoustic performance of the room, which in turn involves the observance of several  speech quality descriptors  Reverberation Time, Speech Transmission Index, Definition  and Centre Time. This chapter on Classroom Acoustics describes the techniques required  for in situ measurements of these parameters, which are crucial for verbal  communication. These parameters, which are based on national and international  technical standards, seek to establish reference values in order to achieve good acoustics  in classrooms. Another tool presented is computational simulation, which enables  acoustic solutions for classrooms to be tested while still in the design phase, as well as  interventions in existing buildings.  As a necessary part of the search for optimal classroom acoustics, real cases are  presented whose objects of study are university classrooms. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  134  1. INTRODUCTION 

The classroom is the environment people experience throughout the years from primary  school to university. Any nation that aspires to compete in the economic and scientific fields  of todays globalized world includes the education of its citizens in its plans. Therefore, the  classroom environment should favor the crucial practice of teaching and learning.  Education is as essential in todays societies as it was in the past. The most formal  education takes place in classrooms, where learning involves intensive verbal communication  between teachers and students Lubman and Sutherland, 2001. However diverse the  techniques for knowledge transmission aided by multimedia resources, which have become  increasingly common, nothing replaces the teacher-student relationship which is basically  developed in the classroom. It is therefore crucial for classrooms to provide the conditions  required for the satisfactory development of teaching and learning activities, especially  teacher-student communication. It is in this context that the importance of classroom  acoustics stands out.  High levels of noise in the classroom cause students to become prematurely tired,  consuming their cognitive abilities, which could be better employed in paying attention to and  understanding the content of the classes Hagen et al., 2002. Classrooms with good acoustics  aid learning, making it more efficient and pleasurable Lubman and Sutherland, 2001.  Maxwell and Evans 2000 showed that the exposure of preschool children to noise is linked  to difficulties in learning to read and write. Classrooms designed for acoustic quality lead to  better student performance.  The quality of the information transmitted by the teacher and perceived by the student is  intrinsically linked to the acoustic performance of the classroom. Speech consists of a  succession of sounds varying rapidly in intensity and frequency French and Steinberg, 1947.  Knudsen 1929 claim that noise interferes in auditory speech, producing the so-called  masking effect, which is dependent on the noise intensity compared to speech intensity. The  reverberation and the distance between speaker and listener also interfere in communication  Steinberg, 1929. The transmission path between the speaker and the listener is described by  the distribution of the speech signal in the room, and affects the deterioration of the speech  signal ISO 9921-2003.  Acoustic descriptors that characterize the quality of spoken communication, such as  Reverberation Time, Centre Time, Definition, and Speech Transmission Index, can be  predicted from the first stages of development of the architectural design and measured in  existing buildings. It is essential that the results obtained from both acoustic predictions and  in situ measurements be compatible with reference criteria available in national and  international technical standards in order to ensure the quality of these rooms. This requires  the constant improvement of technical standards that establish criteria aimed at achieving  good acoustic performance in school buildings. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  135 2. ACOUSTIC DESCRIPTORS   FOR CLASSROOMS  MEASUREMENTS AND SIMULATIONS 

Oral communication requires, above all, that classrooms have an acoustic field that favors  speech intelligibility. From the first stages of planning of buildings, the achievement of this  acoustic field should be ensured.   Makrinenko 1994 argues that speech intelligibility is determined by acoustic  characteristics such as the level of the speech signal, the level of background noise, the  reverberation time and the pattern of sound reflections. The parameters strictly related to  speech intelligibility in rooms include Reverberation Time RT, Definition D50, and the  Speech Transmission Index STI. 

2.1. Reverberation Time 

The concept of reverberation time introduced by Sabine is defined as the time, in  seconds, required for the sound pressure level in a room to decay by 60 dB starting from the  interruption of a continuous sound. Reverberation time is one of the most important  parameters to describe the acoustic quality of rooms.   In live results and in results where conditions of sound diffusion prevail, the RT can be  estimated based on Sabines theory. Sabines formula, which is the most traditional one for  calculating reverberation time, is given below: 

mV A V RT 4 . 163 .0

where: 

V  is the volume of the room in m3,  A  is the equivalent sound absorption area 

n i i i S A 1

, where S  is the area of each  material, and  i   is the absorption coefficient of the materials of the rooms surfaces,  mV 4  corresponds to sound absorption by air, expressed in m2, and  m  is the energy attenuation coefficient for air, expressed in 10-3 m-1. 

Carl Eyring proposed a modification of Sabines formula. This modification would be  suitable for results with high absorption, dead results, with   higher than 0.5 seconds.  Eyring claims that Sabines formula is not valid for results with considerable absorption and  that it should be used for live rooms. Eyrings formula is based on free propagation  between reflections characterized by a diffuse sound field Eyring, 1930. Eyrings formula is  as follows: 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  136 
ln . . 163 .0

S V RT

where: 

RT  is the reverberation time in s,   V  is the rooms volume in m3,  S  is the total area of the rooms surfaces in m2,   ln  is the Neperian logarithm,    is the mean absorption coefficient of all the materials: i i iS S

. 1 

, where Si is  the area of each surface that makes up the room, and i is the sound absorption  coefficient of those materials. 

According to Fasold and Veres 2003, the condition for the application of Sabines  equation is that the rooms mean sound absorption coefficient is up to  3.0

room

 live  rooms. On the other hand, Eyrings equation is used for results where  room

 is greater than  0.3 dead rooms, i.e., with high absorption.  Analogously to the concept developed by Eyring, starting from Sabine, Millington and  Sette Millington, 1932; Sette, 1933 developed another formula for calculating the  reverberation time. Unlike Eyrings formula, that of Millington-Sette considers sound  absorption coefficients separately from the elements that constitute the environment, as  shown below: 

n 1 i i  1 ln .

. 163 .0

iS V RT s    3 

where:  RT  is the reverberation time in s,   V  is the rooms volume in m3,  iS  is the area of each surface that makes up the room, in m2,   ln  is the Neperian logarithm, and  i   is the absorption coefficient of the materials of the rooms surfaces. 

Arau-Puchades 1988 proposed a formula for calculating the reverberation time of  results with asymmetric distribution of sound absorption. The Arau-Puchades formula  assumes that reverberation decay is a hyperbolic process. This decay is the superposition of  three contributions: initial decay, first and second linear portion of the decay, and third linear  portion of the decay Neubauer and Kostek, 2001. For rectangular results, Arau-Puchades  define an absorption coefficient based on Eyrings model for each surface parallel to the three   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  137 axes of x, y and z spatial coordinates Ducourneau and Planeau 2003. Arau-Puchadess  formula for calculating the RT is as follows: 

S S z S S y S S x z y x mV S V mV S V mV S V RT
ln . 163 .0 . 4
ln . 163 .0 . 4
ln . 163 .0

where:  The first portion corresponds to the absorption of the materials located parallel to the x   axis, the second parallel to the y  axis, and the third parallel to the z axis,  mV 4  corresponds to sound absorption by air, expressed in m2,  m  is the energy attenuation coefficient of air, expressed in 10-3 m-1,  V is the volume in m3,  ln  is the neperian logarithm,  x is the arithmetic mean of the absorption coefficients of the surfaces of the floor Sx1  and ceiling Sx2, 

x x x x x x S S S 2 2 1 1

,  y and z are the arithmetic means of the absorption coefficients of the surfaces of the  side, front and back walls, respectively,  S  is the sum of the areas of all the materials, and  x S ,  y S  and  z S  are the sums of the areas of the materials that are parallel to the x , y and z axes, respectively. 

The energy attenuation coefficient m  for air is presented in Table 1 as a function of  temperature and relative humidity. 

Table 1. Energy attenuation coefficient m 10-3 m-1 for air in octave band frequencies   as a function of temperature oC and relative humidity  

Atmospheric Air  Frequency Hz  Temperature  oC  Relative   humidity 

125Hz 250Hz 500Hz 1kHz 2kHz 4kHz 8kHz  Source 1 10  20  30  50  50  50  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.2  0.5  0.7  0.8  1.0  1.2  1.7  2.8  2.3  3.0  9.8  6.5  5.8  33.6  22.4  16.4  Source 2 10  20  30  50  50  50  0.41  0.39  0.38  1.01  0.96  0.94  2.77  2.34  2.26  8.93  6.17  5.76  17.8  11.9  9.88  Source 3 10  20  30 50  30 50  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  1.1  1.0  2.7  1.9  9.4  5.8  29.0  20.3  Source: 1: Beranek-Vr 1992; Source 2: Barron 2003; Source 3: Hohmann, Setzer and Wehling  2004.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  138  The data listed in Table 1 were extracted from the following sources: 1 Beranek and Vr  1992, according to data provided by the standard ANSI S1.26:1978: Method for the  calculation of the Absorption of Sound by the Atmosphere; 2 Barron 2003 and 3  Hohmann, Setzer and Wehling 2004, according to data given in the standard DIN EN  12354-6 2000: Bauakustik  Berechnung der akustischen Eigenschaften von Gebuden aus  den Bauteileigenschaften  Teil 6: Schallabsorption von Rumen.  The factor mV 4 , which corresponds to sound absorption by air, is usually neglected in  the calculation of the reverberation time for small rooms. However, for large volumes and  especially for high frequencies, the absorption by air has a relevant effect and should  therefore not be neglected in calculations.   Table 2, adapted from Fasold and Veres 2003, shows the influence of sound absorption  by air for different volumes as a function of frequency. 

Table 2. Sound absorption by air as a function of volume and frequency 

Frequency Hz  125  250  500  1000  2000  4000  8000  Energy Attenuation Coefficient  m  10-3 m-1  Temperature 20C and relative air  humidity 50  0.075  0.25  0.75  2.5  7.5  25  Sound absorption by air mV 4 m2  V  100 m3  i.e.: a small classroom  0.03  0.1  0.3  1  3  10  V  1000 m3  i.e.: a conference room  0.3  1  3  10  30  100  V  10000 m3  i.e.: a concert hall  3  10  30  100  300  1000  V  100000 m3  i.e.: a large factory pavilion  30  100  300  1000  3000  10000   Source: Fasold and Veres 2003. 

According to the ISO 3382-1 ISO, 2009 and ISO 3382-2 standards ISO, 2008, the  reverberation time, RT, can be measured by the interrupted noise method and by the  integrated impulse response method.   Measuring the reverberation time, RT, by the interrupted noise method consists of  exciting the room with a pseudo-random pink noise and calculating the RT from the rooms  response to this excitation. A common setup to measure the RT by this method comprises: 1  an omnidirectional sound source, 2 a sound power amplifier, 3 a noise generator, 4  omnidirectional microphones, and 5 a sound decay recorder and analyzer.   Reverberation time measured by the integrated impulse response method is similar to the  previous method. The difference lies in the way this signal is processed. This mode of  measuring is less influenced by background noise than the interrupted noise method Bistafa  and Bradley, 2000; Fasold and Veres, 2003. In addition, measurements of the impulse  response allow for the analysis of other important parameters for the characterization of  speech intelligibility, such as Centre Time, Ts, Definition, D50, and Speech Transmission  Index, STI.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  139 The following equipment is normally utilized to measure the impulse response of rooms:  1 an omnidirectional source, 2 a sound amplifier, 3 an audio interface, 4 a sound signal  generator, 5 omnidirectional microphones, and 6 a sound recorder and analyzer, which  processes the sound signal and converts it into an impulse.  

Figure 1. Devices required for measuring the RT by the interrupted noise method.  Figure 2 shows the decay curves of the sound pressure level for different octave bands  MultiSpectrum for the measured RT in a classroom with a volume of 565 m3. Note the  dependence of the reverberation time as a function of frequency.  In this chapter the both methods were used to assess the acoustic quality in classrooms.  RT interrupted noise measurements were taken with Brel and Kjaer equipment and software,  comprising: 1 an omnidirectional source, 2 a sound power amplifier, 3 a BK 2260 sound  analyzer, 4 BZ 7204 software which manages the analyzer to generate and record sound  signals, and 5 Qualifier Type 7830 software, which calculates the RT from the collected  data. The impulse response was measured with the following equipment: 1 an  omnidirectional source, 2 a sound amplifier, 3 an audio interface, 4 a BK 2260 sound  analyzer, 5 BK 4953 omnidirectional microphones, and 6 Dirac 3.1 software for Windows.  For the same room, Figure 3 presents the spatial average of reverberation time obtained  from six source-microphone combinations, according to ISO 3382-2:2008.  As discussed earlier, reverberation time is the time, in seconds, required for the sound  pressure level in a room to decay by 60 dB starting from the interruption of a continuous  sound. Since a decay of 60 dB is often difficult to record because of the influence of ambient  noise on the reverberating tail, the reverberation time is extrapolated from the first 20 dB of  decay measured from the reduction of 5 dB below the initial sound pressure level down to 25  dB below that level.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  140 

Figure 2. Multispectrum of the measured reverberation time. 

Figure 3. Spatial average of the reverberation time in a classroom.  This metric is represented by the letter T followed by the index corresponding to the  measured interval, T20. T30 is calculated likewise, by recording a longer interval -5 dB to -35  dB, which is more commonly utilized ISO 3382-2, 2008. Figure 4 presents the decay  curves measured for the octave bands of 125, 250, 500, 1000, 2000 and 4000 Hz obtained  from the measurements of T20 and T30 in a classroom with a volume of 565 m3, using the  interrupted noise method, according to the ISO 3382-2:2008.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  141

Figure 4. Decay curves T20 and T30 for the determination of the reverberation time.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  142  As discussed earlier, the RT can be obtained by several calculation and measurement  procedures. Figure 5 compares the values of RT obtained by: calculations with the formulas  of Sabine, Eyring, Millington-Sette and Arau-Puchades, measurements by the interrupted  noise method and by the integrated impulse response method. The results presented in this  figure were obtained in a classroom of approximately 300 m, with an average acoustic  absorption coefficient of 0.15 at a frequency of 500 Hz. 

Figure 5. Reverberation time, RT, measured and calculated by different methods.  From Figure 5 it can be seen that the RT values obtained by the two measurement  methods are very similar, and these results are corroborated by studies conducted by Astolfi  et al. 2008 and by Passero and Zannin 2010. Moreover, Figure 5 demonstrates that the  classical formulas comprise a reliable and low-cost frame of reference for predicting the RT  in classrooms.  With regard to classrooms, various acoustic standards present reference values for the RT  that should be observed in the design of the classroom. Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom,  the United States of America, Portugal and France have specific technical standards for  evaluating the RT of classrooms.  In Japan, RT values represent the average in 2-octave bands including 500 Hz and 1000  Hz, and RT is measured in the furnished and unoccupied classroom Fukuchi and Ueno  2004. In the United Kingdom, the Building Bulletin 93 BB93, 2003 indicates that RT is  given in terms of the maximum mid-frequency reverberation time, Tmf, the average RT in the  500 Hz, 1000 Hz and 2000 Hz octave bands, and RT should be measured in the unfurnished  and unoccupied classroom.  In the USA, RT is given as the maximum RT for midband frequencies of 500 Hz, 1000  Hz and 2000 Hz, and RT is measured in the furnished and unoccupied classroom ANSI  S12.60, 2002. In Germany, the DIN 18041 2004 standard establishes that RT values  represent the average in 2-octave bands including 500 Hz and 1000 Hz, and RT is measured  in the furnished and occupied classroom.  In France, RT is calculated as the arithmetic mean of the values measured for the  frequencies of 500 Hz, 1000 Hz and 2000 Hz WHO, 2001, and in Portugal, the RT   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  143 recommended for classrooms is established as a function of two frequency ranges: 1 125 Hz   f  250 Hz, and 2 500 Hz  f  4000 Hz WHO, 2001.  The World Health Organization  WHO recommends the value of 0.6 s for the RT in  classrooms Shield and Dockrell, 2003. Table 3 shows the RT recommended in different  countries as a function of the volume of the classroom. 

Table 3. Recommended Reverberation Time for Classrooms 

Country  Reverberation Time, RT, in s  Volume, V, in m3  France  0.4  RT0.8  0.6  RT 1.2  V  250  V  250  Germany  RT  0.5  RT  0.6  RT  0.7  RT  0.8  V  125 V  250  V  500  V  750  Japan  RT  0.6  RT  0.7  V  200 V  300  Portugal  RT  1.0 for 125 Hz  f  250 Hz  0.6 RT 0.8 for 500 Hz f  4000 Hz  United  States of  America  RT  0.6  RT  0.7  V  283  283  V  566  WHO  RT  0.6  Figure 6. Reverberation time as a function of classroom volume Adapted from DIN 18041:2004.  The German standard DIN 18041:2004 recommends that, in general, the RT of an  unoccupied classroom should not be more than 0.2 s above the required value listed in Table  3. In addition, for people with impaired hearing, concentration or attention problems, and  people who speak German as a foreign language, this standard recommends that the RT be  about 20 lower than the values specified in Figure 6. This reduction in the value of the RT   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  144  should be observed for the octave bands of 250 Hz to 2000 Hz and for classrooms with a  maximum volume of 250 m3. 

2.2. Definition 

According to Huber et al. 2002, the enormous number of results obtained by different  researchers leaves no doubt that, in rooms destined for multiple uses, the reverberation time is  the main objective parameter to be observed in the evaluation of their acoustic quality. On the  other hand, the specific use of a room for music or speech requires that other acoustic  parameters be taken into account.   In environments where speech intelligibility is the main objective to be achieved, the  evaluation of RT should be complemented with an analysis of speech Definition D50 over the  areas of the audience or for a set of positions of these areas.  The parameter D50 is defined as the ratio of sound energy, direct and reflected, which is  contained in the first 50 ms of the decay curve and the total energy of the sound impulse.  Definition is expressed in percentage . Table 4 shows reference values for D50. This  parameter is calculated by means of the following equation Kuttruff, 2004; ISO 3382-1,  2009: 
50 0 50

dt t E dt t E D ms

where:  D50 is the Definition in percentage ;   t E  is the energy present in the impulse response that, in time t , reaches the receiving  point. 

Table 4. Values of reference for Definition D50 

AuthorStandard  D50 Reference values for good intelligibility  Fasold and Veres   50  DIN 18041:2004  50  ISO 3382-1:2009  30 to 70   For a minimum syllabic intelligibility of 85.   The range of recommended values refers to the mean values, in frequency, for a position in concert  halls and multiple use rooms, not occupied, and with a volume of up to 25,000 m3. These values  are obtained for the average between the frequencies of 500 and 1000 Hz. 

2.3. Centre Time 

Another parameter for the study of speech intelligibility is the Centre Time Ts. Centre  Time can be described as the center of gravity of the sound energy decay curve. At this  point there is a kind of compensation between the sound energy favorable to speech   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  145 intelligibility and the diffuse field of the room. Because this metric is not defined as a  function of a given time interval, the Centre Time avoids the discrete division of the impulse  response into early and late periods ISO 3382-1, 2009. This characteristic of the Ts  describes very closely the real behavior of sound at a given point in a room Fasold and  Veres, 2003. Table 5 lists the reference values for the Centre Time. 

Table 5. Reference values for Ts 

Reference values for good speech intelligibility Ts ms  AuthorStandard  Multipurpose results  Speech performance results  Fasold and Veres 2003  60-260   ISO 3382-1:2009  80 

2.4. Speech Transmission Index 

Among the acoustic parameters employed to characterize speech intelligibility, the  Speech Transmission Index STI is the most efficient objective metric Ronsse, 2006. The  greater processing capacity of computers, the portability of measuring equipment, and the  advent of high speed measurement techniques favor the use of this diagnostic technique.  Although the STI is similar to the articulation index AI, another descriptor of  intelligibility ANSI S3.5, 1997, certain characteristics make it especially important. The STI  considers the effects of reverberation, background noise and the contribution of the direction  of the source for the determination of speech intelligibility. These elements, which are usually  treated individually, are combined in a single index Harris, 1998 and Kang 2002. The STI  can be described as a physical quantity representing the transmission quality of speech with  respect to intelligibility IEC 60268-16 2003.  The IEC 60268-16:2003 standard establishes the measurement procedures and correlates  the subjective impression of speech intelligibility to objective values of the measured STI.  This correlation is presented in Figure 7.  To measure the STI requires that a test signal be transmitted from a sound source situated  in the speakers position to a microphone located in the listeners position. The important  characteristics for the sound source are its physical size, direction, position and sound  pressure level. Because the STI depends strongly on the directivity of the source, a mouth  simulator with characteristics similar to those of a human mouth or head should be used as the  sound source for greater precision. If a loudspeaker with characteristics different from those  of a mouth simulator is used, the levels of reflections that will reach the receiver will be  unreal Mller 2007. Bozzoli et al. 2005 contend that the shape of the directivity balloon of  the sound source is important to determine values that are correct and comparable to the STI.   Before beginning STI measurements, the sound level should be calibrated to 65 dBA  and set at a distance of one meter from the source. In addition, the sound levels of the signal  used at all the frequencies from 125 to 8000 Hz must be adjusted to ensure that the  differences between them are lower than 1 dB.  

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  146 

Figure 7. Subjective correlation of the values of STI. Adapted from IEC 60268-16 2003.  The Speech Transmission Index is then calculated from the impulse response of this  equalized signal. Figure 8 illustrates the impulse response of a classroom used to measure the  STI. 

Figure 8. Impulse response of a classroom.  In addition to measuring the impulse response, the background noise generated by the  presence of people, ventilation systems and other equipment in the room, measured or  predicted, should be mixed with the recorded impulse response. This will align the signal-toEBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  147 noise ratio of the occupied room as closely as possible to the rooms working condition and  the STI calculation will provide more accurate results. 

Figure 9. Devices required for measuring the STI.  Measuring the STI requires the following devices:1 an audio interface, 2 a frequency  equalizer octave bands, 3 a power amplifier, 4 a sound source that simulates the  characteristics of the human mouth mouth simulator, 5 microphones to capture the sound  signal, 6 a system to record the rooms impulse response, 7 a sound level meter to record  background noise, and 8 a system to mix background noise and calculate the STI usually a  software program. Figure 9 depicts the devices employed to measure the STI.  Figure 10 shows the position of the source mouth simulator in the speakers teacher  position and the microphone that captures the response of the room in the listeners student  position. 

Figure 10. Mouth Simulator in the teachers position to measure the STI in a classroom.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  148  3. CASE STUDIES IN UNIVERSITY CLASSROOMS 

This section presents several case studies carried out in classrooms at the Federal  University of Paran, Brazil.  Three classroom models are presented, which differ in terms of their volume, geometry  and wall, floor and ceiling materials. The three models differ significantly with respect to  their equivalent sound absorption.  Using the integrated impulse response method, measurements were taken in the three  classrooms of the reverberation time RT, Definition D50 and Centre Time Ts according to  the ISO 3382-2:2008 and ISO 3382-1:2009 standards and of the Speech Transmission Index  STI according to the IEC 60268-16:2003 standard  Objective rating of speech intelligibility  by the speech transmission index.   The classroom depicted in Figure 11 classroom A is shaped like an auditorium and has  a wood floor, mortared and painted brick walls with wood paneling up to 1.20 m from the  floor, a lowered ceiling lined with Acoustic-Celotex Cane Tile Knudsen and Harris, 1988,  steel frame windows with ordinary glass panes, and a wood door.   The classrooms of this model were built in the 1960s, with a seating capacity of 50  students and a volume of 269.70 m3.  

Figure 11. Classroom A  Interior View.  The classroom shown in Figure 12 classroom B has a parallel floor and ceiling, the  floor is overlaid with vinyl tiles and the ceiling with mineral fiber. Its walls are of mortared  and painted brick. The steel-framed windows have ordinary glass panes. The desks and chairs  are made of tubular steel with plywood tops, seats and backrests covered with high-strength  melamine laminate. This room has a volume of 263.41 m and seating capacity of 60 students.  The classrooms of this model were built in the 2000s.  

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  149

Figure 12. Classroom B  Interior View.  The classroom presented in Figure 13 classroom C has a vinyl floor, a ceiling of precast  reinforced concrete panels, mortared and painted brick walls, and steel-framed windows with  ordinary glass panes. Like in classroom B, the desks and chairs are made of tubular steel with  plywood tops, seats and backrests covered with high-strength melamine laminate. This room  seats 45 students and has a volume of 179.52 m. This room was also built in the 2000s. 

Figure 13. Classroom C  Interior View.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  150  Table 6 presents an acoustic evaluation of rooms A, B and C for the parameters of RT,  D50 and Ts obtained by the arithmetic mean of the frequencies of 500 Hz to 2000 Hz in octave  bands. The STI parameter was measured for a source-receptor distance of 4 m and a  background noise of 35 dBA. 

Table 6. Acoustic performance of the three classrooms 

Classroom Type  Classroom Acoustic Descriptors  RT s  D50   Ts ms  STI  A  0.6  69  44.4  0.81  B  0.8  75  33.3  0.62  C  2.2  26  141.2  0.45 

The standards listed in Table 3 recommend a RT of 0.6 s to 0.7 s for good classroom  acoustics. Table 6 indicates that only classroom A meets this standard. The RT value obtained  for classroom C characterizes a room with excessive reverberation, which is not  recommended for a classroom.  Fasold and Veres 2003 recommend D50  50 for speech and the DIN 18041 2004  standard establishes that, for a syllabic intelligibility of at least 85, the Definition should be  no less than 50. According to these recommendations, classrooms A and B have an  adequate D50, while that of classroom C is far below the minimum recommended.  The centre time Ts, similarly to the D50, is also not in line with the recommendations for  good speech intelligibility in classroom C. The measured results indicate that only classrooms  A and B, whose Ts is lower than 80 ms, meet the recommendations for this parameter.  A comparison of the data in Table 6 with the subjective classification of the  IEC16081:2003 standard see Figure 7 indicates that the classification of intelligibility for  classroom A is excellent, that of classroom B is good and that of classroom C is fair.  Rooms A, B and C characterize three very common architectural arrangements of  Brazilian classrooms. In these rooms, in addition to the geometric characteristics of the space,  the specification of the finishing materials is related directly to the acoustic performance of  the classrooms.   The search for better acoustics should be the objective of designs for new rooms and for  the restoration of existing ones. In both cases, acoustic planning of the classrooms is essential  in order to achieve good results. 

4.  ACOUSTIC PLANNING OF A CLASSROOM 

4.1. Computer Simulation 

Simulations allow for the diagnosis and acoustic adjustment of classrooms in the design  phase Schroeder, 1969. The first acoustic predictions of a room are usually made using  statistical reverberation models such as those presented here.  Larger rooms or rooms with greater geometric complexity require more complex  analyses. Physical scale or computer simulation models are among the most widely used   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  151 methods. Computer simulations have gained popularity due to their lower cost and easier  execution and testing of design alternatives compared to testing with scale models.  Suitable room acoustics simulation software programs allow not only for the  identification of reverberation time but also of other relevant acoustic parameters. They also  ensure the prediction of different combinations of the investigated metrics, the characteristics  of the room and its background noise, which is an especially significant calculation capacity  for STI evaluation Huber et al., 2002.  There are two classical geometric methods for the simulation of enclosed rooms or  spaces, called the ray tracing method and the image source method. These two methods can  be used in combination, in which case they are referred to as the hybrid method, which has  advantages over the individual methods Bradley and Wang, 2007. Rindel 2000 claims that  hybrid methods combine the best characteristics of the image source and ray tracing methods  and require significantly less calculation time. A comparison of several computer simulation  methods indicated that programs that use the hybrid method produce the best results Bradley  and Wang, 2007.   Figure 14 presents a simulation of the STI in a classroom, performed by a computer  program that uses the hybrid method, the Odeon 9.0 software. The acoustic map shows the  variation in intelligibility in the room, which is considered good to excellent, according to the  qualitative attributes of the IEC 6026816:2003 standard see Figure 7. 

Figure 14. Simulation of the STI by Odeon software.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  152  4.2. Influence of Absorbent Surfaces  

Figures 15 and 16 depict two different types of ceiling panel materials for classrooms.  The panel shown in Figure 15 was the original classroom ceiling material used in a classroom  block built in the 1960s belonging to the Technology Sector of the Federal University of  Paran. Table 7 describes the absorption coefficient of the original ceiling panel illustrated in  Figure 15. 

Table 7. Sound absorption coefficient of Acousti-Celotex Type C-7 ceiling panel 

Frequency  125 Hz  250 Hz  500 Hz  1000 Hz  2000 Hz  4000 Hz  Sound Absorption  Coefficient    0.25  0.49  0.69  0.78  0.61  0.48   Source: Knudsen and Harris, 1988. 

Figure 15. Acousti-Celotex Type C-7 ceiling panel.  The original ceiling panel was replaced with the PVC panel shown in Figure 16. The  reasons cited for substituting the ceiling panel were as follows: 1 difficult maintenance and  cleaning, and 2 difficult replacement of damaged panels. 

Figure 16. PVC ceiling.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  153 Figure 17 illustrates the reverberation time RT measured by the interrupted noise  method in four classrooms with the original ceiling see Figure 15 and with the new PVC  panels see Figure 16. The RT of the original ceiling was measured in 2004 and that of the  PVC ceiling in 2009.  Figure 17 reveals the marked difference between the reverberation times measured in  rooms with Acousti-Celotex Type C-7 ceilings Knudsen and Harris, 1988 and in rooms with  PVC ceilings. Based on the RT values measured in the two situations, the acoustic quality  was evaluated against some of the standards presented in Table 3, such as the American  standard ANSI S12.6:2002 ANSI, 2002, the Brazilian standard ABNT-NBR-12179:1992  ABNT, 1992, the French specifications listed in the Decree of 09 Jan 1995 WHO, 2001  and the German standard DIN 18041:2004. 

Figure 17. Measurement of reverberation time with acoustic ceiling panel and with PVC panel. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  154  Table 8 summarizes this evaluation and demonstrates unequivocally that, prior to the  substitution of the ceiling, most of the classrooms satisfied the quality standards for RT  according to the four standards used as reference. Classroom 04 met the requirements only of  the French standard. After the ceiling panels were replaced with PVC, none of the rooms met  the requirements of the four reference standards. 

Table 8. Evaluation of the acoustic quality of classrooms with Acousti-Celotex   and PVC ceilings 

Classrooms  American  standard  French standard  German  standard  01  Acousti-Celotex  Adequate  Adequate  Adequate  PVC  Inadequate  Inadequate  Inadequate  02  Acousti-Celotex  Adequate  Adequate  Adequate  PVC  Inadequate  Inadequate  Inadequate  03  Acousti-Celotex  Adequate  Adequate  Adequate  PVC  Inadequate  Inadequate  Inadequate  04  Acousti-Celotex  Inadequate  Adequate  Inadequate  PVC  Inadequate  Inadequate  Inadequate 

4.3. Influence of Occupation 

Another interesting factor to observe in classrooms is the influence of occupation on the  RT. To this end, the RT was measured in two models of classrooms, one built in the 1960s  Polytechnic Centre building  PC, Figure 18, and the other at the beginning of the 21st  century Botanical Garden building  BG, Figure 19. The classrooms in Figures 18 and 19  possess the following characteristics Ferreira, 2006; Zannin and Ferreira, 2009: 

Table 9. Characteristics of the classrooms in the Polytechnic Centre PC   building and the Botanical Garden BG building 

Classroom  Maximum  Number of  Students  Volume 

m3  Sound  Absorption  Area  m2  Reverberation Time RT  s  Mean RT at the frequencies of  500, 1000 and 2000 Hz   Furnished and unoccupied  rooms  PC  Polytechnic  Centre building  50  294.74  58.89  0.6  BG  Botanical  Garden building  50  277.49  15.74  2.5 

The RT measurements were taken with the classrooms empty, with 50 occupation, and  with 100 occupation. As can be seen in Figure 20, the influence of occupation is negligible   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  155 in the PC classroom, where the RT already met the recommendations of the standards  presented in Table 3 in the unoccupied condition. 

Figure 18. PC Classroom. 

Figure 19. BG Classroom.  A 50 and 100 occupation of the room resulted in a decrease in RT of 0.1 to 0.2 s.  Conversely, in the BG classroom, whose RT in the unoccupied condition failed to meet any  of the recommendations listed in Table 3, a 50 occupation of the room reduced the RT by  1.1 to 1.3 s at frequencies of 500, 1000 and 2000 Hz. However, even with this considerable  reduction, the classroom still did not meet the aforementioned recommendations. Only with  100 occupation did the classroom satisfy the RT recommended by the French standard.  Nonetheless, it continues not to meet the requirements of the other standards listed in Table 3.  These results indicate that a classroom should perform adequately in the unoccupied  condition. If the rooms acoustic condition is poor, which is the case of the BG classroom, its  occupation will only marginally benefit its acoustic condition.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  156 

Figure 20. Comparison of reverberation time as a function of occupation. 

4.4. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ACOUSTICS PARAMETERS   AND ACOUSTIC QUALITY 

Good classroom acoustics is achieved through the combination of constructive elements  that results in ideal acoustic parameters. As discussed earlier herein, one of the factors that  exerts the greatest influence in obtaining such parameters is the acoustic absorption of the  materials that make up the room. Acoustic absorption reduces the RT and affects parameters  such as the D50, TS and STI. In addition to reverberation, the STI combines the effects of  noise in its final result. That is why this parameter is of the utmost importance in sound  quality assessments of rooms for communication, which is the case of classrooms.  Based on these concepts, computer simulations were performed in a classroom of  approximately 250 m to verify the influence of acoustic absorption on the RT, D50 and TS  parameters and the contribution of reverberation and background noise to the STI values.  For this study, which is described below, the room was considered to have low absorption  materials on the floor and walls, no furniture and no occupation. Distinct sound absorption  materials were used for the ceiling surface.   Table 10, below, lists the absorption coefficients of the materials used in the simulation  of the classroom in situations A, B, C and D at the frequencies of 500, 1000 and 2000 Hz. To  ascertain the influence of background noise, the STI was simulated in each of the four  situations, using the following noise levels: Leq  35dBA and Leq  50dBA, where Leq  represents the equivalent sound level. The figure below presents the mean RT, D50 and Ts  values at the frequencies of 500, 1000 and 2000 Hz and the acoustic map of the STI obtained  by simulation using Odeon 9.0 software. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  157 Table 10. Sound absorption coefficient  of ceiling materials in situations A, B, C and D 

Situation  Sound absorption coefficient    500 Hz  1000 Hz  2000 Hz  A  0.55  0.72  0.70  B  0.17  0.35  0.52  C  0.17  0.09  0.10  D  0.014  0.016  0.017 

Figure 21. Computer simulation of a classroom with different sound absorption levels. On the STI map,  S represents the position of the mouth simulator. Subjective classification of the STI according to the  IEC 60268-16 standard.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  158  In Figure 21, the simulation of situation A resulted in a reduced RT and TS, and a high  D50, which appear to be adequate for classroom communication. However, excellent to good  values of STI were only obtained with a low background noise of 35 dBA IEC 60268-16   2003. With high background noise, 50dBA, intelligibility can be classified as fair. In  situations B RT  0.8s and C RT  1.6s, the STI varied from good to fair in simulations  with background noise of 35 dBA and from fair to poor with higher noise, 50 dBA. In  situation D, a reverberant room with a RT of 3.6s, intelligibility is classified as poor with a  background noise of 35 dBA and bad with a background noise of 50 dBA. Based on this  analysis and an observation of the simulations in Figure 21, it is clear that a good or excellent  STI IEC 60268-16  2003 can only be achieved with a combination of brief reverberation  time and low background noise Huber et al., 2002. 

CONCLUSION 

The classroom is a special environment, since it is here that humans will be in contact  with knowledge, from childhood to adulthood. It is therefore crucial for the classroom to be  as harmonious as possible, and one of the elements that make up this harmony is its acoustic  quality. As the various sections of this chapter indicate, this quality is linked to several  measurable physical parameters which can also be simulated computationally.  For knowledge  especially that transmitted orally  to reach the listener student clearly,  good conditions must be established in the design of school buildings in general, and of  classrooms in particular, to enable adequate reverberation time, definition and speech  transmission index values to be achieved.  From the measurements taken in real classrooms and from simulations in real and  hypothetical classrooms presented here, it is evident that good acoustics depends on several  factors, including: 1 the level of background noise of the site where the classroom is located,  and 2 the materials covering the rooms internal surfaces, particularly the ceiling.  Background noise, as we have seen, is highly detrimental to the rooms performance in  terms of its intelligibility, represented by the Speech Transmission Index  STI parameter.  Using the measuring devices and simulation software programs currently available, one can  consider the STI an excellent procedure for evaluating speech intelligibility Lazarus et. al,  2007. Acoustic treatment is necessary but does not suffice to ensure adequate values for the  descriptive parameters of a room. Concern regarding acoustics should begin in the early  phases of the design, with the choice of the plot of land and the construction of the edifice.  Buildings close to crossroads with heavy traffic, or which have openings facing noisy areas,  will have higher background noise levels in their interior, resulting in reduced speech  intelligibility.  Notably, of course, the issue of costs is a determining factor in the investment to be made  in the quality of acoustic comfort that rooms in general  and particularly classrooms  will  afford their occupants. With regard to acoustic treatment inside the room, to reduce  reverberation and improve intelligibility, the measurements and simulations presented in this  chapter have shown that ceiling covers made of material with good sound absorption already  go a long way in significantly benefiting the rooms acoustic quality. Hence, it can be   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  159 concluded that school buildings should include acoustic design and planning, since their  absence may irreparably impair the learning process of an entire generation. 

REFERENCES 

American National Standard. ANSI S12.60: Acoustical performance criteria design  requirements, and guidelines for schools. Melville, 2002.  Arau-Puchades H. An improved reverberation formula. Acustica, 1988, 65: 163-179.  Associao Brasileira de Normas Tcnicas. NBR 12179: Tratamento acstico em recintos  fechados: procedimento. Rio de Janeiro, 1992.  Astolfi A, Pellerey F. Subjective and objective assessment of acoustical and overall  environmental quality in secondary school classrooms, Journal of the Acoustical Society  of America, 2008, 1321: 163-173.  Barron RF. Industrial Noise Control and Acoustics. New York, 2003.  Beranek L, Vr IL. Noise and vibration control engineering: Principles and applications.  United State of America, 1992.  Bistafa SR, Bradley JS. Predicting reverberation times in a simulated classroom. Journal of  the Acoustical Society of America, 2000, 108:1721-1731.  Bozzoli F, Viktorovitch M, Farina A. Balloons of Directivity of Real and Artificial Mouth  Used in Determining Speech Transmission Index. In: AES Convention, 2005, 118.  Bradley DT, Wang LM. Comparison of Measured and Computer-Modeled Objective  Parameters for an Existing Coupled Volume Concert Hall. Building Acoustics, 2007, 14  2: 7990.  Building Bulletin 93, Acoustic design of schools  a design guide. London, 2003.   DIN 1804: Acoustic quality in small to medium-sized rooms Hrsamkeit in kleinen bis  mittelgrossen Rumen. Germany, 2004.  Ducourneau J, Planeau V. The average absorption coefficient for encloused spaces with nonuniformly distributed absoption. Applied Acoustics 2003, 64:845-862  European Norm. EN 12354-6: Building Acoustics  Estimation of acoustic performance of  buildings from the performance of elements, Part 6: Sound absorption in enclosed  spaces. United Kindom, 2000.   Eyring CF. Reverberation time in dead rooms. Journal of the Acoustical Society of  America, 1930, 1: 217-241.  Fasold W, Veres E. Schallschutz und raumakustik in der praxis. Planungsbeispiele und  konstruktive lsungen. Huss-medien GmbH, Berlim, 2003.  Ferreira AMC. Avaliao do Conforto Acstico em Salas de Aula: Estudo de Caso na  Universidade Federal do Paran. Curitiba, 2006. Dissertation Master.   French NR, Steinberg JC. Factors Governing the Intelligibility of Speech Sounds. Journal of  the Acoustical Society of America, 1947, 19 1: 90-119.   Fukuchi T, Ueno K. Guidelines on acoustic treatments for school buildings proposed by the  Architectural Institute of Japan. In: ICA  international conference on acoustic, Kyoto,  Japan, 2004.  Hagen M, Huber L, Kahlert J. Acoustic School Design. In: International Forum Acusticum  Sevilha, Sevilla, 2002. Proceedings. Sevilla, 2002.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Paulo Henrique Trombetta Zannin, Carolina Reich Marcon Passero et al.  160  Harris CM. Handbook of acoustical measurements and noise control . USA: Acoustical  Society of America, 1998.  Hohmann R, Setzer MJ, Wehling M. Bauphysikalische formeln und tabellen. Germany, 2004.  Huber L, Kahler J, Klatte M. Die akustisch gestaltete Schule. Germany, 2002  Instruction Manual Dirac Room Acoustics Software Type 7841. Denmark: Brel  Kjaer  Sound  Vibration Measurement, 2003.  International Electrotechnical Commission. IEC 6026816: Sound system equipmentPart  16: Objective rating of speech intelligibility by speech transmission index. Switzerland,  2003.  International Organization for Standardization ISO 9921: Ergonomics  Assessment of  speech communication. Switzerland, 2003.  International Organization for Standardization. ISO 3382-1: Acoustics  Measurement of  Room Acoustic Parameters. Part 1: Performance spaces. Switzerland, 2009.  International Organization for Standardization. ISO 3382-2: Acoustics  Measurement of  Room Acoustic Parameters. Part 2: Reverberation time in ordinary rooms. Switzerland,  2008.  Kang J. Numerical modeling of speech intelligibility in dining spaces. Applied Acoustics,  2002, 63: 13151333.  Knudesen VO, Harris CM. Acoustical Designing in Architecture. Published for the  Acoustical Society of America by the American Institute of Physics, 1988.  Knudsen VO. The Hearing of Speech in Auditoriums. Journal of the Acoustical Society of  America, 1929, 1 1: 56-82.  Kuttruff H. Room Acoustics. Handcover, 2004.  Lazarus H, Charlotte AS, Steckel R, Kulka M, Kurtz P. Akustische Grundlangen sprachlicher  Kommunikation, Berlin, 2007.  Lubman D, Sutherland LC. Good Classroom Acoustics is a good investment. In:  International Congress on Acoustics ICA, 2001, Rome, Italy.  Makrinenko LI. Acoustics of Auditoriums in Public Buildings. USA: Acoustical Society of  America, 1994.  Maxwell LE, Evans GW. The effect of noise on pre-school childrens pre-reading skill.  Journal of Environmental Psychology, London, 2000, 20 1: 91-97.  Millington G. A Modified Formula for Reverberation. Journal of the Acoustical Society of  America, 1932, 4: 69-82.  Mller S. Avaliao da Inteligibilidade com o STI. Acstica e Vibraes, 2007, 38: 25-38.  Neubauer R, Kostek B. Prediction of the Reverberation Time in Rectangular Rooms with  Non-Uniformly Distributed Sound Absorption. Archives of Acoustics, 2001, 26:183-201  Passero CRM, Zannin PHT. Statistical comparison of reverberation times measured by the  integrated impulse response and interrupted noise methods, computationally simulated  with ODEON software, and calculated by Sabine, Eyring and Arau-Puchades formulas,  Applied Acoutics, 2010, 7112: 1204-1210.  Rindel JH. The use of computer modeling in room acoustics. Journal of Vibroengineering,  2000, 3 4: 219-224.  Ronsse L. Speech Intelligibility of Lecture Halls. Journal of the Acoustical Society of  America, 2006, 119 5: 3207.  Schroeder MR. Computers in Acoustics: Symbiosis of an Old Science and a New Tool.  Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1969,45 5: 10771088.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Acoustics: Measurements, Simulations and Applications  161 Sette WJ. A new reverberation time formula. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,  1933, 4: 193-210.  Shield BM, Dockrell JE. The effects of noise on children at school: A review. Building  Acoustics, 2003, 10 2: 97-106.  Steinberg JC. Effects of Distortion upon the Recognition of Speech Sounds. Journal of the  Acoustical Society of America, 1929, 1 1: 121-137.  World Health Organization  WHO  Regional Office for Europe. Noise in Schools, 2001.  Zannin PHT, Ferreira AMC. Field Measurements of Acoustic Quality in University  Classrooms. Journal of Scientific  Industrial Research, 2009, 68: 1053-1057. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

In: Classrooms: Management, Effectiveness and Challenges  ISBN 978-1-61324-601-6  Editor: Rebecca J. Newley, pp. 163-173   2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 

Chapter 8 

TWO WAYS OF CAPTURING LESSON-TO-LESSON  VARIABILITY IN THE CLASSROOM SOCIAL CLIMATE:  GENERAL TREND AND PROCESS ANALYSIS 

M. Tim Mainhard, M. Brekelmans, and T. Wubbels  Social and Behavioral Sciences, Utrecht University, The Netherlands 

ABSTRACT 

This chapter compares two complementing approaches to the analysis of longitudinal  data on the classroom social climate. How students perceive the social climate of their  classroom is related to student academic achievement and well-being den Brok,  Brekelmans,  Wubbels, 2004; Church, Elliot,  Gable, 2001; Davis, 2003, and to the  psycho-social development of students Pianta, 2006; Wentzel 2002. While the  importance of the classroom social climate in general is widely acknowledged, not much  research is conducted on how the social climate differs and evolves between classroom  lessons.   A commonly used approach for studying developmental issues is to describe  longitudinal data in terms of general trends over time i.e., multi-level growth curve  modeling. Thus, questions such as do teachers get more directive during the school  year? may be of interest in this regard. Rather than describing variability in the social  climate between lessons by using a general trend e.g., modeling a decline or increase in  teacher or student variables, a second approach, called multi-level process analysis  Papp, 2004 can be used to examine whether factors other than time can account for  variability in the classroom social climate. Questions such as can classroom incidents  account for between lesson variability in the classroom social climate? refer to this latter  approach.  In this chapter, both approaches are applied to a longitudinal data set on students  perceptions of the classroom social climate during the first months of a school year  Mainhard, Brekelmans  Wubbels, 2011; Mainhard, Brekelmans, den Brok  Wubbels,  2010. First, some background information on classroom social climate and the data set  used is provided. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

M. Tim Mainhard, M. Brekelmans and T. Wubbels  164  CLASSROOM SOCIAL CLIMATE  

Classroom social climate may be conceived as the social aspect of the classroom  environment; that is, it refers to the overall quality of social relations in a classroom i.e.,  peerand teacher-student relationships. One way to assess the classroom social climate is by  mapping students perceptions of their teachers e.g., Fraser, 1998; Wubbels, Brekelmans,  den Brok, and van Tartwijk, 2006. Many different constructs have been used to  conceptualize students perceptions. One approach to describing students perceptions is  focusing on the degree to which students perceive teachers to express particular  interpersonal traits in class. Such traits are, for example, authority and care Woolfolk Hoy,   Weinstein; 2006 or their equivalents e.g., Cornelius-White, 2007; Wubbels et al., 2006.  In the present chapter, a data set is employed that maps students perceptions of the classroom  social climate in terms of a teachers Control i.e., dominance vs. submission and Affiliation  hostility vs. affection in class Wubbels et al., 2006. The two dimensions, Control and  Affiliation, have been shown to be primary for understanding social interaction and various  interpersonal outcomes Blackburn  Renwick, 1996; Fabrigar, Visser,  Browne, 1997;  Gaines et al. 1997; Gurtman  Pincus, 2000. In the classroom context, Affiliation is  conceived as the warmth or care, and Control as the authority or interpersonal influence a  teacher conveys in class Wubbels et al., 2006. Several studies have shown that students who  attend classes with relatively high average levels of perceived teacher Control and Affiliation  show greater cognitive achievement and more positive subject-related attitudes Brekelmans,  Sleegers,  Fraser, 2000; den Brok, Brekelmans,  Wubbels, 2004. 

THE DATA 

The data used here consists of students perceptions of their teachers Control and  Affiliation, collected with a questionnaire in several consecutive lessons of 48 secondary  classroom groups 48 teachers and one of their classrooms; 1208 students; Mainhard et al.,  2011. At the start of the research period, students were unacquainted with their teachers and  the first questionnaires were completed directly after the first lesson a teacher provided to his  or class. On average, teachers completed ten measurements during a four months period.  Employing multiple short versions of the Questionnaire on Teacher Interaction QTI;  Wubbels, Crton,  Hooymayers, 1985; Wubbels et al., 2006 assured that students did not  respond to the same set of items every week Cronbachs alphas for Control and Affiliation  ranged between .79 and .93.  For illustrative purposes, Figure 1 is included, which depicts the resulting data set in  terms of raw Control and Affiliation trajectories for the 48 classrooms throughout the  research period. As can be seen, both the intercepts and trajectories differ across classrooms  for both dimensions. The trajectories for Affiliation are clearly more dispersed than those for  Control, but no obvious development direction is apparent for either interpersonal dimension. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Two Ways of Capturing Lesson-to-Lesson Variability   165

Figure 1. Raw trajectories of Control and Affiliation during the first 16 weeks of the school year first  published in Mainhard et al., 2010. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

M. Tim Mainhard, M. Brekelmans and T. Wubbels  166  TWO APPROACHES 

First, the data is analyzed to describe the variability in Control and Affiliation over the  measurement occasions in terms of a general trend. Then, process analysis is discussed which  captures variability in Control and Affiliation in terms of specific incidents that occurred  during lessons. 

Approach 1. Development of the Classroom Social Climate, Examining  General Trends across Time 

With regard to general trends in the development of classroom social climate, two issues  are explored: 

Do Control and Affiliation, as indicators of the classroom social climate,  systematically increase, decrease, or remain stable over time? 

How well do estimations of growth of Control and Affiliation generalize over  classrooms? 

In order to answer these questions, multi-level growth curve modeling Hox, 2002 is  used. This type of analysis models the outcome variable as a function of time.   The current data is represented in three-level hierarchical models with classrooms at the  highest level, students at the intermediate level, and measurement occasions i.e., weeks at  the lowest level. The inspection of the multi-level model, including no variables describing  growth in the realm of Control or Affiliation i.e., the unconditional model, shows that the  variance in student perceptions is about equally divided across classrooms, students, and  weeks. Then, in a stepwise manner, as is customary in multi-level growth modeling, it is  assessed which components e.g., components representing linear or quadratic growth should  be added to reach an adequate description of the variance in the data. A linear component  describes steady positive or negative growth; quadratic components describe deor  acceleration of growth. See Mainhard et al. 2010 for a concise description of the analysis  strategy applied. For the data used here, the growth or change rate in Control and Affiliation  across time is best represented by a combination of linear Control B-1.43, p.001;  Affiliation B-3.00, p.001 and quadratic Control B0.08, p.001; Affiliation B0.13,  p.001 growth components. The relatively small Bs indicate that, on average, the nature of  the classroom social climate remains near to its initial status, but at the same time, shows a  slight tendency to decline with a u-shaped curvature during the research period the  theoretically possible range of Control and Affiliation is 260. Including growth  components reduces the variance associated with measurement occasions by approximately  14 for Control and 27 for Affiliation. The average development of Control and Affiliation  is illustrated by the bold lines in Figure 2. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Two Ways of Capturing Lesson-to-Lesson Variability   167

Figure 2. Trajectories of Control and Affiliation according to the best fitting multi-level growth curve  models first published in Mainhard et al., 2010.  Other studies have also shown that student perceptions of the classroom social climate  Brekelmans, 1989; Patrick, Turner, Meyer,  Midgley, 2003; Ryan  Patrick, 2001, student 

Contro Affiliatio  EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

M. Tim Mainhard, M. Brekelmans and T. Wubbels  168  attitudes towards schoolwork Flanders, Morrison,  Brode, 1968, and teachers  communicated goal orientations Patrick, Anderman, Ryan, Edelin,  Midgley, 2001 remain  rather stable throughout the school year. Similarly, Skinner and Belmont 1993 found that  teacher involvement, structure, and autonomy support and student engagement remained  rather stable from fall to spring. Marsh and Roche 1993 found that student ratings of  different dimensions of teaching effectiveness e.g., individual rapport and group interaction  in a university sample were rather stable within semesters as well.  In order to evaluate the generalizability of the developmental trends found for Control  and Affiliation, it is possible to calculate how many classrooms significantly divert from the  average developmental trend of Control and Affiliation.1 The average small decline in  Control is highly generalizable over classrooms, only four classrooms divert from this trend.  In just one classroom, Control significantly increases during the period under study. For  Affiliation, the results of the multi-level growth curve analysis are less generalizable. Of the  48 classrooms, 24 divert from the average linear decline. Eleven classrooms show a stronger  decline and 13 classrooms a smaller decline of Affiliation. Only three classrooms show a  significant increase in Affiliation during the research period. Similar patterns are found for  the quadratic growth components.  In terms of the quality of the classroom social climate, the findings draw a somewhat  pessimistic picture for classrooms that start the school year with low, i.e., unfavorable levels  of Control and Affiliation. In those classrooms, the social climate even got less favorable  during the first months of the school year.   Overall, the classroom climate remained rather similar to the climate students  experienced during the first lesson of the school year. Teachers should not expect that matters  will improve simply as a result of the passing of time. Affiliation occurs to vary more than  Control across the first months in class and differences between classrooms are bigger for  Affiliation than for Control.  The major conclusion regarding the presented analyses is that a for Control, the average  developmental trend largely applies to all of the classrooms in the sample; for Affiliation,  about half of the classrooms divert from the average developmental trend and b only some  of the variance associated with measurement occasions seems to be due to a specific  development in Control or Affiliation.  

Approach 2. Variability in the Classroom Social Climate, Examining   the Role of Teacher Behavior Incidents 

The second approach that is discussed differs from the search of developmental trends in  that it uses predictors other than time to describe variability in the classroom social climate.  More specifically, we examine how incidents of coercive and supportive teacher behavior in  class are associated with variability in Control and Affiliation. The analyses are guided by  two questions: 
In MLWin Raudenbush  Bryk, 2002, the multi-level package used here, this can be achieved by using so-called  caterpillar plots.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Two Ways of Capturing Lesson-to-Lesson Variability   169

How does teacher behavior, as observed by students during a classroom lesson, relate  to the social climate during the same lesson?  

How do coercive and supportive teacher behavior in a lesson one or two weeks  earlier affect the classroom social climate in the current classroom lesson? 

In addition to the QTI, as described in the outline of the data set, students completed a  teacher behavior checklist that mapped the occurrence of supportive and coercive incidents  Mainhard et al., 2011. Examples of a coercive and a supportive incident item are In this  lesson, the teacher yelled at us Cronbachs alpha coercive scale .81, and In this lesson, the  teacher said we were doing well Cronbachs alpha supportive scale .71. Supportive and  coercive incident scores were negatively correlated -.44;  p  .01.  As in the first approach, multi-level analyses are conducted Level 1 represents the week  or occasion level, Level 2 the class level.2 To examine the withinand across-lesson  associations between teacher behavior incidents and the classroom social climate, a special  type of multi-level modeling, namely multi-level process analysis, is used Papp, 2004.  Rather than fitting a general trend across time in order to explain variability in the dependent  variable, this analysis examines whether factors other than time can account for variability in  students perceptions of teacher Control and Affiliation. In fact, in multi-level process  analysis the predictor variable is anything except a representation of time Papp, 2004. As  Papp points out, process analysis is closely related to multi-level analysis with time-varying  predictor variables but without a variable representing time.  All explanatory variables used in the analyses are Level 1 variables, in the present case,  collective perceptions of Control and Affiliation i.e., the classroom means, and the teacher  behavior incidents in a specific lesson, as indicated by the students. Analyses of the  associations of supportive and coercive behavior with the classroom social climate within a  lesson were controlled for perceived Control and Affiliation a week prior to the classroom  lesson of interest. To find out whether teacher behavior incidents in a lesson one or two weeks  earlier affect the current social climate, behavior incidents in a lesson one and two weeks  before are entered into the models for Control and Affiliation. As Seidman, Green, Rafaeli,  Shrout, and Bolger 2004, and Shrout, Seidman, Green, and Boulger 2008 have  recommended, perceived Control and Affiliation one week earlier, as well as concurrent  behavior incident measures, are left in the model. This approach minimizes floor effects and  makes the interpretation of the resulting models more straightforward. Equivalent analyses  were run for Control and Affiliation. Please refer to Mainhard et al. 2011 for a more  comprehensive description of the analyses or to van Doorn, Branje, Hox, and Meeus, 2009  for another instructive example. Including behavior incidents in the current lesson and in  lessons one or two weeks earlier reduced the variance associated with measurement occasions  with 38 for Affiliation but only about 5 for Control.  The analyses show that coercive teacher behavior incidents e.g., using sarcasm, yelling  at students, or reprimanding students during a classroom lesson are associated with lower  teacher Affiliation during the same lesson and to lower Affiliation in a lesson a week later.  Thus, using coercive behavior immediately disrupts the classroom social climate and,  unfortunately, this effect of acting coercively does not just disappear in the ongoing stream of  teacher behavior. Coercive teacher behavior is not associated to mere temporal disruptions of 
This analysis was conducted with average classroom scores of Control and Affiliation.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

M. Tim Mainhard, M. Brekelmans and T. Wubbels  170  the classroom social climate in one lesson, but instead, its negative influence on the social  climate lasts for one more week. However, if no new eruption of coercive behavior occurs  after two weeks, a teachers former level of Affiliation had been re-established. No  associations between the current classroom climate and behavior incidents two weeks earlier  were found.  It seems that coercive strategies are only slightly associated with greater teacher Control.  The use of coercive behavior is associated with somewhat more Control in class, but acting  coercively in two consecutive lessons occurs to counterbalance these associations. This  finding is in contrast to more general theories on interpersonal power French  Raven, 1959;  Schrodt et al., 2008 which assume that coercive behavior enhances interpersonal Control. It  is, however, in line with some studies which show that coercive strategies are associated with  more student misbehavior Lewis, Romi, Qui,  Katz, 2005; Miller, Ferguson,  Byrne,  2000. Teachers who engage in coercive behavior may be aware of the detremintal effect of  this behavior on their Affiliation with students. However, these teachers may more or less  deliberately sacrifice Affiliation because they believe they will re-establish or consolidate  their control in the classroom by acting coercively. Disciplinary actions may sometimes be  necessary, but at the same time may ruin the classroom atmosphere.   Frequent supportive behavior towards students is associated with more perceived  Affiliation during the same lesson and also in a lesson one week later. Two weeks later, the  effect of the supportive incident fades away. Finally, more frequent supportive behavior is  hardly associated with variability in teacher Control. 

GENERAL TREND OR PROCESS ANALYSIS? 

Two approaches to longitudinal data on the classroom social climate were presented:  describing between lesson differences in social climate in terms of a general developmental  trend i.e., multi-level growth curve analysis of teacher Control and Affiliation and capturing  between lesson variability by relating the classroom climate to incidents of teacher behavior  within specific lessons i.e., multi-level process analysis. While the former analysis is  especially relevant for questions regarding the growth or decline of the social climate across a  longer period of time in this case, about four months, process analysis is not concerned with  identifying such general developmental trends. Its focus is much more on the interplay of  two or more variables from lesson-to-lesson. The analyses presented showed that focusing on  the systematic, time-dependent proportion of variance in the classroom social climate  produces quite different information on the climate than trying to explain how the climate in a  specific classroom lesson is associated with incidents in the same lesson, or incidents in  lessons a week or two weeks earlier. While the growth curve analyses showed that in most  classrooms the classroom social climate remains in the proximity of the first lesson of a  school year, the process analysis showed the ways in which, for example, coercive teacher  behavior temporarily disrupts the classroom climate. One may argue that process analyses  should be preferred above multi-level growths curve modeling because it explains more  variance associated with measurement occasions. This is, however, only true for Affiliation.  Furthermore, of course, not the results of the analyses but the underlying questions asked  should be leading when choosing the strategy of analysis.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Two Ways of Capturing Lesson-to-Lesson Variability   171 In line with Papp 2004, we think that being aware of the versatility of multi-level  analysis in general, and specifically of process analyses, could assist educational researchers  who have collected repeated-measures data. A single data set may produce multi-faceted  information on the processes under study by taking different perspectives. To conclude, we  hope that we provided the reader with instructive examples of the analysis of a longitudinal  data set, that may inspire new research questions or that may illuminate or complement  findings of earlier studies. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The research presented in this chapter was made possible by funding from the  Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research 411-03-313. Please refer to Mainhard,  Brekelmans, den Brok, and Wubbels 2010 and Mainhard, Brekelmans, and Wubbels 2011  for the original published work this chapter draws on. 

REFERENCES 

Brekelmans, M. 1989. Interpersonal teacher behavior in the classroom. In Dutch:  Interpersoonlijk gedrag van docenten in de klas Utrecht: W.C.C.  Brekelmans, M., Sleegers, P.,  Fraser, B. 2000. Teaching for active learning. In P. R. J.   Simons, J. L. van der Linden,  T. Duffy Eds., New learning pp. 227242.  Dordrecht:  Kluwer Academic Publishers.  den Brok, P., Brekelmans, M.,  Wubbels, T. 2004. Interpersonal teacher behavior and  student outcomes. School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 153, 407-442.  Blackburn, R.  Renwick, S. 1996. Rating scales for measuring the Interpersonal Circle in  forensic psychiatric patients. Psychological Assessment, 8, 76-84.  Cornelius-White, J. 2007. Learner-centered teacher-student relationships are effective: A  meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 771, 113-143.  Church, M. A., Elliot, A. J.,  Gable, S. L. 2001. Perceptions of classroom environment,  achievement goals, and achievement outcomes. Journal of Educational Psychology,  931, 43-54.  Davis, H. A. 2003. Conceptualizing the role and influence of student-teacher relationships  on children's social and cognitive development. Educational Psychologist, 384, 207234.  van Doorn, M., Branje, S., Hox, J.,  Meeus, W. 2009. Intra-individual variability in  adolescents perceived relationship satisfaction: The role of daily conflict. Journal of  Youth and Adolescence, 386, 790-803.  Fabrigar, L. R., Visser, P. S.,  Browne, M. W. 1997. Conceptual and methodological  issues in testing the circumplex structure of data in personality and social psychology.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 13, 184-203.  Flanders, N. A., Morrison, B. M.,  Brode, E. L. 1968. Changes in pupil attitudes during  the school year. Journal of Educational Psychology, 595, 334-383.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.
Fr Fr G H G L M M M M Pa Pa Pa Pi R R 72  raser, B. J.  applicatio rench, J. R.,  in social p Gaines, S. O.,  Wexler, M manifestat Social Psy Hox, J. 2002 Lawrence Gurtman, M. B circumple Bulletin, 2 ewis, R., Rom student m 216, 729 Mainhard, M. T the classro Education cedpsych. Mainhard, M. T behaviour Learning  Marsh, H. W.,  structured Education Miller, A., Ferg behaviour app, L. M. 2 using mul 124.  atrick, H., An communic School Jo atrick, H., Tu psychosoc in mathem ianta, R. C.  teachers:  Handbook 685-710. Raudenbush, S Oaks: Sag Ryan, A. M.,  adolescen Research  M. Tim 1998. Clas ons. Learning E  Raven, B.  power pp. 150 Panter, A. T M. O. 1997 tion of interp ychology, 73,  2. Multilevel  e Erlbaum.  B.,  Pincus, ex structure fr 26, 374-384.  mi, S., Qui,  misbehavior in 9-741.  T., Brekelman oom social cl nal  Psycho 2010.06.002.  T., Brekelman r: Withinand and Instructio  Roche, L.  d intervention nal Research J guson, E.,  B r. British Journ 2004. Captur ltilevel model nderman, L. H cation of goa urnal, 1021, urner, J. C., M cial environme matics. Teache 2006. Clas Implications f k of classroom  New York: E . W.,  Bryk ge.   Patrick, H nts' motivation Journal, 382 m Mainhard, M ssroom envir Environments 1959. The ba 0-167. Ann A T., Lyde, M. D . Evaluating  personal traits  610-623.  analysis: Te , A. L. 2000 from multiple  X.,  Katz,  n Australia, Ch ns, M., Brok,  imate during  ology.  Adv ns, M.,  Wu d across-lesso on, 213, 345A 1993. Th n to enhanc Journal, 301 Byrne, I. 2000 nal of Educati ring the interp ling technique H., Ryan, R. M al orientations , 37-58.  Meyer, D. K ents during th ers College Re ssroom mana for research a m management Erlbaum.  k, A. S. 2002 H. 2001. Th n and engagem 2, 437-460.   M. Brekelmans ronment instru  Research, 11 asis of social p Arbor, MI: Un D., Steers, W the circumpl in interperso echniques and 0. Interperson perspectives. Y. J. 2005. hina and Israe d. P.,  Wub the first mont vance  onli ubbels, T. 20 on association -354.  he use of stud ce university , 217 251.  0 Pupils cau ional Psycholo play among w es. Applied an M., Edelin, K. s in four fifth K.,  Midgley he first days of ecord, 1058,  agement and  and practice. In t: Research, p 2. Hierarchic he classroom ment during m s and T. Wubb ruments: Dev 1, 7-34.  power. In D. C iversity of Mi W. N., Rusbult lexity of inter onal trust. Jou d application nal adjective  . Personality  . Teachers c el. Teaching a bbels, T. 201 ths of the sch ine  public 011. Coercive ns with the cl dents evaluati y teaching e usal attribution ogy, 701, 85 withinand be nd Preventive   C.,  Midgl h-grade class y, C. 2003.  f school: Asso 1521-1558.  relationships  n C. Evertson practice, and c al linear mod social enviro middle school bels  velopment, va Cartwright Ed ichigan Press.  t, C. E., Cox rpersonal trai urnal of Perso s. Mahaw, N scales: confi and Social P lassroom disc and Teacher  10. The deve hool year. Con cation.  doi e and supporti lassroom soci ions and an in effectiveness.  ns for difficult 5-96.  etween-person Psychology, 1 ley, C. 2001 rooms. The E How teacher ociations with between ch n  C. Weinst contemporary  dels 2nd ed. onment and c l. American E alidity and  d., Studies  x, C. L.,   its and the  onality and  New Jersy:  irmation of  Psychology  cipline and  Education,  lopment of  ntemporary  i:10.1016j.  ive teacher  ial climate.  ndividually  American  t classroom  n processes  112, 115. Teachers'  Elementary  rs establish  h avoidance  hildren and  tein Eds.,  issues pp.  . Thousand  changes in  Educational   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Two Ways of Capturing Lesson-to-Lesson Variability   173 Reeve, J., Bolt, E.,  Cai, Y. 1999. Autonomy-supportive teachers: How they teach and  motivate students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 913, 537.  Schrodt, P., Witt, P. L., Myers, S. A., Turman, P. D., Barton, M. H.,  Jernberg, K. A.  2008. Learner empowerment and teacher evaluations as functions of power use in the  college classroom. Communication Education, 57, 180-200.  Seidman, G., Green, A. S., Rafaeli, E., Shrout, P. E.,  Bolger, N. 2004, January. Can a  statistic artifact make conflict appear good for marital satisfaction? Poster presented at  the Society for Personality and Social Psychology annual meeting, Austin, Texas.  Shrout, P. E., Seidman, G., Green, A. S.,  Bolger, N. 2008. Short-term benefits of conflict  in relationships Manuscript in preparation.  Skinner, E. A.,  Belmont, M. J. 1993. Motivation in the classroom: Reciprocal effects of  teacher behavior and student engagement across the school year. Journal of Educational  Psychology, 854, 571-581.  Wentzel, K. R. 2002. Are effective teachers like good parents? Teaching styles and student  adjustment in early adolescence. Child Development, 731, 287-301.  Woolfolk Hoy, A.,  Weinstein, C. S. 2006. Students and teachers perspectives on  classroom management. In C. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook for  classroom management: Research, practice, and contemporary issue pp. 181-220.  Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  Wubbels, T., Crton, H. A.,  Hooymayers, H. P. 1985. Discipline problems of beginning  teachers, interactional teacher behavior mapped out. Abstracted in Resources in  Education, 2012, 153, ERIC document 260040.  Wubbels, T., Brekelmans, M., den Brok, P.,  van Tartwijk, J. 2006. An interpersonal  perspective on classroom management in secondary classrooms in the Netherlands. In  C. Evertson  C. S. Weinstein Eds., Handbook of classroom management: Research,  practice and contemporary issues pp. 1161-1191. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum  Associates. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

In: Classrooms: Management, Effectiveness and Challenges  ISBN 978-1-61324-601-6  Editor: Rebecca J. Newley, pp. 175-185   2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 

Chapter 9 

COMFORT IN SCHOOL BUILDINGS   IN THE MEDITERANEAN ENVIRONMENT 

Eusbio Z. E. Conceio  Faculty of Science and Technology  University of Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal 

ABSTRACT 

A review of thermal comfort and air quality is the aim of this work. The numerical  and experimental methodology is used in the evaluation of comfort in school buildings in  the South of Portugal Algarve region with Mediterranean environment.  In this work, results about comfort in three typical schools buildings, in Winter and  Summer conditions, equipped with natural and crossed ventilation, are presented. The  thermal comfort level is evaluated by the Predicted Mean Vote value, while the air  quality is evaluated by the carbon dioxide concentration. 

INTRODUCTION 

In this work the numerical and experimental methodology is used in the evaluation of  comfort in school buildings in the South of Portugal, with Mediterranean environment,  namely the thermal comfort and the air quality.  In the numerical methodology, a numerical model that simulates the dynamic response of  building is used, while in experimental methodology, indoor and outdoor climate analyzers  are used. The software is used to define the building environmental field and evaluate the  human thermal comfort and air quality levels, that the occupants are subjected.  The experimental tests, measured inside the classrooms and in the external environment,  are used in the validation tests, in order to verify if the software reproduces well the building  thermal response. 

 E-mail: econceiualg.pt   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Eusbio Z. E. Conceio  176  The Predicted Mean Vote PMV and the Predicted Percentage of Dissatisfied people  PPD indexes, developed by Fanger 1970 and presented in ANSIASHRAE Standard 55  2004 and ISO 7730 2005, are used to evaluate the thermal comfort conditions in moderate  environments equipped with heating and air-conditioning systems either in cold or in warm  climates during Winter or Summer conditions. The PMV index, given as a value on the  seven-point comfort scale -3 cold; -2 cool; -1 slightly cool; 0 neutral; 1 slightly warm; 2  warm and 3 hot, is based in four environmental parameters air temperature, air velocity, air  relative humidity and mean radiant temperature and two personal factors clothing and  metabolic activity levels. In negative PMV values the body heat loss is higher than the body  metabolic heat, in neutral PMV values the body heat loss is equal to the body metabolic heat,  while in positive PMV values the body heat loss is lower than the body metabolic heat. For  acceptable thermal comfort conditions the ISO 7730 2005 defines three comfort categories  A, B and C, establishing limits for PMV and PPD indexes. In the category C, used in this  work, the limits of the suggested PMV values change between 0.7 and -0.7 PPD15 .  In warm environments, in buildings not equipped with air-conditioning systems, Fanger  and Toftum 2002 presented an extension of the standard PMV model. This extension, that  combines the static PMV model and the adaptive model, uses the traditional PMV model,  that considers the human body thermal balance, and the expectations verified in the adaptive  model.  The airflow rate inside an occupied compartment can be calculated using different  recommendations and methodologies presented in national D.L. n 792006 of April 4th and  international ANSIASHRAE 62.1, 2004 standards. Both standards recommended, in order  to guarantee acceptable air quality, the internal carbon dioxide concentration should be lower  than 1800 mgm3. The Portuguese normalization, presented in D.L. n 792006 of April 4th,  defines an airflow rate of 35 m3h per occupant 9.7 ls.  

NUMERICAL MODELS 

The multi-nodal building thermal behavior model, that operates in transient conditions, is  based in energy and mass balance integral equations. The full energy balance equations are  developed for the air inside the compartments and several ducts system, the different  windows glasses, the interior bodies located inside the several spaces and the different  layers of building and bodies ducts system, while the mass balance integral equations are  developed for the water vapor inside the several spaces, ducts system and indoor surfaces  and air contaminants inside the several spaces and ducts system.  In the resolution of these equations system the Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg method with error  control is used.  The model considers the conductive, convective, radiative and mass transfer phenomena.  The conduction is verified in the building's main bodies doors, ceiling, ground, walls, etc.  and ducts system fluid transport layers. The natural, forced and mixed convection  phenomena are considered, while in the radiation, verified inside and outside the building, the  short-wave the actual distribution of direct solar radiation in outdoor and indoor surfaces  and long-wave heat exchanges between the building external surfaces and the surrounding  surfaces as well as among the indoor surfaces of each space phenomena are considered.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Comfort in School Buildings in the Mediteranean Environment  177

Figure 1. Scheme of the modern school building grid generation. 

BUILDINGS SCHEME 

In this work three school buildings are considered. A modern school building, a school  buildings complex and a kindergarten, are considered.  A modern school building see figure 1, located in the Algarve region, is analyzed. In the  analyzed school building, constituted by three blocks, with three floor levels, divided in 97  compartments, 1277 building main bodies and 211 windows, with simple transparent glasses,  are considered. This simulation is made in typical school days with clear sky and with 800  occupants.  In this work, a school buildings complex see figures 2 constituted with one main  building and two other buildings, also located in the South of Portugal, is also considered.  The 94 compartments, the 1578 building main bodies and the 307 windows and panels  glasses are considered. The main school building is the larger building of the school buildings  complex and has 3 floors and 56 rooms. The ground zero has the South and East elevations  underground. The generality of the windows building are oriented to South and North. The  NorthWest school building has 25 rooms and two floors. The ground floor rooms are mainly  used for classrooms, while the first floor rooms are mainly used for classrooms and for  auditorium. The generality of the building windows are oriented to South and North. The  NorthEast building has 11 rooms and one floor.  In the analyzed kindergarten school building see figures 3, divided in 24 compartments,  498 building main bodies and 42 windows glasses are considered. This building, also located  in the South of Portugal, has three classrooms, for 3, 4 and 5 years old children, and other  spaces for offices, administrative, WC, teachers and non-teachers staff and meeting room. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Eusbio Z. E. Conceio  178 

Figure 2. Scheme of the school buildings complex grid generation.  In the previous simulations the environmental variables, the occupation methodology and  the ventilation strategies are used as input data. In the environmental variables the air  temperature, the air relative humidity, the wind velocity and the wind direction are measured,  in the occupation methodology the occupation cycle, the occupants clothing level and  occupants activity level are considered, while in the ventilation strategies the airflow rate and  the air velocity in the different conditions are measured in a real classroom. 

Figure 3. Scheme of the kindergarten school building grid generation. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

In this section a review of thermal comfort and air quality, in school buildings located in  the South of Portugal, with Mediterranean environments, is made. A modern school building,  a school buildings complex and a kindergarten are analyzed. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Comfort in School Buildings in the Mediteranean Environment  179 Modern School Building Thermal Response 

In the modern school building the building thermal response, the human thermal comfort,  the air quality and the external solar radiation, are evaluated. The validation, without  surrounding buildings presence, is also made in Winter and Summer conditions.  In Conceio et al. 2004 a numerical study of thermal response of school buildings and  a numerical model validation in Winter conditions is made. In the validation experimental  values about the air temperature and relative humidity, obtained in the real building, are  compared with numerical values, obtained in the numerical model. The spaces with highest  and lowest air temperature levels are also identified and the different kinds of existing  shadings devices are evaluated.   The validation shows a good agreement between numerical and experimental results. In  general, the difference between numerical and experimental air temperature values is lower  than 2C, being verified a maximum difference of 4 C in the compartments with windows  turned South, only during some hours in the afternoon. The difference of numerical and  experimental air relative humidity values, in general, changes between 10 and 20 , being  this value highest in the first hours of the day.  In Conceio and Lcio 2005 the numerical simulation of the shading effect verified in  school buildings with complex topology, in Winter conditions, is analyzed. In accord to the  obtained results is verified that, in Winter conditions with low external air temperature and  with clean sky, spaces with windows not subjected to solar radiation or subjected to shading  effect, non acceptable thermal comfort levels are verified.  In Conceio and Lcio 2006a the air quality inside compartments of a school building  is analyzed. The air exchange monitoring, evaluation of carbon dioxide and assessment of  ventilation strategies is made. An adjusted airflow model, in order to increase the internal air  quality, is developed in the work. The adjusted airflow model is used, mainly, in  compartments with long occupation period, subjected to polluted air produced by occupation  of corridors and atria.  The air exchange and flow rate is evaluated experimentally using the tracer gases method  in the first phase of the work, while in the second part, after being calculated the air flow rate,  are estimated the evolution of carbon dioxide inside spaces with different air flow typologies.  In the experimental tests is verified that the crossed natural ventilation system,  implemented in the building's compartment increase the air flow rate. In general, the office  and the auditorium air flow rates are lower than in the classroom, teachers' and computers  rooms air flow rates.  This fact is associated to the presence of a high number of open small windows located  upper the doors and windows area in the classrooms, teachers' and computers rooms.  In the numerical simulation, related to crossed natural ventilation flow philosophy, is  verified that the carbon dioxide concentration is higher than the recommended value by the  Portuguese standard 1800 mgm3.  When the forced crossed ventilation philosophy is installed, without air flow adjustment,  is verified that the classrooms, in general, are subjected to carbon dioxide concentration lower  than the recommendation presented in the Portuguese standard. The corridors, atria and small  offices, are subjected to carbon dioxide concentration higher than the recommendation  presented in the Portuguese standard. However, when the forced crossed ventilation  philosophy is used, with air flow rate adjustment, good results are shown.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Eusbio Z. E. Conceio  180  In Conceio and Lcio 2006b a numerical study of thermal response of school  buildings and a numerical model validation, in summer conditions, is made. In the validation  experimental values about the air temperature and relative humidity, obtained in the real  building, are compared with numerical values, obtained in the numerical model.  The validation tests show a good agreement between experimental and numerical values  in all analyzed spaces. In general, the error verified is around 1C. Nevertheless, some  discrepancies are verified. These discrepancies are due to aspects associated to simplification  factors. It is verified that the heating system, with PMV control, installed in occupied spaces,  promotes good thermal comfort levels. In general, the uncomfortable occupants are lower  than 15, nevertheless, in some spaces, less than 6 of uncomfortable persons are verified.  The reduction of the buildings energy consumption and the increase of the occupants  thermal comfort levels, using the high solar radiation levels available in this region, is the aim  of Conceio and Lcio 2008a. The heating systems equipped with control based with the  PMV index and three air collectors located above the roof area to heat the air injected in  uncomfortable rooms are numerically analyzed.  It is observed that, in general, the rooms with windows turned North, the compartments  with windows subjected to shading devices and the interior spaces without windows with low  occupation level, presented the highest uncomfortable thermal conditions.  The implementation of heating systems in uncomfortable spaces promotes good thermal  comfort levels. It is verified that using a control based in PMV index is possible to guarantee  high comfort levels with low energy consumption level in the heating process. The highest  consumption level is observed in the first hours of the day, mainly in compartments which  have their main occupation time during break times.  It is verified that the solar air collectors, mainly highest ones, promote, in the afternoon,  acceptable thermal and air quality levels in the spaces considered. In order to promote  simultaneously thermal comfort and air quality good levels, uncomfortable occupied spaces  are ventilated and heated using warm air from the collector, comfortable or lightly  comfortable spaces are ventilated and heated using light warm air from the corridor and the  small comfortable occupied spaces are ventilated using clean air coming directly from the  external environment. The ventilation philosophy implemented in the school building, using  three big solar air collectors placed above the roof area, create an acceptable thermal and air  quality levels in the afternoon, with low-energy consumption level.  In Conceio and Lcio 2008b a thermally more efficient ventilation system, to be  implemented in a school building, in Winter conditions, using simultaneously the Predicted  Mean Vote index and carbon dioxide concentration as control system is implemented. The  ventilation system presented, that promotes simultaneously acceptable air quality and thermal  comfort, with low levels of energy consumption, uses three air collectors located above the  roof area. The solar air collectors presented can provide, especially in the late morning and  afternoons, acceptable levels of heating in most occupied spaces, although the smaller  collector presents more difficulty in securing these conditions than the larger ones.  In Conceio and Lcio 2009 the school building thermal response for four different  orientations, either in Winter or Summer conditions, is evaluated. In this study the numerical  study of the thermal efficiency of a school building with complex topology for different  orientations is made.   The work identifies uncomfortable spaces and promotes several solutions that could be  introduced for each orientation, in order to improve the thermal comfort and the air quality   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Comfort in School Buildings in the Mediteranean Environment  181 levels and decrease the buildings energy consumption levels. The information obtained from  this study could be used to help a designers choise which thermal systems and solutions are  more suitable for a preferred school building orientation.  In Conceio and Lcio 2010a a numerical study of the influence of opaque external  trees, with pyramidal shape, in the thermal behavior of a school building, in Summer  conditions, in transient conditions, is presented. The shading devices are guaranteed with 49  opaque trees with pyramidal shape placed in front to the windows in one side of each  considered building. Two situations with the same configuration are analyzed. In the first one,  the trees, located in front to the windows, are placed in the West and South-West direction,  while in the second one, after a 180 building rotation, the trees are placed in the East and  North-East direction. Both situations are studied with and without presence of trees. The  building temperatures and the occupants thermal comfort conditions are calculated.  The obtained results show that when the trees are placed in front to windows turned West  decrease the indoor air temperature and it is verified mainly in the afternoon, nevertheless,  when the trees are placed in front to windows turned East the decrease indoor air temperature  is verified mainly in the morning. In this study is verified that the maximum indoor air  temperature decrease, due to the trees presence, in the first situation is around 3 C, while in  the second situation is around 4 C.  The thermal comfort conditions that the occupants are subjected, in spaces with windows  turned West and East, without trees presence, in general, is very uncomfortable. Nevertheless,  if the trees presence is considered, lightly uncomfortable thermal conditions are verified. 

School Buildings Complex Thermal Response 

In the school buildings complex an adaptive thermal comfort model is applied in the  occupants thermal comfort evaluation. This adaptive comfort model is developed using the  Fanger Predicted Mean Vote index corrected with the external air temperature.  In Conceio et al. 2010 the application of a school building thermal response  numerical model in the evolution of the thermal comfort level in Mediterranean environment  is made.  In accord to the obtained results, the Fanger Predicted Mean Vote index presents similar  values to the adaptive Predicted Mean Vote index in optimal thermal comfort conditions, for  Fanger Predicted Mean Vote index equal to zero. However, when the Fanger Predicted Mean  Vote index increases the adaptation influence is higher.  In Winter conditions the adaptive Predicted Mean Vote index reduces a maximum value  of 5.5  the Predicted Mean Vote index, while in Summer conditions the adaptive Predicted  Mean Vote index reduces a maximum value of 12.5  the Predicted Mean Vote index.  However in some transition months the variation is not verified. The adaptive comfort model  can be used to evaluate a more realistic comfort level that the students feel in particular  situations and in particular thermal conditions. This kind of model, that can be used more  efficiently than the existing natural energy resources, show that a school space can provide  satisfactory comfort conditions in Summer and Winter conditions, than a standard model  without correction.  The application of an adaptive comfort philosophy can be used to improve the thermal  comfort level and to reduce the energy consumption level.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Eusbio Z. E. Conceio  182  Kindergarten School Building Thermal Response 

In the kindergarten school building the building thermal response and the human thermal  comfort is evaluated. The validation, with surrounding buildings presence, is also made in  Winter and Summer conditions.  In Conceio et al. 2007 the thermal comfort level and energy consumption in school  buildings in the South of Portugal is made.  In the kindergarten school building is verified that the surrounding buildings must be  considered in the numerical simulation. It is also verified that the classrooms with windows  turned South are thermally comfortable, nevertheless the classrooms with windows turned  North are thermally uncomfortable.  In Conceio et al. 2008a the energy and thermal comfort management in a  kindergarten school building in the South of Portugal in Winter conditions is made, while in  Conceio et al. 2008b the application of an indoor greenhouse in the energy and thermal  comfort performance in a kindergarten school building in the South of Portugal in Winter  conditions are analyzed. Without occupation, with surrounding buildings, the validation in  Winter conditions, the identification of potential spaces used as greenhouse and the thermal  comfort level that occupants are subjected, are evaluated.   The validation of the numerical model, being considered the kindergarten school building  and the surrounding buildings, shows good agreement between the numerical values and the  experimental data.   In accordance with the internal air distribution temperature levels, is suggested to  consider the hall, with significant area of glassed windows turned South, as greenhouse used  to warm the air to be used in the classrooms with window turned North see also Conceio et  al., 2008b.  The classrooms with windows turned North are thermally uncomfortable, nevertheless  the comfort level in the afternoon in the classroom with windows turned South are in accord  to the standards.  In Conceio et al. 2008c the indoor environment comfort in a kindergarten school  building in the South of Portugal in Summer conditions is made.   In accord to the obtained results, the introduction of the surrounding buildings improves  better agreement between the numerical values and the experimental data. The higher  difference, between numerical values and experimental data, in general, is not higher than  2C.   All compartments are thermally uncomfortable during the occupation time. The  classroom with windows turned South is the most uncomfortable. It is suggested, in Summer  conditions, to introduce external shading devices located above the windows turned South  and an external thermal insulation located above the kindergarten school building. It is also  suggested to introduce crossed ventilation in the North classrooms and displacement  ventilation in South classrooms. The presence of occupants in the simulation will increase the  thermal levels and the introduction of the air ventilation decrease these levels. Nevertheless,  in spaces with high occupation level its important to introduce these changes in the  numerical simulation.  In Conceio and Lcio 2010b the heating, ventilating and air conditioning systems  control based in the Predicted Mean Vote index is made. In this work the application of   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Comfort in School Buildings in the Mediteranean Environment  183 heating, ventilating and air conditioning systems control, based in the Predicted Mean Vote  index, is analyzed.   The heating system worked only for negative Predicted Mean Vote index values and the  heating power increases when the negative Predicted Mean Vote index values increases. The  control methodology, presented in this study, guarantees, in general, acceptable thermal  comfort conditions in all occupied spaces.   In Conceio and Lcio 2010c the implementation of passive and active solar strategies  in a kindergarten in Mediterranean external conditions, with natural and forced ventilation, in  Summer and Winter conditions, is made. The simulation, with a real occupation cycle,  passive and active strategies were developed in a kindergarten in order to guarantee, in  occupied spaces, acceptable thermal comfort and air quality conditions, with low energy  consumption level.   In passive strategies the kindergarten is equipped with multiple inclined aluminum  shading devices placed above the transparent windows level and in front to the transparent  door facing South, removable inclined tissue shading devices placed in front to the  transparent windows facing East and horizontal fabrics shading devices placed above the  transparent panel levels facing South, South-West and West. This passive system, in Winter  conditions, a maximum solar radiation and, in Summer conditions, a minimum solar  radiation, in shaded transparent surfaces, is presented.  In the active strategies, without forced ventilation, the internal air quality is not  acceptable, while with forced ventilation the internal air quality is acceptable, in spite of in  the beginning some spaces in Winter conditions are not acceptable. In Winter conditions the  greenhouse is very important in the heating phase, nevertheless, is suggested that the forced  ventilation operates not before the local 10 a.m. In Summer conditions the forced ventilation  during the night is very important, in order to cold the spaces, and the use of the stored cold  air during the day is very import due to the higher external air temperature levels.  The combination with the passive and active strategies, developed in this work,  guarantees, in general, acceptable comfort conditions in the occupation spaces with low  energy consumption level.  In Conceio et al. 2009 the energy and thermal comfort evaluation for different passive  solutions in a kindergarten in Summer conditions is made. The introduction of a roof placed  in the top of the kindergarten, horizontal shading devices placed above the windows level  facing South and external pyramidal opaque trees placed in front to the windows facing West  and East, used to reduce the indoor temperature level and to increase the indoor thermal  comfort level, are analyzed.  In accord to the obtained results, the new roof and the horizontal shading devices are  thermally efficient, nevertheless the external pyramidal opaque trees are not thermally  efficient due to the surrounding buildings presence.  When the kindergarten, the surrounding buildings, the horizontal shading devices and the  roof are considered the thermal comfort level is acceptable. However, in spaces, like South  classroom, corridor, office room, for example, the comfort level can be improved. In accord  to the obtained results the introduction of forced ventilation is suggested. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Eusbio Z. E. Conceio  184  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This research activity is being developed inside a project approved and sponsored by the  Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology, POCI 2010, also sponsored by the  European Comunitary Fund FEDER. 

REFERENCES 

ANSIASHRAE Standard 55, 2004. Thermal environmental conditions for human occupancy.  American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc.  ANSIASHRAE Standard 62.1. 2004. ASHRAE Standard  Ventilation for acceptable indoor  air quality, Atlanta, American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning  Engineers, Inc.  Conceio E. Z. E. and Lcio M M. J. R. 2006a. Air Quality Inside Compartments of a  School Building: Air Exchange Monitoring, Evaluation of Carbon Dioxide and  Assessment of Ventilation Strategies, The International Journal of Ventilation, UK, Vol.  5, N. 2, September 2006, pp. 259-270.  Conceio E. Z. E. and Lcio M M. J. R. 2008a. Thermal Study of School Buildings in  Winter Conditions, Building and Environment, Vol. 43, No. 5, May 2008, pp. 782-792.  Conceio E. Z. E. and Lcio M M. J. R. 2008b. Projecto de um Sistema de Ventilao  Eficiente de um Edifcio Escolar em Condies de Inverno na Regio do Algarve,  Revista INGENIUM, II Srie, Ordem dos Engenheiros, N 107, SeptemberOctober  2008, pp. 76-80.  Conceio E. Z. E. and Lcio M M. J. R. 2009. Numerical Study of the Thermal Efficiency  of a School Building with Complex Topology for Different Orientations, Indoor and  Building Environment, Vol. 18, N.1, February 2009, pp. 41-51.  Conceio E. Z. E. and Lcio M M. J. R. 2010a. Numerical Study of the Influence of Opaque  External Trees with Pyramidal Shape in the Thermal Behaviour of a School Building in  Summer Conditions, Indoor and Building Environment, December 2010; Vol. 19, 6: pp.  657-667.  Conceio E. Z. E. and Lcio M M. J. R. 2010b. Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning  Systems Control Based in the Predicted Mean Vote Index, Proceedings of the IFAC  Conference on Control Methodologies and Technology for Energy Efficiency CMTEE  2010, University of Algarve, Vilamoura, Portugal, 29 31 March 2010.  Conceio E. Z. E. and Lcio M M. J. R. 2010c. Implementation of Passive and Active Solar  Strategies in a Kindergarten in Mediterranean External Conditions, Building Simulation,  Volume 3, September 2010, pp. 245261.  Conceio E. Z. E. and Lcio M. M. J. R. 2005. Numerical Simulation of the Shading Effect  Verified in School Buildings with Complex Topology in Winter Conditions, Fourth  International Conference on Computational Heat and Mass Transfer, Cachan-Paris,  France, 17 20 May 2005.  Conceio E. Z. E. and Lcio M. M. J. R. 2006b. Numerical Study of Thermal Response of  School Buildings in Summer Conditions, Healthy Buildings 2006, Lisbon, Portugal, 4 8  June 2006.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Comfort in School Buildings in the Mediteranean Environment  185 Conceio E. Z. E., Lopes M. C. and Lcio M. M. J. R. 2008a. Energy and Thermal Comfort  Management in a Kindergarten School Building in the South of Portugal in Winter  Conditions, 4th WSEASIASME International Conference on Energy, Environment,  Ecosystems and Sustainable Development EEESD '08 and 1st WSEAS International  Conference on Landscape Architecture LA '08, Faro, Portugal, 11 13 June 2008.  Conceio E. Z. E., Lopes M. C. and Lcio M. M. J. R. 2008c. Indoor environment comfort  in a kindergarten school building in the South of Portugal in Summer conditions, Indoor  Air 2008, Copenhagen, Denmark, 17 22 August 2008.  Conceio E. Z. E., Lopes M. C. and Lcio M. M. J. R. 2009. Energy and Thermal Comfort  Evaluation for Different Passive Solutions in a Kindergarten in Summer Conditions, 11th  International Building Performance Simulation Association Conference Building  Simulation 2009, Scotland, Glasgow, 27 30 July 2009.  Conceio E. Z. E., Lcio M M. J. R. and Lopes M. C. 2008b. Application of an Indoor  Greenhouse in the Energy and Thermal Comfort Performance in a Kindergarten School  Building in the South of Portugal in Winter Conditions, WSEAS Transactions on  Environment and Development, Issue 8, Volume 4, August 2008, pp. 644-654.  Conceio E. Z. E., Lcio M. M. J. R., Vicente V. D. S. R., Lopes M. C. and Teixeira A. R.  P. A. 2007. Thermal Comfort Level and Energy Consumption in School Buildings in  South of Portugal, REHVA World Congress CLIMA2007 WellBeing Indoors, Helsinki,  Finland, 10 14 June 2007.  Conceio E. Z. E., Nunes A. R. L., Gomes J. M. M. and Lcio M M. J. R. 2010.  Application of a School Building Thermal Response Numerical Model in the Evolution  of the Adaptive Thermal Comfort Level in Mediterranean Environment, The  International Journal of Ventilation, UK, Volume 9, N. 3, December 2010, pp. 287-304.  Conceio E. Z. E., Silva A. I. and Lcio M M. J. R. 2004. Numerical Study of Thermal  Response of School Buildings in Winter Conditions, RoomVent2004 9th International  Conference on Air Distribution in Rooms, Portugal, Coimbra, 5 8 September 2004.  Decreto-Lei n 79. 2006. Regulamento dos sistemas energticos de climatizao em edifcios  RSECE, Dirio da Repblica, I SrieA, Nr 67, April 4th.  Fanger, P. O. 1970. Thermal comfort: analysis and applications in environmental engineering.  McGraw-Hill Book Company. USA.  Fanger, P. O. and Toftum, J. 2002. Extension of the PMV model to non-air-conditioned  buildings in warm climates. Energy and Buildings. Elsevier. N. 34. pp. 533-536.  ISO 7730, 2005. Ergonomics of the Thermal Environments  Analytical determination and  interpretation of thermal comfort using calculation of the PMV and PPD indices and  local thermal comfort criteria. International Standard. Switzerland.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

In: Classrooms: Management, Effectiveness and Challenges  ISBN 978-1-61324-601-6  Editor: Rebecca J. Newley, pp. 187-219   2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 

Chapter 10 

CLASSROOM DISCIPLINE:   DISCIPLINE STRATEGIES, PREVENTING STUDENT  MISBEHAVIORS AND RESEARCH ON STUDENT  MISBEHAVIORS IN THE CLASSROOM  

Kemal Kayiki  Akdeniz University 

ABSTRACT 

Classroom is the keystone of a formal education system. Conducting the aim of the  education system depends on the success of the teaching-learning process in the  classroom. The success of the learning-teaching activity depends on efficient classroom  management. Knowing the characteristics of students and arranging the process  according to this, arranging in-class relationships, arranging the physical structure of the  class, providing student motivation, managing in-class activities and learning processes,  sustaining the discipline and managing student misbehaviors are among the functions of  classroom management. Sustaining the discipline and managing student misbehaviors  have great importance in the success of the learning-teaching process. Improving  students learning in classrooms requires teachers to be effective in coping with classroom  misbehaviors Ding et al. 2008; Ding et al. 2010.  We cannot speak of the success of the teaching-learning process in a classroom  where the teachers spend most of their times sustaining the discipline and preventing  student misbehaviors. When a teacher who is responsible for the success of the learning  and teaching process in the class feels himself inadequate in managing discipline and  student misbehaviors may have depression, come down with psychosomatic diseases and  even for beginners, especially may resign. In this sense, it is of great importance for  teachers to be educated about managing discipline and student misbehaviors.   In this study; classroom discipline, discipline strategies, student misbehaviors and  coping strategies were elaborated. Moreover, a literature review of the writer on  elementary school students misbehaviors in Turkey was examined. 450 teachers who 

 Asst. Prof. Dr. Kemal KAYIKCI, Akdeniz University, Faculty of Education, Department of Educational Sciences,  kemalkayikciakdeniz.edu.tr   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  188  serve in elementary schools in Antalya participated in the study. A 5graded likert-type  scale named Student Misbehaviors Scale which was developed by the researcher  himself, was used in the study. In the analysis of study, arithmetic average, standard  deviation, t-test, one way ANOVA, LSD and Scheffe test were used. According to the  result of the study, there are significant differences among the frequency level of student  misbehaviors in the sense of gender, age, seniority, branch and technical means of  classroom. Misbehavior which is observed most frequently in schools is the types of  student misbehaviors towards each other. Young teachers who are below 30 are  exposed to these misbehaviors more than elder teachers. There are significant differences  between misbehavior frequency in the sense of classes with poor and good technical  means. As the technical means of classrooms increase, level of student misbehavior  decrease. 

Keywords: Classroom discipline, discipline strategies, classroom management, student  misbehaviors.  

INTRODUCTION 

a Concept of Discipline 

In every country, attaining the goals of the education system depends on attaining the  goals of the school; and attaining the goals of the school depends on attaining the goals of the  classroom. Like in many organizations, there are common goals included in the curriculum  and expected to be accomplished. Attaining these common goals effectively are only possible  in an orderly designed classroom. Orderly designed classrooms provide an effective learningteaching process. Enabling suitable studying order in the classroom by activating specific  rules and disciplines in the operation of the classroom is defined with the term of discipline.  Discipline has two meanings according to the behavior. For example, we say discipline is  quite bad in this class. The second one is the operations the teacher carries out in order to  enable desirable behaviors in students Charles, 2005; Kayikci, 2009. Discipline should not  be considered as giving punishment to students Sabanci, 2009. Discipline should be  regarded as teaching students to control themselves Cummings, 2000. When we consider  these descriptions, the main point can be said obeying the order, enabling the order and  creating the order.   Order provides clearness, stability to the operation of system, directs it; prevents the  arbitrariness of obscurity, discomfort of unknown. When the order is distracted, so is the  control of operation, it is not possible to estimate where, how and why it is going, it becomes  inevitable to divert from the goals. Diverting from the goals is diverting from the reasons of  the system foundation and existence Basar, 2008. Classroom order based on rules and  principles that would serve to the aim of class prevents possible problems in the classroom  and diverting from goals; helps the learning-teaching process to be effective. When we  consider in this sense, classroom discipline is perceived as one of the most important  elements of classroom management. Classroom management includes creating a suitable  environment for learning, physical arrangements, teaching process and time management,  arranging in-class relations according to specific rules, arrangement of communication and  enabling student motivation. Discipline includes reaction and actions of teachers towards   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  189 student behaviors which influence, prevent order and security of the class or learning Karip,  2003.  Providing the order that would enable the learning-teaching process to be effective is not  an easy thing that everybody can do. Teachers who are not effective enough in the sense of  classroom management and discipline spend most of their time with discipline problems. In  time, such kinds of teachers focus not on the goal of lesson but on student misbehaviors and  managing misbehaviors becomes the primary goal. The teacher who cannot cope with  misbehavior may lose self-confidence and may be in conflict with students regarding these  misbehaviors as a threat towards himself. Inevitable disorders which are repeated frequently  may cause frustration, outburst or even destruction for the teacher if he does not have the  ability of coping with them Emmer, 1991.  When the circumstances below happen, discipline problems are likely to occur Edwards  1997; Celep, 2002: 

When children find themselves in a meaningless learning environment, 

When the help given to students in learning, independent thinking is inadequate,  

When the children do exercise by force, 

When punishment is favored. 

b Discipline Theories and Models 

Discipline Theories 

1. Retributive Discipline Theory: It is based on the philosophy of primitive people.  Authority and rules can be used with personal goals and expectations. Some of the teachers  can use discipline as a means of revenge by personalizing it Sarita, 2000.   2. Punitive Discipline Theory: In this theory, discipline was formed on punishment.  Punishments to be given in the event of disobeying rules are determined in advance.   3. Preventing by Fear Discipline Theory: Philosophical basis of the theory is founded on  the pessimist approach of human nature. According to this theory, a human being has badness  in himself. He is rebellious, lazy and violent. It is necessary to prevent badness and reveal  goodness and people should be controlled not considering any ethic rule. An individual  should be controlled by various preventions and prohibitions. Misbehaviors should be  prevented by way of shouting, walking all over, bullying. The student who performs  misbehavior stands before the class and forms the source of fear for other students.   4. Reformative Discipline Theory: Using punishment as a sanction in every circumstance  is not possible. When the dissuasive effect of punishment decreases or is removed, it becomes  difficult to enable control in the class and manage the classroom. Therefore, it is needed to  form a thought of obeying present order and rules among students. Every student can perform  misbehavior, what is needed to be done is to detect the condition which causes students to  misbehave and remove it. In reformative theory, students are informed about possible  negative results of his misbehavior and enabled not to do them. This theory can be applied  with an efficient consultation and guidance.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  190  5. Preventive Formative Discipline Theory: It is based on the optimistic approach of  human nature. According to this theory, people are born good and pure. They learn badness,  laziness and selfishness with the effect of environment. The aim of preventive discipline is to  make logical arrangements and prepare students to manage himself. Characteristics of  preventive discipline are; 

a The aim of discipline is not to frighten, punish but to reform, help, attain and support  the confidence,  b Character and personality of every student is taken into consideration,  c It is based on support and temptation rather than forbid,  d It pays attention to student participation,  e It is objective, unbiased and just,  f It is based on cooperation Sarta, 2000.  

Discipline Models  There are various models in classroom management which are in the aim of detecting,  correcting and preventing the repetition of misbehaviors in class. Some of them are listed  below: 

1. Canter Model: The model is based on the thought of teachers being active in the class.  The aim is to teach the teacher to be calm but at the same time powerful in the class. He  struggles with misbehavior with the same determination from the beginning of term. He  clearly makes use of the power of reward and non-physical punishment not having a break,  staying at the school after courses, or being sent to the headmasters room. He informs  students and their family about classroom rules and their possible results. He especially wants  students to be respectful, kind and responsible towards the teacher, each other and school  management.   2. Realistic Therapy Model of Glaser: Glaser model is the guidance activity which directs  students towards reality and supports them to be responsible to compensate his needs in reallife conditions. Realistic therapy helps students make positive choices by making relations  between his behaviors and their results Erdem, 2011.  3. Group Dynamics Model of Kounin: This model was founded on group management  and the ripple effect. According to this model, when the teacher prevents the wrong behavior  of the student, this event creates a wave effect among students and prevents other students  from performing a similar behavior in the future. Clearness and determination are the most  important factors of this model. The teacher knows well what the students have done wrong  and what he should do instead of it. Directing towards the group is regarded as an important  dissuader of misbehaviors. The teacher should avoid severe physical threats since it would  irritate class. According to this model, the teacher should make kind shifts between courses,  should not suspend the course and move from one subject to another without order. Kounin  has concluded that in the prevention of misbehavior, teachers should do interrogation rather  than management Admiraal et al. 2000.   4. Behavioral Model: It is based on the thoughts of behavioral psychologist Skinner.  Reinforcement can be utilized in order to change specific dimensions of student behaviors.  Students who perform desirable behaviors should be rewarded with various presents. Students   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  191 who perform misbehavior should be left devoid of attention and presents. Students obtain  specific presents or activities in return of his points at the end of specific periods.   5. Effective Teacher Model: This model was developed by Thomas Gordon. The aim of  this model is to teach teachers how to form positive relationships with students. Gordon  supports the idea that misbehaviors can be decreased with clear and calming communication.  The basis of this model is to detect who the problem belongs to. If the problem is caused by a  student, the teacher helps student to solve the problem himself by listening to him actively  Empathic listening. According to this approach, if the teaching activity is prevented by the  students misbehaviors speaking, making noise; this problem is caused by the teacher  himself. It is the problem of the teachers not to attain the goals of the lesson. Gordon has  detected that although the problem is in fact caused by the teachers, they use you language  message you are wrong; you are stupid, lazy etc. However, the model suggests teachers to  tell what he expects by using I languageGordon, 1974.  6. Rational Results Model: The aim of this model, which was developed by Dreikurs, is  to improve self-discipline in children. The base of this model is to teach the student that he is  responsible for his behaviors. The model anticipates solving problems in the classroom as  democratically as possible. The student learns that he is responsible for his behaviors. For  example, the one who draws something on the classroom wall cleans it. The one who has not  done his homework, does it at the break or at lunch. Rational results that the student will  confront as a result of his misbehaviors are explained to him and he is expected to decide to  show desired behaviors Sarta, 2000. Dreikurs approach to discipline depends on  understanding the incentive behind student behaviors. According to him, students react  negative feelings by improving defense mechanisms which aims to protect their self-respect.  Dreikurs suggests teachers to determine the aim of students and use this information to make  them understand the aim of their behaviors. Every student wants respect and their  misbehaviors are caused by this desire. When he cannot attain the respect he wants, he begins  to show misbehavior Larrivee. 2005; Finger  Bamford.  7. Fred Joness Positive Classroom discipline: Clinic psychologist Fred Jones has  searched how to make the teaching process more active for long years. This positive  discipline model was formed by observing methods of successful teachers. The fundamental  aim of this model is to provide the student with the ability of controlling himself and enable  him him to develop suitable, positive behaviors. Jones states the importance of effective body  language, the necessity of participation by using supportive methods and guiding role of the  teacher Charles, 2005. The way of intervening students misbehavior is important. One of  the promising approaches is to support childrens positive behavior as being respectful  towards other students. Punishing, beating the student; humiliating him before other students  should be chosen, positive student behaviors should be preferred Soodak, 2003.  8. Marvin Marshalls Discipline through Raising Responsibility: Marshall has served as a  teacher, consultant and director in all stages of education. Marshalls discipline model aims to  develop good and suitable behaviors whatever the elements are, by increasing individual  responsibility. According to Marshall; in fact, the individual has the tendency to act  responsibly, but needs help to reveal this behavior. He asserts that this help can be attained by  giving responsibility to the individual. Negative behaviors can be decreased by having  conscious of responsibility. Since it is easy to understand and apply, it is preferred more by  the teachers Charles, 2005.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  192  9. Jane Nelsen, Lynn Lott, and H. Stephen Glenns Positive Discipline in the Classroom:  Nelsen, Lott and Glenn base their concepts on a positive discipline approach. Their aim is to  teach adults and children to respect themselves and others and have responsibility. Teachers  should create the environment in which they will have responsibility, respect each other and  develop cooperation. This environment can be improved with regular classroom activities  where positive discipline rules are discussed and applied. In this model, it is suggested to  respect the student. In these classes, the students should not be despised or exposed to  negative criticism even if he performs misbehavior, he should rather learn how to transform  fault to success. In addition to this, he should know how to solve problems by interacting with  teachers and friends. It is necessary to create an environment in which he will feel  enthusiastic for life and learning rather than fear and inadequacy. In this process, the student  will improve the feelings of belonging, commitment and regard Nelsen  et al., 2000.   10. Richard Curwin and Allen Mendlers Discipline with Dignity: the basis of this  discipline model is founded on respect and hope. All of the negative behaviors including  violence can be solved in long-term. It aims to study actively with students who are difficult  to cope with. According to this approach; the students whose self-respect is under threat has  the tendency to perform misbehavior. We should have hope to direct these students towards a  positive way. Curwin and Mendler have two contributions to school discipline: 1 strategies  of developing in-class behaviors by improving student self-respect and hope 2 strategies of  forming effective communication with offensive students. The fundamental aim of the model  is to provide better opportunities to all students in order to be successful. In performing this,  the sense of hope and respect play important role Curwin  Mendler, 1988; Charles, 2005.  11. Barbara Colorosos Inner Discipline: Coloroso lists student behaviors in three  groups: 1. Faults 2. Naughtiness 3. Chaos.  When such kinds of behaviors occur, he draws attention to enabling active discipline  rather than the punishment method. In an inner discipline model, it is important to show the  student what he has done wrong and make him think about the solution of the problem  without harming his personality. It is asserted that learning how to think rather than what to  think improves inner discipline. The individual should make his own decisions and know that  he is responsible for the decisions he has made. There are 3 main points for enabling active  discipline: 

The student must be honored and respected, 

The individual should be informed that he has a right on his own experiences, 

The individual should give his own decisions with his free will; he should learn that  he is responsible for his success and faults. 

12. Budd Churchwards Honor Level System of Discipline: Honor level behaviors are  expected to be revealed. Churchward has put forward a discipline system which is attractive  for all teachers. This approach is named the Honor Level System. Churchward observes  student behaviors for 14 days and determines various honor levels for positive or negative  results. The most superior side of the model is removing the stress due to monitoring student  behaviors closely. Students are aware of the things they should do in order to reach high  levels of honor. In this sense, the teacher should behave coherently. Shouting at or long  advices are not suggested for coping with misbehavior. As a result of misbehavior, rules   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  193 which are already known by the students begin to operate. For example, the student who has  disobeyed the rules compensates his condition by behaving good for 1-2 weeks. Chruchward  asserts that behavior results should be listed regularly by using a computer-based program  Churchward, 2003; Charles, 2005.  13. Spencer Kagan, Patricia Kyle, and Sally Scotts WinWin Discipline: Representatives  of the model assert that disorder and discipline problems in the class provide opportunity to  learn expected behaviors. These negative environments provide an opportunity to learn  valuable human skills such as controlling oneself, anger management, making gooddecision, strong personality and understanding others feelings. With this in mind, concepts  which form the keystone of the model can be explained as such: 1 Cooperation of teacher,  student and family is important for creating the feeling of responsibility. 2 Long-term  solutions should be taken depending on student-teacher interaction. 3 The environment  should be designed for the student to make his own decisions by using his responsibilities.   Kagan, Kyle and Scott list four types of misbehavior as such: anger, disobedience,  challenge, and losing interest towards social environment. Moreover, seven situations of  students which cause misbehavior are given: drawing attraction, escaping from defeat, being  angry, enabling control, being active, getting bored of the environment and not being aware  of the events. All of these positions emerge from the wrong choices in compensating the  needs of people. There are two main aims of discipline approach based on mutual benefit: 1  showing how to fulfill needs by way of positive and responsible behaviors 2 providing  valuable life styles. Students and teacher meeting at common emotions and thoughts and  having consensus have importance in forming active classroom discipline. We language  which shows that both sides meet at common point must be used. In providing discipline, the  problem is examined; not the source of problem. Fast and long-term solutions based on the  problem should be created Kagan. S.  et al, 2004.   14. Linda Alberts Cooperative Discipline: It is a kind of discipline based on close  cooperation of student and teacher in taking classroom decisions. The role of family cannot  be ignored in activating the learning. Preferences of students have an important place at the  basis of this model. Students are motivated to behave the way they like. Having wrong aims  cause emergence of misbehaviors. Teachers can direct choices of students by supporting them  or by cooperating with them. Students should feel that they are valuable members of the  classroom. Students should be supported to study in cooperation with their friends.  Participation of students and families should be enabled in the planning of a classroom  discipline system.   The basis of the cooperative discipline model developed by Albert depends on the  regulation of positive and negative behaviors of students in order to compensate their needs.  As long as these basic needs are fulfilled and students are encouraged in a positive way, the  number of misbehaviors is minimized and cooperative participation between teacher-student  increases. Rather than removing this totally, the teacher should minimize the condition as  much as possible by developing positive attitudes Charles, 2005.   15. C.M. Charless Synergetic Discipline:C.M. Charles who has received his master  degree in the field of education psychology focuses on a cooperative teaching method which  depends on developing a qualified learning environment and positive student behaviors. A  discipline system in which mutual content turns into energy is aimed. Synergy means high  power or energy that emerges in the process of social interaction between two or more people.    EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  194  In a discipline model, a teaching approach which is based on increasing energy,  responsibility and desired behaviors is dominant. For preventing misbehaviors, reasons  behind these should be considered. In making the decisions of the classroom, participation of  students should be enabled. When misbehaviors occur, people should behave in a positive and  respectful attitude way. Charles expresses the importance of activating students in order to  remove common reasons behind misbehaviors and increase motivation. In this model,  teachers are not suggested to dominate students or have struggles with them. We can rather  speak of students willful sharing with love and respect. Charles, in this sense, mentions the  importance of being a society and ethic behaviors Charles, 2000; Charles.2005.  16. Alfie Kohns Beyond Discipline: In the basis of this model which aims at thinking,  punishing and cooperating; there is an approach based on improving the conscious of  society rather than a popular discipline model. According to Kohn, punishment and reward  system is the reason of distrusting their judgments. Environments in which students can  explain their thoughts and study towards solution in a cooperation are created. Two  contributions provided by Kohn in classroom discipline are explained as such: 1 The teacher  is only a guide in attaining information and constructivist theory which is formed by the  experiences of the student should be based on. According to this approach, directing the  students towards subjects which they regard important is a good method for providing  discipline in the classroom. The second contribution of Kohn is to develop the conscious of  an in-class society which is based on educating responsible students. In this way, Kohn  asserts that a discipline approach which considers others in class would occur and that would  prevent misbehaviors Charles, 2005.  

c The Effect of Student Misbehaviors on the Learning-Teaching   Process and Teacher 

Classroom misbehavior is taken as any activity which a annoys, upsets or distresses  teachers, b is disruptive of good order in the classroom and causes trouble, and c leads  teachers to comment continually Houghton, Wheldall,  Merrett, 1988; Ding et al. 2010.  Such kinds of problems can be experienced as a result of misbehaviors. The emotional  environment of the class is distracted; education of all the students is prevented, discomfort  and chaos are experienced in the classroom, the teacher becomes nervous. Student  misbehaviors not only prevent students learning but also prevents them from keeping the  information they have learned Seidman, 2005.  Inefficient and inadequate classroom management and discipline causes student  misbehavior and also student misbehavior influences the success of the teacher and education  process negatively. According to a study conducted in 2004, 75 of teachers have stated that  if student misbehaviors were less in their classroom, they would spare more time for teaching  and teaching activities. Student misbehaviors talking and walking in the class without  permission prevent students who are interested in the learning process Guardino   Fullerton, 2010.   It was found that teachers who had greater concerns about student misbehaviors tended  to be less confident in managing classrooms and thereby were more likely to use non-physical  punishment and refer the student to other school personnel Martin et al.,1999. Interestingly,  recent comparison studies revealed that Chinese teachers appeared less punitive than Israeli and   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  195 Australian teachers Lewis, Romi, Qui,  Katz, 2005, 2008. Chinese teachers favored positive  coping strategies such as recognition or reward and discussion or negotiation Ding et al.  2010.  According to the study of Blas, it was detected that the teacher is the main stress  resource of classroom interaction; stress is composed of discipline, indifference, low success  and absenteeism. Moreover, stress is the most important resource in the decrease of teacher  performance and level of students learning. The reasons of teachers stress are poor  discipline among students, rudeness and continuous speaking, struggle of creating a silent  environment in the classroom. I feel myself like an animal trainer not a teacher; this  sentence heard from a teacher who cannot cope with the pressure of student behaviors  adequately represents the struggle of many recent teachers Admiraal et al. 2000. It is a wellestablished fact that student misbehavior is a factor in teacher burnout and the decision of  novice teachers to leave the profession Public Agenda, 2004; Allen, 2010. 

d Resources of Student Misbehaviors in the Class 

A study involved pupils from the first year of secondary schooling i.e., 11and 12-yearolds in one inner city school. The results of the study indicated that pupils attributions for  misbehavior at school were best represented by four factors, fairness of teachers actions,  pupil vulnerability, adverse family circumstances and strictness of classroom regime. The  first two of these factors were also seen as more significant contributors to pupil misbehavior than  the latter two, a finding in marked contrast to the results from studies of teachers views of  the causes of pupil misbehavior Croll  Moses, 1985; Miller, 1995; Miller, Ferguson   Moore, 2002.  There are many resources of student misbehaviors at school. Most important of these are  family, peer groups, the student himself, teachers, school management, environment of  school, mass communication means radio, television, media and internet, course program  and school rules. We can list these resources as in-class and non-class resources. 

a Non-class Resources  1. Family: Investigations have repeatedly shown that teachers view parents and home  circumstances as being the major cause of pupil misbehavior in schools Croll  Moses, 1985;  Miller, 1995. Croll and Moses 1985  used a postal survey to elicit the views of 428 junior school  teachers and found this group to attribute misbehavior in schools to parents in 66 of cases  Miller, Ferguson  Moore, 2002. Miller 1996 found that teachers located the origins of  pupils difficulties with factors under the control of parents in 71 of cases. For example, as a  result of mother and father living separate and children being devoid of concern and  compassion may cause various behavioral problems. Such kinds of students expect much  more attention from the teacher and may perform misbehavior in order to attain his goal.  Students who are the only child of the family and who are over-spoiled; and thereby whose  every wish have been fulfilled, expect their friend to give priority to their needs and  sometimes live problems with their friends. Indifference of families towards a child and his  lessons influence motivation of children negatively and may cause misbehavior. Children  who are exposed to violence by their parents may have the tendency to show violence to his  friends and cause misbehaviors. When there is a contrast between family education and   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  196  education given at school, children may live an inner conflict and reflect it to classroom. For  example, if the student adopts the principles he has obtained from family education, he may  have discussions with the student, sometimes be indifferent towards the course, deal with  something else and distract other students. Parents comparing their children with other  students and expecting more than the capacity of student influences student behavior  negatively.   Support of parents is needed for the prevention of student misbehavior. A strong  cooperation between family-school management and teacher in preventing student  misbehaviors at school and forming successful discipline system is required. Students  adapting to the order of school and parents support in this process make it easy for students  to attain positive behavior habits at school. Providing education for the family is the  responsibility of school.   2. Peer Groups: One of the other important elements which influence student behaviors  at school is peer groups. As a member of peer groups, students try to adapt to the behavioral  norms of these groups. Therefore, peer groups may sometimes play positive or sometimes  negative roles on student behaviors. Peer groups which influence students and are taken as a  model by them, directing their behaviors in the class. Students resolve to behave according to  the norms of peer group they belong to or behavior norms of peer group suppress the  behaviors of students. Students being included in a peer group which has positive behavior  norms influence their behavior positively and they should be encouraged by teacher and  family for this inclusion. School management, parents and teacher should cooperate to amend  the groups which have negative behavior norms Sarta, 2000.   3. School Management: School managements adequacy about forming and applying  discipline rules may cause student misbehaviors at school and in the classroom. School  management that is not based on science of management, inadequacy in problem-solving, an  administration where the interests and needs of student is not taken into regard may cause  disorder in the discipline of school and class. Rules which do not operate actively form the  basis of discipline problems in time.  4. Uncontrolled Media: Uncontrolled and dangerous media publishing influence attitude  and behavior of students and may cause students to show misbehavior in the classroom.  

b In-Class Resources  1. Student Characteristics: a Students who do not have self-confidence may not want to  be involved in the activities thinking that they might be unsuccessful. Successful sides of  these students shall be expressed and they should be enabled to experience success. B  Students are more sensitive, resentful and unstable in adolescence. In this period, students live  uneven and rough days. These unstable feelings are reflected in different ways. This  reflection is sometimes as admiration, commitment, and sometimes as anger, hatred, grudge,  rebellion and violence. In this situation, the teacher should be understanding and help the  student. C Another element which directs students to misbehavior is anxiety. Especially test  anxiety which creates serious discipline problems on students. Students should focus on  learning rather than exams Sarta, 2000. D Students who have different backgrounds carry  their cultural features with them and may live problems in adapting to the behaviors and rules  required by the culture of the class. Some of the students may perform misbehavior towards  their teacher and friends in the process of adaptation and may violate the rules of school  easily. Students who think that they do not attain the respect they deserve may make noise, hit   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  197 the desk with a pencil or ruler in order to draw attention. Students who are seeking power  may challenge their friends and sometimes even their teacher. Moreover, revengeful students  are too brave that they do not stand away from being punished Finger  Bamford, 2006.   2. Program and Teaching Models: Program contents which do not especially consider the  attention, expectation and requirements of student and based on memorizing may cause  discipline problems among students. Students do not pay attention to learn the information  which they believe to be useless. Students memorize this information just in order to pass the  exam and forget after the exam. Since they would not be busy with courses which are not  useful and interesting for them, it would be difficult for the teacher to involve these students  into the course and these students would perform misbehavior. Moreover, the usage of  unsuitable teaching methods which do not comply with multiple-intelligence of the teacher  would decrease students interest towards the lesson and cause misbehaviors. That the  duration of courses are not suitable to the development of the student, in other words, long  courses which would force the attention of the student, having mathematics at the final hours,  not using enough teaching technology projection  computer etc may direct students to  misbehave.   3. Classroom environment and climate: While determining classroom management  strategies, socio-economic and cultural background of students should be regarded. When  students with autocratic backgrounds are educated in a democratic environment, or vice versa,  it is possible to live some problems. In addition to this, depending on all of the requirements  of modern education, a democratic environment should be based on and students should be  included in all of the processes in the class and directed toward taking responsibility. This  approach can also help the student to adopt self-discipline. Forming a warm and positive  environment in the classroom and sincere  fiduciary relationship between students and  teachers can be effective in decreasing student misbehaviors. It is the teacher who is  especially responsible for this duty. A classroom management based on rivalry causes  behaviors of cooperation between students, sharing and supporting each other to decrease and  causes students to be reserved and violent towards each other. This situation causes  communication and interaction problems among students. Not setting classroom rules  together with students makes it difficult for students to obey the rules. Students violate the  rules which they do not understand thoroughly, they do not believe to be useful and find it  difficult to obey.   4. Physical Order of the Classroom: Researchers have studied the relationship between  classroom environment, student behavior and academic study. Well-organized classrooms  enable possible misbehaviors between teacher and student to be less Guardino  Fullerton,  2010. Changing the environment of the classroom may help to interfere the student who  performs misbehavior Conroy  et al., 2002. Order of the classroom is an important  element which increases or decreases the motivation of the student and teacher. The physical  structure of the classroom gives the student the opportunity to behave free and participate in  the activities; while problematic behaviors would occur in classrooms which are not wellorganized. Small or big desk, chair of the student and student sitting at an unsuitable place are  important factors which influence misbehavior. Size of the class large classes frequently  cause misbehaviors and monotonous classes monotonous classes influence the interest of  student negatively are the factors which effect student behaviors Seidman, 2005. The  motivation and participation of students will increase in well-organized classes and the  frequency of experiencing problems will decrease Jones and Jones, 2004. According to a   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  198  study, when the order of classroom is changed suitably, it was seen that time spent with  academic study increases and time spent with misbehavior decrease Guardino  Fullerton,  2010.   5. Personal and Occupational Characteristics of the Teacher: Although the teacher is  expected to prevent student misbehaviors by way of efficient class discipline, they can be the  reasons of misbehaviors. The most important reason of this is the inadequacy of teachers  classroom management skill. According to the studies about classroom management,  misbehaviors of teachers may be the reason of misbehaviors of students Cummings, 2000.  Excreting specific hormones as a result of stress influences learning negatively Cummings,  2000; Kayikci, 2009.  Effective communication skills of the teacher are important keys for the success of the  teacher. As an adult, the teacher has to accept the student as an individual regardless of his  age and avoid behaviors which would insult him before the class shut up, get off my sight  etc. and avoid speeches, attitude, actions and behavior which would cause frustration.  Misbehavior of teachers in the sense of students were defined as such Sarta, 2000:  shouting, threatening, using physical power, walking towards the students, bullying, insulting,  swearing, behaving rudely, giving order, dominating, mocking, scorning, tagging negatively,  judging, reprimanding, leaving lesson, not being sorry even in when he is wrong,  contradiction, being unprepared, inability of using time effectively, punishing the failure,  paying attention only to successful students. Trnkl et al. 2001 reported that resources of  discipline problems in primary schools in Turkey are crowded classrooms, lesson materials  and tools, curriculum, social activities, play grounds and canteen, social environment of the  school, teacher, insufficient counseling services and personal characteristics of students. 

e Attaining Classroom Discipline with Efficient Classroom Management  Strategies 

Self-educated and skillful teachers on the issue of class management and discipline can  prevent or minimize student misbehaviors enabling efficient classroom discipline with  classroom management strategies. In his research, Kayikci 2009 reported a negative and  significant relation observed between the teachers classroom management dimensions of  Teacher-student relation and communication, Recognition of student characteristics and  needs, Application of teaching process and motivation, Setting up class rules and  application and Arrangement of classroom environment and physical structure and all  dimensions Towards spoiling teaching process, Students towards each other, Towards the  teacher, Towards violation of disciplinary rules related to the students disciplinary behavior.  There is a positive and significant relation between teachers classroom management  dimension regarding Management of undesirable behavior and students disciplinary  behavior dimension of Towards violation of disciplinary rules.   Teachers being successful with classroom management and discipline depend on their  having necessary information and skill. In order to manage student behaviors efficiently,  teachers should educate themselves about human psychology, group behavior, and efficient  communication, problem-solving and should reflect this to application. It is an important  factor for teachers to have occupational experience to attain this. It is expected from a teacher   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  199 who has the information and skills listed above to apply these strategies in forming classroom  order and attaining discipline.   1. Preparation and Planning before Lesson: An important part of student misbehaviors  emerges from the failure in the process of learning-teaching. Most of these failures arise from  not preparing enough, not bringing the equipments to the class on time, gaps between  activities, not using time efficiently and actively and not giving correct decisions in the sense  of suitable learning teaching strategies. The most effective way of removing these failures is  to make an applicable plan suitable to the objective conditions of the class and to apply it  successfully. Education and teaching being effective and efficient is possible by giving  necessary importance to planning and teachers getting prepared for class Kayikci, 2011.  Conducting classroom activities in the frame of a specific plan increases the confidence of  especially recent teachers. In addition to this, planning helps to prevent possible student  misbehaviors.  2. Group Dynamics: Teacher should analyze friends groups informal groups to which  students belong to and their structure as well and form a relationship which helps to the aim  of course in the classroom. The teacher should use the energy of the class in the aim of course  without ignoring informal groups. The teacher should for a classroom culture that is not based  on rivalry but cooperation.  3. Acknowledging and Considering Individual Characteristics: When the teacher knows  student and features of students well, for example, knows cultural environment, affective  features, cognitive features academic level, learning styles, multiple intelligence etc. and  give education in regards of this, he will not leave the success to chance and prevent or at  least minimize discipline problems during the course.  Students come to school from different backgrounds. Every student behaves according to  the culture and behavior norms of the environment in which he is brought up. The  environment of school and classroom make it necessary for students to keep pace with  classroom culture. In this adaptation process, there may be adaptation problems both among  students and between students and teacher. This must be regarded as something natural.  During this process, the teacher should know the culture of students and help them to adapt.  This process sometimes lasts long and sometimes short for students. Teachers should be  patient, conscious and understanding towards students overcoming this process successfully.  Teachers that know personal features, interests and expectations of students is an important  factor which determines teachers behavior in class and his expectations from students.   Another field in which teachers should know and pay attention about students is the  emotions of students. Students are resentful, aggressive, easily angry and under the pressure  of sexual development Tierno, 1991. A teacher who detects this is more efficient in  understanding the student and preventing possible negative situations. Teachers should first of  all understand student requirements and the relationship of behaviors related to it. Later on, a  good classroom management should be provided in order to compensate personal needs of  students in the classroom Celep, 2002. In an active classroom management, it is expected  from teachers to regard expectations of students, participate actively in the course, construct  the education thematically, behave towards the student in a friendly way and provide  cooperative education conditions Jones and Jones, 2001.   4. Positive teacher-student relations and positive classroom culture: Organizing teacherstudent relations is not the only responsibility of the  teacher in the classroom. Creating  positive, moderate and confident relationships among students is also the task of the teacher.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  200  Teachers should adopt a classroom management strategy which is based on not rivalry but on  cooperation. It is because in a classroom management which is based on competition and  rivalry, conflicts between students and misbehaviors increase. Students cooperating and  supporting each other is possible with a classroom culture which is based on cooperation.  Positive culture and atmosphere created in the classroom prevent and decrease possible  misbehaviors.   The teaching-learning process in the classroom depends on, in a way, to the  communication process of teacher-student and students among themselves. Therefore,  communication skills and positive relationships of the teacher in classroom management is  regarded as one of the most important elements of his success. Warm and sensitive ways of  communication between teacher and student is an important factor in decreasing  misbehaviors. The respect of the teacher towards the student, being sincere and moderate are  important factors which effect students attitude and motivation of the student. Effective  teachers make eye contact with students, have clear body language, listens to students with  respect and always seem attentive. This is a method which decreases teacher-student conflict  Meyers, 2003; Seidman, 2005.   The quality of teacher-student relationships effect academic success and student  behavior. Students prefer sincere and friendly teachers. When teachers are more sympathetic  and have more positive roles for students, it is no doubt very important for students to have  more positive judgments towards school and teachers Jones  Jones, 1998; Celep, 2002.  Good relationships between teachers and students require enabling specific basic conditions.  According to this, the relationship between teacher and students should be clear, transparent,  direct and based on honesty, teacher and students should value each other and have the  feeling of mutual commitment; it must be regarded that every student has unique  characteristics, interests and abilities and these differences should be considered; and needs of  teachers and students should be compensated mutually Gordon, 1974. In the meta-analysis  of more than 100 recent studies Marzano, 2003, it was concluded that the quality of teacherstudent relationship is the keystone of classroom management elements. In fact, meta-analysis  studies show that teachers who have good relations with students averagely experience 31  less discipline problems, violations and attention problems Marzano, 2003.  

f Student Misbehaviors in the Class 

In fact, it is difficult to draw the limits of misbehaviors because the factors which make  behaviors undesirable depend on a sequence of variables such as conditions, circumstances,  place etc. Aydn, 2007. Every kind of behavior which prevents educational efforts at school  is named as a misbehavior. Their effects are graded. In this sense, misbehaviors are listed in a  wide range from the one that is not destructive to the most destructive Baar, 2008. Some of  the misbehaviors are not regarded as destructive ones but as the ones which direct towards  misbehavior. Not bringing equipments such as the course-book, notebook, forgetting trainers,  sports-clothes and not completing the homework can be listed among these Lemlech, 1988.  Misbehaviors abuse and ignore common rights of teachers and students, effect negatively and  prevent educational aims, plan and activities.   Student misbehaviors were classified according to specific features by various writers.  For example, Seidman 2005 classifies misbehaviors in five ways. These are: aggression,   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  201 immorality, disobedience towards authority, classroom disorder and faults done stupidly.  Some of these behaviors may occur wrongly coughing, sneezing  while some are done  deliberately talking, yawning loudly, leaving the class early. Meyers 2003 has classified  misbehaviors as apparent and obscure behaviors. Behaviors carried out apparently are talking  all through the lesson, eating and drinking something loudly or discussing with teacher.  Teachers find these behaviors as immature and disgusting. Obscure behaviors are those  carried out more passively and carelessly such as sleeping during the course, missing classes,  laziness, insensibility and leaving the class early. This list can be offered as misbehaviors in  the classroom: being late for class, shouting at others, walking towards them, bullying,  threatening, assaulting, outraging, talking rudely and swearing, verbal harassment, making  false accusations towards friends, cheating, unreasonable absenteeism, leaving the class and  walking in the class without permission, not listening to the course, preventing others  listening and studying, whistling, walking on the desks and table, talking without permission,  talking continuously, acting rudely and disrespectfully, giving harm to the goods of the class  and teacher,, stealing others goods, smoking cigarettes and using addictive drugs, lying  Sarta, 2000. Not obeying rules of clearness and manners, irritating others, not being  careful and attentive while doing task, being rude and disrespectful towards teacher, not  listening to friends or preventing them study, talking while others are talking, giving harm to  the goods of friends are misbehaviors that are frequently experienced Basar, 2008. In many  classes there is negative feeling and sense of hostility which covers all the students. In these  classes there is a reaction towards homework, not participating in the lesson deliberately and  making complaints Meyers, 2003. In the largest survey of bullying in schools in the United  States to date Nansel,Overpeck, Pila, Ruan, SimmonsMorton,  Sccheidt, 2001, 29,0  of  students were found to be involved in bullying. Dynamics: 13  as bullies, 10,6  as victims,  and 6.3  as bully-victims. Allen, 2010 The literature also suggests that gender is a consistent  factor in students disruptive behavior Cameron, 1998. Boys tend to be more disruptive than  girls, and also tend to manifest more aggressive modes of disruption Wright  Dusek, 1998. 

g Approaches and Strategies of Coping with Student Misbehaviors   in the Class 

Approaches of Managing Misbehaviors 

1. Non-interventionist Approach: This is the approach which informs the students about  the problem and makes them solve the problem. It estimates that the student has good  intent and is reliable and should control himself and can do this if he is given the  opportunity. The teacher is not a dictator but a mediator.   2. Behavioral Approach: It is an approach in which the teacher directs behavior of  student when needed. Environment is responsible for the behavior. Rules and result  of disobeying them are determined in advance. Obeying the rules is rewarded and  disobeying them is punishable, or the student is left devoid of advantages.   3. Interactive Approach: It is among behavioral and helping approaches. The teacher  shares the authority with student. The teacher accepts that he is capable of solving  the problem of the student but still needs the help of an expert. Rules are set together  and solutions are searched together as well. In the choice of these approaches,   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  202  characteristics of behavior, student and environment is considered Salend,  Whittaker,  Reeder 1993; Basar, 2008. 

Strategies of Managing Misbehaviors  Actions teacher can do against student misbehaviors can be listed as such: Ignoring little  faults, ignoring provocative actions, making eye-contect, getting close, warning,  reprimanding, changing the place he sits, smiling, changing the subject, giving time-out,  talking to, leave him deprives from rights and freedom, keeping at class, not doing his wish,  getting into contact with family, making contract, giving non-physical punishment Elrod   Terrel, 1991; Baar, 2008. Before directing these options, what should be done is to  understand misbehavior and search for the reasons of this. In this way, it would be easy to  attain which strategy to choose for the action.   Understanding the problem: It is composed of recognizing the behavior, determining and  commenting on it. Determination of the behavior requires having information about the  behavior, behavior and environment. Commenting on the behavior directs the teacher to its  possible reasons. It must be detected that how many people are irritated by the behavior.   Ignoring: Behavior which does not spoil the classroom discipline and happens  unintentional can be ignored. Teachers who ignore little carelessness and focus on direct  academic activities rather than dealing with misbehaviors can be successful Brophy, 1988.   Warning: Sometimes students may misbehave unintentionally. In this situation, the  teacher warns the student with mimic or body language and tries to prevent their petition of  behavior. If the student does not understand this, the teacher gets close to students and makes  eye contact with him. If the student does not understand this as well, teacher can gently poke  the student. The teachers poking to the shoulder of the astudent gently can make him aware  of the fault he has done. These acts are almost always effective. Yet other strategies can be  applied in the event of them being unsuccessful. One of them is a verbal warning. First of all,  the students are warned by whispering and if this does not give results, the student can be  warned loudly. Verbal warnings should be done softly; in a voice which does not have  different meaning or sense.   Making changes in the lesson: If the student misbehaves in cooperation with the friends,  his seat can be changed. If the student continues his misbehaviors, he can be placed in a  remote place of the class with the aim of leaving him alone Celik, 2005. If the problem has  increased between teacher and student, the lesson was left in the background, emotion is  dominant over logic, a break can be given. Another activity can be done and participation can  be enabled do in this way misbehaviors can be prevented. Apart from these;   Giving Responsibility: It is natural for a student who thinks he has nothing to do or  nothing interesting for him to misbehave. In this situation, giving him responsibility,  changing his task with an interesting one can be effective Baar, 1988.   Talking with Student: If it is not possible to prevent the misbehavior by warning or in  another way, it can be effective for the teacher to talk with the student. This conversation can  be in class or out of the class; individually or with group. Students can be expected not to  repeat the misbehavior by telling him the results of his behaviors.   Communication with School management and Family: Rather than coping with the  problematic situations alone, the teacher should cooperate with school management and  family. This method should be used when the teacher is stuck in a difficult situation and   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  203 needs the help of their support, when the problem arises from school or family and the  solution requires their contribution.  Punishing: there can be circumstances in which the worst means should be used.  Punishment is one of them. Punishment can be used as a means of preventing misbehavior  and providing the order Rich, 1991.   These suggestions are set forward in the prevention of in-class misbehavior of higher  education student which causes them to be rusticated Meyers, 2003: 

a Sensible and warm communication among people.   b A basis on which common decisions are taken in the class.  c Creating learning groups in the classroom.   d Teachers being understanding and empathetic towards students emotions in order to  decrease potential misbehaviors.  e Helping students to evaluate their own alternatives.  f Using suitable methods of problem solving.  

Palardy  Palardy 2001 listed below nine preventive strategies which are essential.  Even if all the preventive strategies described here are used, behavior problems may still  emerge. But if the strategies are used, the number and intensity of these problems will be  reduced significantly. 

1. Teacher must feel comfortable with themselves, their pupils, and their subject matter.  2. Teachers must believe in their students capacity and propensity for appropriate  classroom conduct.  3. Teachers must ensure that their instructional activities are interesting and relevant.  4. Teachers must match their instructional activities with their pupils capabilities.  5. Teachers must involve their pupils in setting up the rules.   6. Teachers must make certain that their pupils know and understand the routine.  7. Teachers must identify their problem times. When do pupils tend to act up? Or  toward the end of the period? On the playground? In the lunchroom? In the halls? On  Monday, or Wednesday, or Friday?  8. Teacher must remember that pupils are not little adults.  9. Teacher must give evidence that they genuinely like and respect their pupils. 

Brophy and Mc Caslin 1992 have searched effective methods used by teachers in  dealing with problematic students. Generally, teachers who have had the best result are those  who touch the student or draw his attraction by coming close to him, in contrast, teachers who  choose to wait rather than intervening in the situation and who rarely states his discontent  with misbehavior has become unsuccessful. According to Wubbels et al., teachers efforts of  discipline such as warning or sending off students may cause problems in teacher-student  interaction. The reaction given to aggressive behaviors may cause more aggressive behaviors.  This situation may cause a vicious circle between trainee teacher and student Admiraal et al.  2000. According to Rudolf Dreikurs et al., 1982 misbehavior arises from students  perception of social status inefficiency of the student and this is one of the ways of gaining  reputation. Problems occur when the student cannot make himself distinguished with socially  acknowledged means. Dreikurs have made explanations to four types of misbehavior which   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  204  he calls as drawing attraction Finger  Bamford, 2010. Explanations of Dreikurs about  these four misbehaviors are summarized in Table 1. 

Table 1. Reasons and Management Strategies of Four kinds of Misbehaviors   according to Dreikurs 

Misbehavior  Reason  Management Strategy  The most common ones are  making noise continuously,  hitting the desk with pencil or  ruler, asking for help even if it is  not required.   Desire to draw  attention when he  thinks he could not  attain the reputation  he deserves.  Students are made to feel that their behaviors  are recognized, students can be directed to  routine tasks, their studies can be expressed in  group.   He refuses to fulfill the demands  of teacher and obey the rules. He  gets into discussion with teacher  apparently.  Seeking for strength. He should not be reacted with anger, not get  into fight of strength. Teacher should recess  for a while, and then talk to student one to one,  student can be given tasks which would enable  him reputation and status.   Deliberately, pouting, not  cooperating, tries to hurt those  around him, threatening teacher  and students, giving harm to  school equipment.   Seeking for revenge. Teacher should be calm, say to student that his  behaviors are unacceptable, he shouldnt  retaliate, draw the student away from the  environment or you suspend from the  environment, do physical intervention in the  frame of rules. Later meeting can be carried  out in Glasser method.  These are students who are  indifferent towards school and do  not have any effort. They seem to  be doing something and say I  cannot accomplish teacher.  They express their desperation.  The student who has  learned helplessness. Teacher should talk with the student and he  must be made to deal with tasks suitable to his  level, his effort and success should be  expressed and student should be encouraged in  order to fulfill his responsibilities.  

A RESEARCH ON THE OBSERVATION OF STUDENT MISBEHAVIORS   IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS IN TURKEY IN THE SENSE OF VARIOUS  DEMOGRAPHIC FEATURES 

The aim of the study is to detect the reasons of student misbehaviors in elementary  schools, frequency of these misbehaviors and detect whether there are significant differences  in the frequency of misbehaviors according to various demographic features. In this way, it is  aimed to make suggestions to prevent and deal with misbehaviors in the classroom and to  educate them with in-service education. In this aim, the questions below were studied: 

1. What are the student misbehaviors and frequency of them? What are the most  experienced student misbehaviors in every level?  2. Does the frequency level of student misbehaviors have a significant difference  according to the gender of teachers?  3. Does the frequency level of student misbehaviors have a significant difference  according to the age of teachers?   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  205 4. Does the frequency level of student misbehaviors have a significant difference  according to the rank of teachers?  5. Does the frequency level of student misbehaviors have a significant difference  according to the branch of teachers?  6. Does the frequency level of student misbehaviors have a significant difference  according to the technical means of the classroom? 

Method 

This study is a descriptive study and was carried out in a literature review model. The  study was conducted in the 2008 academic year, in Turkey  Antalya city center and  Konyaalt, Muratpaa, Kepez, Manavgat, Alanya and Kumluca.   Universe and Sample: The universe of research is the elementary schools in Antalya city  center and Konyaalt, Muratpaa, Kepez, Manavgat, Alanya and Kumluca. The sample of the  study is elementary school teachers in 40 elementary schools chosen randomly.   Data Collection Tool and Collection of Data: In the study scale of Student  Misbehaviors prepared in 5-graded Likert type and developed after validity and reliability  analyses were done. Choices, points and arithmetic average used in the scale and arithmetic  average intervals were shown in Table 2.  

Table 2. Choices, points and arithmetic average used in the scale 

Points  Choices  Arithmetic Average Intervals  1  Never  1.00 1.79  2  Rarely  1.80 2.59  3  Sometimes  2.60 3.39  4  Often  3.40 4.19  5  Always  4.20 5.00 

In order to test content validity of the scale, views of academicians and teachers were  obtained. Researches on classroom management and discipline, books and data obtained from  literature review were utilized. In addition to this, an item pool was formed by collecting the  same comments to the question what are students misbehaviors in your class? from 60  teachers who serve in 10 different schools and chosen randomly. Statements in the item pool  were evaluated in the sense of being compatible with the aim of the study, compatible with  the problem, easily understood and suitable to scale development techniques. after necessary  regulations are done; pilot scheme of the scale which is formed of 54 items was applied on  120 teachers who serve in 10 different schools.  Total item correlation and factor analysis were done for the test of structure validity of  the survey. These stages were followed in the development of scale: KMO was calculated as  97.1 ; Bartletts. 17678,801. In this way, it was detected that the data is suitable for factor  analysis and so they were done factor analysis. Factor loads were calculated with varimax  rotation by applying principal components technique. Items whose factor load values are over  0.45 were evaluated in this scale. It was suitable to take factor loads whose values vary   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  206  between 0.30 and 0.40 as under cut point in the formation of factor pattern Neale and  Liebert, 1980; Tavancl, 2006.  Exploratory factor analysis was used in the development of scale. These analyses are  defined as types of studies in which information about the nature of measured factors are tried  to attain rather than examining a specific hypothesis Crocker and Algina, 1986; Tavancl,  2006. Internal consistency was calculated for the calculation of scale reliability and  Cronbach alpha values of each dimension were found. The scale was composed of 46 items  and 4 dimensions after removing some of the items. Number of items, names and Cronbach  Alpha values of these dimensions are, respectively; 
18 items of towards violating teaching process: .96;  2 15 items of towards students each other: .96;   3 9 items of students towards teacher: .92;  4 4 items of towards violating discipline rules: .79. 

It is suitable for the internal consistency coefficient alpha to be at least 0.70 Nunnally,  1978; Tavancl, 2006. 64 of the variance are described with the factors. Variance rates  which vary between 40 and 60 are regarded to be adequate in the analyses on social  sciences Scherer, Wiebe, Luther ve Edams, 1988; Tavancl, 2006. After studies of  reliability and validity, Scale of Student Misbehavior composed of 46 items was applied to  520 teachers and data from 450 scales which turned back were evaluated. In the analysis of  the data, SPSS 16 package program was used. In the analysis, arithmetic average x, standard  deviation Ss, t-test, one-way variance analysis ANOVA, LSD and Scheffe tests were used  as well. The level of relevance was accepted as 0.05 

Findings and Comments 

1. Student misbehaviors in the classroom and frequency of these behaviors and the most  frequent student misbehaviors according to various dimensions were given in Table 3 and  Table 4. 

Table 3. Student misbehaviors in the classroom according to the dimensions 

NO Student Misbehaviors  Levels  N  X  S   I  Student misbehaviors towards violating the teaching process  450  2,44  ,72  II  Student misbehaviors towards students each other   450  2,51  ,68  III  Student misbehaviors towards teacher  450  1.89  ,67  IV  Student misbehaviors towards violating discipline rules  450  1.74  ,68  V  Total  450  2,29  ,62 

When Table 3 was observed, it was detected that the most frequently experienced  misbehavior is in the dimension of misbehaviors towards students each other x2.51. It  was seen that the most frequently experienced misbehavior in the second rank is in the  dimension of misbehavior towards violating education process x2.44, in the third rank   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  207 there is misbehavior of students towards teacher x1, 89; and the least frequently  experienced misbehavior is in the dimension of misbehaviors towards violating discipline  rules x1.74. It is seen that the student misbehaviors are generally rarely experienced  x2,29. Students showing misbehaviors towards their friends and peers can be related to  their forming horizontal communication and their relationship being profound both nominally  and in the sense of depth. Moreover, it can be thought that students misbehaviors towards  each other can be tolerated more than other fields. The most frequent behavior in this  dimension is students pushing each other and sniping at each other.  

Table 4. Arithmetic average x and standard deviation s values   according to frequency level of the most frequently student misbehaviors   -according to various dimensions 

Items Students misbehaviors and frequency of these behaviors that  the teachers face in the classroom  Frequency of and  standard deviations of  students misbehaviors   N450  X   S 

IStudent Behaviors Aimed at Disrupting the Teaching Process 
Students making noise in lessons  2,60 ,91  2  Students talking with other students around them  2,68 ,91  3  Students interrupting while others are talking  2,73 ,90  4  Students conducting behaviors that will disrupt the course of lesson  2,34 ,93  5  Students paying attention to irrelevant extracurricular activities in classroom  2,36 ,89  6  Students disrupting classroom environment with arbitrary behaviors  2,23 ,94  7  Students not following or listening to the lesson  2,52 ,89  8  The indifference of students towards the lesson  2,48 ,85  9  Students not bringing class-related equipment  2,45 ,83  10  Students polluting the classroom and hisher environment  2,45 ,96  11  Students taking a walk, changing their places in classroom without permission  2,22 1,02 12  Students not doing the activity that they need to do in classroom  2,36 ,85  13  Students disrupting the lesson with irrelevant topics  2,21 ,92  14  Students talking in class without taking the floor  2,79 ,91  15  Students not cooperating with their group in group activities  2,40 ,85  16  Students not participating in class  2,33 ,92  17  Students not abiding by in-class rules  2,48 ,88  18  Students drawingwriting on fixed-asset inventories of school desk, table, wall  2,32 1,0 

IIThe Undesired Behaviors of Students Directed Towards Each Other 
Students resorting to brute force towards their friends  2,46 ,81  20  Students speaking vulgar language towards their friends  2,58 ,83  21  Students fighting with each other  2,36 ,84  22  Students swearing and cursing to each other   2,13 ,93  23  Students disrespecting their friends with their expressions and behaviors  2,41 ,88  24  Students hurting their friends feelings with their expressions and behaviors  2,33 ,87  25  Students shoving and scuffling with each other  2,85 ,80  26  Students disturbing their classmates  2,53 ,85  27  Students playing practical jokes on their friends  2,66 ,90 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  208  Table 4. Continued. 

Items Students misbehaviors and frequency of these behaviors that  teachers face in the classroom  Frequency of and  standard deviations of  students misbehaviors  N450 X   S  28  Students sniping to their friends  2,77  ,88  29  Students reporting their friends  2,93  ,93  30  Students throwing paper, notes etc. at each other  2,34  ,94  31  Students acting sarcastic and derogatory to their friends  2,23  ,86  32  Students conducting behaviors, which disturb their friends  2,76  ,76  33  Students damaging their friends belongings  2,34  ,81 

IIIThe Undesired Behaviors of Students Towards Teacher 
Students disrespecting towards teacher  1,93  ,93  35  Students disobeying teacher  1,68  ,81  36  Students showing verbal and behavioral reactions to their teacher  1,86  ,84  37  Students laying down the law to teacher  1,94  ,87  38  Students criticizing teachers lecturing method  1,65  ,79  39  Students making vulgar expression and behavior to teacher  1,49  ,78  40  Students conducting behaviors that will make teachers lecturing difficult 2,09  ,92  41  Unpleasant dialogues experienced among students and teachers  1,91  ,79  42  Students not listening to teacher  2,46  ,97 

IVThe Undesired Behaviors Directed To The Violation of Discipline Rules 
Students cheating on exams  1,98  ,91  44  Students violating the rules formed about appearance   2,22  1,0  45  Students using harmful substances such as smoking, drinking and drugs  1,41  ,81  46  Students using cell phones in class  1,33  ,73 

When Table 4 is observed, it is seen that the misbehaviors of students towards violating  the education process are respectively, talking in the lesson without permission  X 2,79,  in the second rank intervening their friends speeches  X 2,73, in the third rank talking  with their friends during lesson  X 2,68. The misbehaviors of students towards each  other are respectively, student pushing each other  X 2,85, in the second rank sniping at  each other  X 2,77, in the third rank  disturbing each other  X 2,76. The misbehaviors  of students towards teacher are respectively; not listening to his teacher  X 2,46, in the  second rank performing behaviors which make teachers having lesson difficult  X 2,09,  in the third rank speaking with authority towards teacher  X 1,94. The misbehaviors of  students towards violating discipline rules are respectively, disobeying rules of clothing  X 2,22, in the second rank cheating in the exam x1,98, in the third rank smoking  cigarette and using addictive drugs  X 1,41.  2. Comparison of frequency level of student misbehavior according to gender with  dimension. When Table 5 is observed, it is seen that there is a significant difference among  frequency levels of student misbehaviors in the sense of gender in the fourth dimension of  misbehavior towards violating discipline rules t448,84; p.05. Male teachers  experience student misbehaviors towards violating discipline rules  X 1,81 more then  female teachers  X 01,67. In other dimensions, there is no significant difference among   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  209 frequency levels of student misbehaviors in the sense of gender in the dimension of  misbehavior towards violating discipline rules. 

Table 5. t test results about comparison of frequency level of student misbehavior  according to gender with dimension 

Dimensions  Variables  gender  N  X   S  sd  T  P  ITowards violating  education process  Female  239  2,42  ,69  448  ,74  ,46  Male  211  2,47  ,76  IIAmong students  Female  239  2,51  ,68  448  ,02  ,99  Male  211  2,51  ,69  IIITowards teacher 

Female  239  1,84  ,62  448  1,36  ,18  Male  211  1,93  ,71  IV-Towards violating  discipline rules  Female  239  1,67  ,63  448  2,25  ,03  Male  211  1,81  ,73  Total 

Female  239  2,27  ,59  448  ,84  ,40  Male  211  2,32  ,66 

Table 6. Results of variance analysis Anova about the frequency levels of student  misbehaviors in the classroom according to the age of teachers.  

Factor  Variable age  N  X S  F  P  Difference LSD  ITowards violating  education process 

a below 30  49  2,66  ,79 3,114 ,026 a-c  a-d 

b between 30-40 157  2,51  ,74  c between 41-50 188  2,35  ,71  d above 51   56  2,37  ,57  Total  450  2,44  ,72  IIAmong students 

a below 30  49  2,75  ,79 2,578 ,053  

b between 30-40 157  2,52  ,67  c between 41-50 188  2,46  ,66  d above 51   56  2,43  ,66  Total  450  2,51  ,68  IIITowards teacher 

a below 30  49  2,23  ,79 6,688 ,000  a-b  a-c  a-d 

b between 30-40 157  1,93  ,69  c between 41-50 188  1,81  ,60  d above 51   56  1,73  ,54  Total  450  1,89  ,67  IV-Towards violating  discipline rules  a below 30  49  1,88  ,82 2,154 ,093  

b between 30-40 157  1,79  ,73  c between 41-50 188  1,65  ,60  d above 51   56  1,76  ,65  Total  450  1,74  ,68  d above 51  56  1,87  ,82  Total  450  1,79  ,73  Total 

a below 30  49  2,54  ,72 4,001 ,008 a-b  a-c  a-d 

b between 30-40 157  2,33  ,63  c between 41-50 188  2,22  ,59  d above 51   56  2,21  ,53   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  210  Total  450  2,29  ,62 

3. Frequency levels of student misbehaviors in the classroom according to the age of  teachers.  When the findings in Table 6 are observed, it is seen that there are significant differences  in the sense of teachers ages about the frequency of student misbehaviors F3-446 4,00; p  .05.  As a result of LSD test applied in order to find the age frequency of this significant  difference, there are significant differences between teachers below the age of 30 and the  frequency of student misbehavior in the third dimension student misbehaviors towards  teacher and total dimension with all the teachers in other groups of age b between 30-40,  c 41-50, d above 51. In the first dimension, the views of teacher who are below 30 upon  the frequency of student misbehaviors are different from the views of teachers who are at the  age of 41-50 and above 51. As it can be observed from Table 5 that the average of teachers  who are below 30 is higher than that of all teachers in other dimensions. According to this, it  is seen that teachers who are below 30 experience student misbehavior much more than  others. This situation shows us that students feel freer to perform misbehaviors towards  young teachers. The most frequent student misbehavior which is experienced by teachers  below 30 are in the dimension of misbehavior of students towards each other  X 2,75 and  towards violating the education process  X 2,66. When we regard the averages in total, it is  seen that as the age group of teachers increases, frequency of student misbehaviors decreases.  4. Frequency levels of student misbehaviors in the classroom according to the seniority of  teachers.  When the findings in Table 7 are observed, it is seen that there is a difference between the  duration of educational service and frequency level of student misbehavior. F3-446 5.54,  p .05 There is a significant difference in the third and total dimension of misbehaviors  towards the teacher between teachers who have less than 6 years of experience and teachers  who have 16-24 years and 25 years and more experience. Similarly, this difference was found  between teachers who have 6-15 years of experience and teachers who have 16-24 years and  25 years and more experience. According to this, it is seen that young teachers who have  occupational experience up to 15 years are exposed to misbehavior towards the teacher when  compared with other experienced teachers. When we consider in the sense of misbehaviors  towards violating the education process, it is seen that teachers who do not have enough  experience less than 6 years and between 6-15 years  X 2,58 and X 2,61 are exposed to  misbehavior towards violating the education process more than teachers who have 25 years  and more teaching experience. When we regard the averages in total, it is seen that as the  level of seniority increases, frequency of student misbehaviors decreases.  5. Frequency levels of student misbehaviors in the classroom according to the branches of  teachers.  When the findings in Table 8 are observed, it is seen that the views of teachers about the  misbehavior of students show significant difference according to branches F2-447 28,93;  p .05. According to this, there is a significant difference between classroom teacher and  branch teachers at all dimensions when their views about the frequency level student  misbehaviors are compared. As it can be observed in the table, the frequency level of student  misbehavior experienced in the classroom by classroom teachers is more than branch   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  211 teachers. In other words, more student misbehaviors can be observed in the classes of branch  teachers compared to classroom teachers.  Table 7. Results of variance analysis Anova about the frequency levels of student  misbehaviors in the classroom according to the seniority of teachers 

FACTOR  VARIABLE  seniority  N  X   S  F  P  Difference  LSD   ITowards violating education process 

a less than 6 years  43  2,58  ,78  5,11  ,002  a-d   b-d  b 6-15 years  128  2,61  ,78  c16-24 years  174  2,36  ,70  d25 years and more 105  2,30  ,61  Total  450  2,44  ,72  IIAmong students 

a less than 6 years  43  2,66  ,80  2,60  ,052   b 6-15 years  128  2,60  ,71  c16-24 years  174  2,48  ,64  d25 years and more 105  2,39  ,65  Total  450  2,51  ,68  IIITowards teacher 

a less than 6 years  43  2,17  ,77  8,73  ,000  a-c  a-d  b-c  b-d 

b 6-15 years  128  2,05  ,72  c16-24 years  174  1,82  ,60  d25 years and more 105  1,70  ,57  Total  450  1,89  ,67  IV-Towards violating discipline rules  a less than 6 years  43  1,83  ,77  4,62  ,003  b-c 

b 6-15 years  128  1,89  ,77  c16-24 years  174  1,60  ,57  d25 years and more 105  1,73  ,68  Total  450  1,74  ,68  Total   a less than 6 years  43  2,46  ,72  5,54  ,001 a-c  a-d  b-c  b-d  b 6-15 years  128  2,44  ,67  c16-24 years  174  2,23  ,58  d25 years and more 105  2,16  ,55  Total  450  2,29  ,62  When the averages are considered in the sense of dimensions, while average of  misbehavior towards violating education process is  X 2, 88 it is 2, 77 for branch teachers.  The frequency level of student misbehaviors towards each other is more for branch teachers  X 2,79 than classroom teachers  X 2,39. The frequency level of student misbehaviors  towards the teacher is more for branch teachers  X 2,19 than classroom teachers  X 1,74.  Generally, branch teachers are exposed to misbehaviors  X 2,61 more than classroom  teachers  X 2,15 and pre-school teachers  X 2,31.   There is a significant difference in the dimensions of behaviors of students towards each  other and violation of discipline rules between branch teachers and pre-school teachers.  According to this, branch teachers are exposed to student misbehaviors more than pre-school  teachers. The most important reason of this is that branch teachers have more classes  compared to other teachers and therefore have less information about the students. While both  classroom teachers and pre-school teachers have but one class, branch teachers have many. In  addition to this, since pre-school and classroom teachers regard the classes as their own, they  are integrated with their classes and are more sensitive towards the problems of their classes.  These teachers spend more time with their students and this has a positive effect on students.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  212 

Table 8. Results of variance analysis Anova about the frequency levels of student  misbehaviors in the classroom according to the branches of teachers.  

Factor  Variable  Branch  N  X   S  F  P  Difference  LSD   ITowards violating  education process 

aclassroom teacher  298 2,28  ,65  17,31 ,000  a-b 

bBranch teacher  139 2,77  ,77  cPre-school teacher.  13  2,57  ,65  Total  450 2,44  ,72 

IIAmong students 

aclassroom teacher  298 2,39  ,60  17,31 ,000  a-b  c-b 

bBranch teacher  139 2,79  ,76  cPre-school teacher.  13  2,39  ,55  Total  450 2,51  ,68 

IIITowards teacher 

aclassroom teacher  298 1,74  ,56  24,82 ,000  a-b 

bBranch teacher  139 2,19  ,76  cPre-school teacher.  13  2,03  ,63  Total  450 1,89  ,67 

IV-Towards violating  discipline rules  aclassroom teacher  298 1,55  ,53  44,58 ,000  c-b  a-b 

bBranch teacher  139 2,15  ,75  cPre-school teacher.   13  1,48  ,99  Total  450 1,74  ,68  Total  aclassroom teacher  298 2,15  ,53  28,93 ,000  a-b 

bBranch teacher  139 2,61  ,68  cPre-school teacher  13  2,31  ,59  Total  450 2,29  ,62  Teacher who is responsible for the classroom and gives all cultural courses to 7-11 age group.   Specific branch teachers of students at 7-14 age group.  Teacher who gives education to students getting ready for elementary school at the age of 6. 

6. Frequency levels of student misbehaviors in the classroom according to the technical  means of class.   When Table 9 is observed, it is seen that there is a significant difference between  technical means in the classroom and the frequency of student misbehaviors. F2-447 7,31;  p .05 When the averages are considered, it is seen that as the technical means of classroom  increases frequency of student misbehavior decreases. There is a significant difference in the  sense of student misbehaviors between classes with good technical means and poor technical  means in all dimensions. Moreover, there is a significant difference in the sense of student  misbehavior between classes with poor and mediocre technical means in the dimension of  students behavior towards teacher. In the dimension of behaviors towards violating discipline  rules, there is a significant difference in the sense of student misbehavior between classes  with mediocre and good technical means.  

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  213

Table 9. Results of variance analysis Anova about the frequency levels of student  misbehaviors in the classroom according to the technical means of class. 

FACTOR  VARIABLES technical  means of class  N  X   S  F  P  Difference  Scheffe  ITowards  violating  education  process  a poor  128  2,57  ,71  4,847  ,008  a-c 

b mediocre  159  2,46  ,74  c good  163  2,31  ,68  Total  450  2,44  ,72  IIAmong  students 

a poor  128  2,64  ,73  4,153  ,016  a-c 

b mediocre  159  2,51  ,65  c good  163  2,40  ,65  Total  450  2,51  ,68  IIITowards  teacher 

a poor  128  2,08  ,75  9,377  ,000  a-c  a-b 

b mediocre  159  1,86  ,63  c good  163  1,75  ,58  Total  450  1,88  ,66  IV-Towards  violating  discipline rules  a poor  128  1,93  ,73  13,922  ,000 

a-c  b-c 

b mediocre  159  1,79  ,72  c good  163  1,53  ,53  Total  450  1,73  ,68  Total  a poor  128  2,44  ,65  7,306  ,001  a-c 

b mediocre  159  2,30  ,62  c good  163  2,16  ,56  Total  450  2,29  ,62 

CONCLUSION 

It was detected that the most frequent student misbehaviors experienced by the teachers is  in the dimension of students misbehavior towards each other. It was seen that the second  most frequent student misbehavior experienced by the teachers is in the dimension of  misbehavior towards violating the education process; students having communication with  each other freely and their being numerous may cause increase in misbehaviors. Moreover,  physical closeness of students, covering their behaviors or thinking that teacher would not see  it or thinking that they will not complain of each other can be effective in the increase of  misbehaviors. That the most frequent misbehavior in this field is pushing each other and  sniping to each other comply with the reasons listed above. Misbehaviors towards the  education process, as Finger and Bomford 2006, are regarded as the behaviors which  student do in order to draw attention. According to them, these are the behaviors which, in  fact, are not too bad but irritate the class and generally cause discomfort for other students.   The most frequent behaviors of students towards each other were detected as pushing  each other, sniping, and irritating friends. The most frequent behavior in the dimension  of misbehaviors towards violating education process was determined as speaking without  permission, disturbing others speeches, talking with friends around in the class. The  most frequent behavior in the dimension of students misbehavior towards teacher was  determined as not listening to teacher, performing behaviors that make the course  difficult, speaking with authority towards teacher. The most frequent behaviors in the   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  214  dimension of misbehavior towards violating discipline rules was determined as disobeying  clothing rules, cheating in the exam, smoking or using addictive drugs.   There is a significant difference between frequency levels of student misbehaviors  towards violating discipline rules experienced by female and male teachers. Male teachers are  exposed to more misbehavior compared to female teachers in this sense.   There is a significant difference in the sense of the frequency level of student  misbehaviors experienced by young teachers below 30 when compared with all the other age  groups in all other dimensions. When we regard the total averages, it is seen that as the age  group of teachers increases, the frequency of misbehaviors decrease. According to this, it can  be said that as the gap between teacher and students increases, the authority of teachers in  class become more and more respected.   In the sense of service years, there is a significant difference in the frequency level of  student misbehaviors according to service years. When we consider the dimensions, it can be  said that these misbehaviors are experienced in the dimensions of misbehavior towards  violating the education process, towards teacher, towards violating discipline rules. Generally  regarding, it is seen that as the seniority of teachers increase, student misbehaviors decrease.  These findings confirm the hypothesis that teachers success is not only composed of  academic success but only can give good results when it is accompanied with experience. The  teacher who combines his occupational knowledge with experience knows his students better,  himself better, and is more advantageous in choosing the most suitable method in providing  classroom management and discipline. The most important point is that with occupational  experience, the teacher increases his skills in classroom management. According to the study  of Kayikci 2009, it was detected that as the skills of teachers in classroom management  increase, discipline problems and student misbehaviors decrease.   There is a significant difference between frequency levels of student misbehaviors  according to branches in the sense of dimensions. According to this, there is significant  difference between branch teachers and classroom teachers in all dimensions. Frequency  levels of student misbehaviors experienced by classroom teachers are lower than branch  teachers. the most important reasons of this is that branch teachers have too many classes,  have a distributed responsibility and give only one or two hours of course to each group in a  week. Classroom teachers knows their students better and therefore have authority on them  since they, contrary to branch teachers, have courses at specific hours of the week only in  their own class which is only one class.   There is a significant difference between frequency levels of student misbehaviors and  technical means of the classroom. When we consider the averages, it is seen that as the  technical means of the classroom increase student misbehaviors decrease. There is a  significant difference in the sense of student misbehaviors between classes with good  technical means and poor technical means in all dimensions. As education technology  develops, the opportunity of participating in the courses and more sense organs would be  addressed. As technology develops, it would become easier to use modern education  techniques and methods with students. Moreover, much as technology is used, it would  become easier to have lessons according to multiple intelligence and both the motivation and  participation of students would increase. Naturally, as motivation and participation increase,  student misbehavior would decrease.  

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  215 APPENDIX:  DIMENSIONS AND FACTOR LOADINGS OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE 

Dimensions and Factor Loadings Pertaining To Students Undesired  Behaviors 

IStudent Behaviors Aimed at Disrupting the Teaching Process  1st Dim.  2nd   Dim.  3rd  Dim.  4th  Dim. 1 Students making noise in lessons  ,770 
Students talking with other students around them  ,755 
Students interrupting while others are talking  ,752 
Students conducting behaviors that will disrupt the course of  lesson  ,728 
Students paying attention to irrelevant extracurricular activities in classroom  ,712 
Students disrupting classroom environment with arbitrary  behaviors  ,698 
Students not following or listening to the lesson  ,691 
The indifference of students towards the lesson  ,690 
Students not bringing class-related equipments  ,677 
Students polluting the classroom and hisher environment  ,651 
Students taking a walk or changing their places in classroom without permission  ,649 
Students not doing the activity that they need to do in classroom ,649 
Students disrupting the lesson with irrelevant topics  ,639 
Students talking in class without taking the floor  ,612 
Students not cooperating with their group in group activities  ,607 
Students not participating in class  ,606 
Students not abiding by in-class rules  ,595 
Students drawing and writing something on the fixed-asset  inventories of school desk, table, wall etc.  ,452 

II-The Undesired Behaviors of Students Directed Towards Each Other 
Students resorting to brute force towards their friends 

,751 
Students speaking vulgar language towards their friends 

,747 
Students fighting with each other 

,744 
Students swearing and cursing to each other  

,723 
Students disrespecting their friends with their expressions and  behaviors 

,686 
Students hurting their friends feelings with their expressions and  behaviors 

,685 
Students shoving and scuffling with each other 

,680 
Students disturbing their classmates 

,664 
Students playing practical jokes on their friends 

,637 
Students sniping to their friends 

,636 
Students reporting their friends 

,635 
Students throwing paper, notes etc. at each other 

,635 
Students acting sarcastic and derogatory to their friends 

,631 
Students conducting behaviors which disturb their friends 

,566 
Students damaging their friends belongings 

,545 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  216  IIIThe Undesired Behaviors of Students Towards Teacher 
Students disrespect towards teacher 

,766 
Students disobeying teacher 

,762 
Students showing verbal and behavioral reactions to their teacher  

,736 
Students laying down the law to teacher 

,682 
Students criticizing teachers lecturing method 

,661 
Students making vulgar expression and behavior to teacher 

,641 
Students conducting behaviors that will make teachers lecturing  difficult 

,638 
Unpleasant dialogues experienced among students and teachers 

,637 
Students not listening to teacher 

,598 

IV-The Undesired Behaviors Directed To The Violation of Discipline  Rules 
Students cheating in exams  

,656  44 Students violating the rules formed about appearance  

,640  45 Students using harmful substances such as smoking, drinking and  drugs 

,593  46 Students using cell phones in class 

,489 

REFERENCES 

Admiraal, W. F., Fred. A. J.  Wubbels. T. 2000. Effects of student teachers coping  behavior. British journal of educational psychology.70. pp. 33-52   Allen, P. K. 2010. Classroom management, bullying, and teacher practices. The  Professional educator. Vol.34. No.1.  Aydin, A. 2007. Snf ynetimi. Classroom management. Ankara. Tekagac yayini.   Basar, H. 2008. Snf ynetimi. Classroom management Ankara: An yaynclk. 14. Bas.  Brophy, J. E. Mc Caslin, 1992. Teachers reports of how they perceive and cope with  problem students. Elementary school journal Vol:93, pp. 13-68.   Brophy, J. 1988Educating teachers about managing classroom and students. Teaching and  Teacher education.vol 4, nr.1 1-18.  Cameron, R. J. 1998. School discipline in the United Kingdom: Promoting classroom behavior  which encourages effective teaching and learning. School Psychology Review, 27, 33-44.  Celep, C. 2002. Snf ynetimi ve disiplini. Classroom management and discipline An  yaynclk.Ankara. 2. bask.  Celik, V.2005. Snf ynetimi. Classroom management Ankara: Nobel yaynlar. 3. bask   Charles, C. M. 2000. The synergetic classroom. Boston: Allyn and Bacon  Charles, C. M. 2005. Building classroom discipline. Collaboration by Gail W. Senter.  Boston. 8th ed.  Churchward, B. 2003. Discipline by design: The honor level system. www. Honorlevel.com.  Conroy, M. A., Davis, C. A., Fox, J. J.  Brown,W. H. 2002. Functional assessment of  behavior and effective supports for young children with challenging behaviors.  Assessment for effective intervention Vol.27, No.4, 35-47.  Crocker, L. M.  Algina, J. 1986. Introduction to classical and modern test theory. New  York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  217 Croll, P.,  Moses, D. 1985. One in five. The assessment and incidence of special educational  needs . London: Routledge  Kegan Paul.   Cummings, C. 2000. Winning strategies for classroom management . Alexandria, VA:  Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.   Curwin, R.  Mendler, A. 1988. Discipline with dignity. Alexandria, VA Association for  supervision and curriculum development.  Davis, B. G. 1993 Tools for teaching. San Fransisco:JosseyBass.   Ding, M., Li, Y., Li, X.,  Kulm, G. 2008. Chinese teachers perceptions of students  classroom misbehaviors. Educational Psychology, 28, 305 324.   Ding. M., Li, Y., Li, X  Kulm, G. 2010. Chinese teachersattributions and coping  strategies for student classroom misbehavior Asia Pacific Journal of Education Vol. 30,  No. 3, September 2010, 321-337   Edwards, C.H, 1997. Classroom discipline and management. Printic hall, Inc. New Jersey   Elrod, w.T.  Terrel, S.M.1991. Schools without Corporal Punishment: There are  alternatives . Contemporary Education.vol62. nr.3 188-193   Emmer, E.T. 1991. Once more with feeling: Teacher emotion and the discipline and  management functions. Contemporary Education. Vol62.Nr.3 167-173.  Finger, J.  Bamford, B. 2006 The classroom teachers book of management essentials.snf  ynetimi stratejileri retmen klavuzu Turgut Karakse eviri Ed. ev: renci  davranlarnn ynetimiYahya Altnkurt, Ycel imek. Nobel Yayn Ankara.Australia.  Finger, J.,  Bamford, B. 2006. The classroom teachers book of management essentials.  Brisbane: Australian Council for Educational Leaders with Fernfawn Publications.  Gordon, T. 1974. TET. Teacher effectiveness training.New York: Peter H. Wyden.  Guardino, C. A.  Fullerton, E. 2010. Changing behaviors by changing the classroom  environment. Teaching exceptional children. Vol.42, No. 6, pp. 8-13  Houghton, S., Wheldall, K.,  Merrett, F. 1988. Classroom behavior problems which  secondary school teachers say they find most troublesome. British Educational  Research Journal, 14, 297 312.   Jones, V  Jones, L. 2004. Comprehensive Classroom Management. Boston: Pearson  Education Inc.  Kagan. S., Kyle, P.  Scot, P. 2004. Win-win discipline. San clemente, CA: Kagan  publishing.   Kaplan, A., Gheen, M.  Midgley, C. 2002. Classroom goal structure and student  disruptive behavior . British Journal of Educational Psychology, 72, 191-211.  Karip, E. 2003. Sinif ynetimi. Classroom managementpegem yaynclk.Ankara.  Kayikci, K. 2011. Sinif ici ogretim etkinliklerinin yonetimi.Managing Teaching Activities  in Classroom In R.Sarpkaya ed. Sinif Yonetimi.Classroom managementpp. 213255. Ankara: htiya Yayincilik.  Kayikci, K. 2009. The Effect of Classroom Management Skills of Elementary School  Teachers on Undesirable Discipline Behavior of Students. Procedia Social and  Behavioral Sciences, 11, 2009, p.1215-1225.  Kounin,J. S. 1970. Discipline and group management in the classroom . Holt , Rinehalt and  Winstonnc. NeYork.  Larrivee. B. 2005. Authentic classroom management. Creating a learning community and  building refl active practice. Boston, MA: Pearson education. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Kemal Kayiki  218  Lemlech, J. K. 1988. Classroom management. Longman, inc. Second ed. New York.  Marzano, R. J. With Marzano, j. S. Pickering, D. J. 2003. Classroom management that  works. Alexandria, VA:ASCD.  Marzano, R, J.  Marzano, J. 2003. The key to classroom management. Building classroom  relationships. Educational leadership. Vol.61, pp. 6-13.  Meyers, S. A. 2003. Strategies to prevent and reduce conflict in college classrooms. College  Teaching. Vol. 51, No.3. pp. 94-98.  Miller, A. 1995. Teachers attributions of causality, control and responsibility in respect of  difficult pupil behavior and its successful management Educational Psychology, 15, 457471.  Miller, A., Ferguson, E.  Moore, E. 2002. Parents and pupils causal attributions for  difficult classroom behavior. British Journal of Educational Psychology 72. 27-40  Nansel, T. R.,Overpeck, M., Pila,R. S. Ruan, W. J. , SimmonsMorton, B  Sccheidt, P.  2001. Bullying behaviors among US youth: Prevalence and association with  psychosocial adjustment. Journal of the American Medical Association, 285. 2094-2100  Neale M. N and Liebert, R.M. 1980 Science and behavior: an introduction to method of  Research. London: PrenticeHall International, Inc.  Nelsen, J. , Lott, L. , Glenn. H. 2000. Positive discipline in the classroom. Rocklin.  CA:Prima. Revised editions,   Nunnally, J. C. 1978. Psychometric theory. 2.nd edition. New York : Mc Graw -Hill.  Palardy, J. M.  Palardy, T.J. 2001. Classroom Discipline: Prevention and intervention  strategies. Education. Vol.108.No:1. 87-92   Rich.J. M. 1991. Should students be punished? Contemporary Education.Vol.62. Nr.3.  180-184.   Sabanci, A. 2009. Sinif yonetiminin temelleri.The Essentials of classroom management. In  M.eliktened Yapilandirmaci yaklasima gore sinif yonetimi.classroom management  aspects constructivism pp. 27-51 Ankara: An yaynclk.2.bas  Salend, S.J.; C. Whittaker; E. Reeder.1993 Group evaluation:A Collaborative Peermediated Behavior management System. Exceptional Children vol59, nr.3. 203-209.  Sartas,  M.  2000.  Sinif  yonetimi  ve  disiplinle  ilgili  kurallar  gelistirme  ve  uygulama.L.Kucukahmet Eds. sinif yonetiminde yeni yaklasimlar. New approaches in  classroom management.Ankara. 47-89.  Scherer, R. F. , Wiebe, F. A. , Luther D.C., Adams. J. S. 1988. Dimensionality of Coping:  Factor Stabilty Using the Ways of Coping Questionnaire. Psychology Reports. 62, 763770.  Seidman, A. 2005. The learning killer: Disruptive student behavior in the classroom.  Reading Improvement. V 42 n1. Project Innovation, Inc., P.O. Box 8508, Spring Hill  Station, Mobile, AL 36689-0508. Web site: http:journals825. home. Mindspring  .comcsj.html.  Soodak, L.C. 2003. Classroom management in inclusive settings. Theory into practice, Vol.  42, No:4, Taylor  Francis, Ltd. http:www.jstor.orgstable1477396  Tavancl, E. 2006. Tutumlarn olculmesi ve SPSS ile veri analizi. Measuring attitudes and  Data analysis with SPSS. Ankara: Nobel Yayinlari. 3. Baski. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Classroom Discipline  219 Tierno, M.J. 1991. Responding to the socially-motivated behaviors of adolescents:  Recommendations for classroom management. Adolescence. Vol26.nr.103.  Trnkl, A., Zoraloglu, Y. Gemici, Y. 2001. Ilkogretim okullarinda okul yonetimine  yansiyan disiplin sorunlari.Discipline problems which reflect school management of  elementry school. Kuram ve uygulamada eitim ynetimi.Educational administrationtheory and practice.  Wright, J. A.,  Dusek, J. B. 1998. Compiling school base rates for disruptive behaviors from  student disciplinary referral data. School Psychology Review, 27 , 138-147. 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

INDEX 
21st century, 58, 112, 154  A  abuse, 200  academic performance, 55, 58, 65, 96, 105, 112, 114  access, 65, 71, 81, 98, 112  accountability, 95, 96  accounting, 22, 116, 128  achievement test, 96  acoustics, vii, xi, 133, 134, 150, 151, 156, 158, 160  action research, vii, 1, 8, 9, 31  activity level, 126, 176, 178  adaptation, ix, 78, 181, 196, 199  adaptations, 35  adjustment, 75, 131, 150, 173, 179, 218  administrative support, 82  administrators, x, 82, 93, 100, 115, 116, 121, 122,  127  adolescents, ix, 77, 91, 171, 172, 219  adulthood, 158  adults, ix, 2, 5, 7, 77, 90, 131, 192, 203  African American students, x, 112, 113, 115, 116,  117, 118, 119, 127  age, xii, 2, 75, 132, 188, 198, 204, 209, 210, 212,  214  aggression, 61, 72, 80, 81, 85, 89, 200  aggressive behavior, 87, 88, 203  air quality, xi, 175, 176, 178, 179, 180, 183, 184  air temperature, 176, 178, 179, 180, 181, 183  algorithm, 128  alienation, 61, 62, 71, 74  American culture, 128  American Educational Research Association, 75  anatomy, 131  anger, 61, 193, 196, 204  ANOVA, xii, 43, 188, 206  antisocial behavior, ix, 77, 91, 116, 119  antitrust, 72  anxiety, 66, 196  apathy, 60  appraisals, x, 55, 115, 116, 118, 126, 128  ARC, 130  arithmetic, xii, 137, 142, 150, 188, 205, 206  articulation, 145  Asia, 217  asocial, 61  aspiration, 71  assault, 120  assessment, x, 28, 30, 55, 82, 93, 96, 99, 103, 105,  122, 159, 179, 216, 217  assimilation, 35  atmosphere, 170, 200  atria, 179  authenticity, 70  authorities, viii, 4, 59, 61, 62, 63, 64, 66, 67, 68, 70,  71, 75  authority, vii, 1, 4, 20, 62, 63, 64, 71, 73, 75, 164,  201, 208, 213, 214  autonomy, 60, 67, 73, 74, 168  avoidance, 37, 55, 66, 172  awareness, x, 7, 94  B  BAC, 18, 19, 24, 26  background information, xi, 163  background noise, 135, 138, 145, 146, 147, 150, 151,  156, 158  banking, 95  barriers, 53  base, viii, ix, 2, 20, 26, 33, 35, 36, 41, 53, 54, 56, 69,  70, 77, 90, 92, 96, 99, 100, 191, 192, 193, 219  basic education, 94   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Index  222  basic needs, 193  beginning teachers, 173  behavioral problems, 116, 120, 121, 122, 195  behaviors, viii, x, 55, 57, 59, 60, 62, 64, 65, 66, 68,  73, 78, 79, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 92, 93,  95, 97, 98, 104, 105, 107, 108, 110, 115, 116,  117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 123, 127, 129, 188, 189,  190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199,  200, 201, 202,203, 204, 206, 207, 208, 211, 212,  213, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219  benefits, 7, 60, 70, 73, 173  Benevolence-based trust, ix, 59  bias, 117, 120, 126, 127, 128, 131  birth weight, 119, 130, 131  Black students, 116, 117, 124, 130  black tea, 118, 120, 124  Blacks, 124  blame, 114  bonds, 104  boredom, 65, 66  Brazil, 133, 148  bullying, 189, 198, 201, 216  burnout, 195  C  calculus, 69  carbon, xi, 175, 176, 179, 180  carbon dioxide, xi, 175, 176, 179, 180  case studies, 148  case study, 31, 84  category a, 5  causal attribution, 172, 218  causality, 218  causation, 105  cell phones, 208, 216  challenges, iv, vii, viii, ix, x, 34, 35, 78, 82, 90, 93,  105, 112, 128  chaos, 194  Chicago, 72, 113, 131, 132  childhood, 91, 158  children, ix, 5, 6, 30, 32, 56, 57, 64, 73, 77, 78, 79,  80, 81, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 99,  103, 113, 114, 119, 120, 121, 122, 126, 127, 129,  130, 131, 134, 160, 161, 171, 172, 177, 189, 191,  192, 195, 216, 217  China, 172  citizens, 134  City, 132  clarity, 9, 67  classes, xii, 4, 29, 38, 40, 42, 134, 164, 188, 192,  197, 201, 210, 211, 212, 214  classification, 150, 157  Classroom Acoustics, v, xi, 133, 160  classroom culture, 3, 4, 7, 10, 28, 29, 199  classroom environment, x, 78, 80, 93, 95, 101, 103,  104, 105, 111, 134, 164, 171, 197, 198, 207, 215,  217  classroom management, xii, 97, 100, 104, 105, 107,  172, 173, 187, 188, 189, 190, 194, 197, 198, 199,  200, 205, 214, 217, 218, 219  classroom skills, 99  classroom teacher, 96, 97, 100, 105, 210, 211, 212,  214, 217  classroom teachers, 96, 97, 100, 210, 211, 214  clean air, 180  cleaning, 78, 152  climate, vii, viii, x, xi, 59, 61, 68, 70, 71, 93, 163,  164, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 172, 175, 197  climates, 176, 185  closure, 102  clothing, 176, 178, 208, 214  clustering, 123  coaches, 83  coding, 10, 42, 84, 89, 91, 122  cognition, 30, 57  cognitive abilities, 7, 28, 31, 35, 36, 56, 65, 68, 72,  134, 171,     coherence, 57  collaboration, viii, 33, 37, 44, 50, 53, 54, 56, 67, 71,  85  collaborative inquiry, viii, 33, 34, 38, 39, 45, 47, 53,  56  college students, 56  color, iv, 51, 114, 128, 130, 131  communication, viii, xi, 6, 7, 8, 31, 59, 61, 68, 70,  71, 72, 88, 103, 106, 133, 134, 135, 156, 158,  160, 172, 188, 191, 192, 195, 197, 198, 200, 203,  207, 213  communication skills, 7, 198, 200  communities, 30, 72, 119  community, 6, 7, 30, 70, 71, 74, 95, 104, 112, 217  comparative method, vii, 1, 10  compassion, 195  compensation, 144  Competence-based trust, ix, 59  competition, 68, 71, 200  complement, 58, 171  complex organizations, 60  complexity, 3, 68, 122, 126, 150  compliance, 80, 81, 84, 86, 88, 89, 91  composition, vii, viii, 33, 34, 37, 39, 45, 46, 53, 54,  55  comprehension, 30, 70, 96, 106, 112, 117  computer, 37, 38, 41, 45, 50, 52, 56, 58, 150, 151,  156, 160, 193, 197   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Index  223 computer simulations, 156  conception, 2, 6, 25  conceptualization, 63, 129  conditioning, 176, 182  conduct disorder, 92  conduction, 176  conference, 138, 159  configuration, 181  conflict, 91, 171, 173, 189, 196, 200, 218  conformity, 4  confrontation, 91  Congress, 160, 185  congruence, 69, 131  consensus, 29, 193  consent, 81  conspiracy, 116, 118, 128  construction, 2, 18, 35, 36, 55, 67, 158  constructivism, 4, 8, 31, 32, 218  consumption, 180, 181, 182, 183  contingency, 102  control group, 84, 92  conversations, 2, 3, 6, 29, 81, 104  cooperation, 6, 7, 28, 56, 60, 63, 68, 73, 74, 190,  192, 193, 194, 196, 197, 199, 200, 202  cooperative learning, 4, 8, 31, 55, 57, 58, 94  coordination, 60  coping strategies, xii, 187, 195, 217  correlation, 145, 146, 205  cost, 66, 68, 98, 142, 151  coughing, 201  counseling, 198  counterbalance, 170  covering, 158, 213  credentials, 71, 98  criminal behavior, 119  criminal justice system, 128  critical state, 85  criticism, 84, 99, 192  CRM, 160  culture, x, 3, 4, 7, 10, 28, 29, 54, 67, 73, 93, 95, 101,  128, 196, 199, 200  curriculum, 43, 55, 91, 95, 96, 103, 188, 198, 217  curriculum development, 217  D  danger, 129  data analysis, 10, 44  data collection, 10, 103  data set, xi, 120, 123, 163, 164, 169, 171  decay, 135, 136, 138, 139, 140, 144  deconstruction, 95  defense mechanisms, 191  deficiencies, 119, 121  Definition and Centre Time, xi, 133  delinquency, 119, 128, 130  Delta, 106, 112  democracy, 112  demographic factors, 119  Denmark, 160, 185  Department of Education, 30, 131, 187  dependent variable, 118, 124, 169  depression, xii, 27, 187  depth, 207  destruction, 189  detectable, 116  detention, 98  developmental process, 10  deviation, xii, 188, 206, 207  dialogues, 18, 20, 28, 208, 216  differential rates, 116  diffusion, 135  dignity, 61, 63, 64, 217  direct observation, 103, 104  discomfort, 188, 194, 213  discrimination, 97, 130  diseases, xii, 187  disorder, 92, 193, 196, 201  displacement, 182  disposition, 114  Disruptive behavior, ix, 77  distribution, 35, 60, 64, 74, 104, 134, 136, 176, 182  diversity, 85  DOI, 91  dominance, 67, 164  drawing, 13, 16, 19, 23, 35, 41, 42, 105, 193, 204,  207, 215  drugs, 122, 201, 208, 214, 216  E  economics, 68  education, iv, viii, xi, 2, 4, 30, 31, 33, 34, 38, 40, 55,  65, 71, 75, 94, 95, 99, 105, 111, 112, 113, 121,  122, 124, 130, 133, 134, 187, 188, 191, 193, 194,  195, 196, 197, 199, 203, 204, 206, 208, 209, 210,  211, 212, 213, 214, 216, 217  educational career, x, 71, 94, 95, 101, 115, 117, 200  educational psychology, 58, 216  educational research, 94, 115, 171  educational settings, 37, 61, 62, 64  educational system, ix, 60, 61, 71, 116, 117, 127  educators, 65  elaboration, 56, 67  elders, 4   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Index  224  elementary school, x, xii, 73, 83, 85, 93, 96, 187,  204, 205, 212  e-mail, 59  emotion, 202, 217  empathy, ix, 60  empirical studies, 34  employment, 65  empowerment, 173  enculturation, 3  energy, 61, 135, 137, 144, 176, 180, 181, 182, 183,  193, 194, 199  energy consumption, 180, 181, 182, 183  engineering, 159, 185  enrollment, 117  environment, ix, x, xi, 6, 35, 40, 41, 42, 43, 53, 57,  58, 60, 67, 69, 70, 71, 78, 80, 83, 90, 93, 94, 95,  97, 98, 101, 103, 104, 105, 110, 111, 134, 136,  158, 164, 171, 172, 175, 180, 181, 182, 185, 188,  189, 190, 192, 193, 194, 195, 197, 198, 199, 202,  204, 207, 215, 217  equal opportunity, 71  equality, 64, 68, 71  equipment, 139, 145, 146, 160, 204, 207  equity, 64, 71, 74  ethical standards, 62  ethics, 112  ethnic background, 4, 57  Europe, 161  everyday life, 30, 61  evidence, viii, ix, x, 35, 37, 41, 42, 52, 53, 59, 61,  65, 73, 74, 77, 90, 92, 100, 115, 116, 117, 119,  120, 126, 127, 128, 129, 203  evidence-based practices, 90, 92  evolution, 179, 181  examinations, 9  excitation, 138  exclusion, 94  execution, 151  exercise, 29, 71, 72, 189  expertise, 35, 53, 64, 69, 70, 71, 111  exposure, 95, 134  expulsion, 98, 116, 118  external environment, 175, 180  extinction, 91  F  facial expression, 79  facilitators, 67  factor analysis, 205, 206  fair procedures, 62  fairness, ix, 59, 62, 64, 69, 72, 73, 195  families, 8, 193, 195  fear, 189, 192  feelings, 62, 63, 65, 66, 67, 191, 192, 193, 196, 207,  215  fiber, 148  fights, 86, 121, 123  Finland, 31, 33, 54, 185  first dimension, 210  first generation, 5  flexibility, 60  fluid, 176  food, 48  force, 60, 189, 197, 207, 215  foreign language, 143  formal education, xi, 121, 134, 187  formation, vii, 1, 4, 6, 10, 29, 206  formula, 135, 136, 159, 161  foundations, 113  framing, 106, 112  France, 142, 143, 184  free will, 192  freedom, 112, 202  friction, 60  funding, 95, 171  G  galaxies, 48  Galaxy, 51  garbage, 122  gender differences, viii, 34, 38  general education, 111  general knowledge, 122  generalizability, 83, 168  geometry, 148  Germany, 33, 56, 142, 143, 159, 160  gestures, 5  gifted, 112, 113  glasses, 176, 177  governance, 65, 66  grades, 64, 65, 71, 116, 117, 119  gravity, 144  greenhouse, 182, 183  grid generation, 177, 178  grounding, 129  group activities, 40, 86, 207, 215  group interactions, 4  group size, 43  group work, vii, 1, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19,  20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28, 29, 30, 41  grouping, 10, 96  group-value model, 75  growth, viii, xi, 2, 3, 4, 24, 163, 166, 167, 168, 170   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Index  225 guidance, viii, 31, 33, 34, 36, 39, 43, 53, 56, 73, 86,  189, 190  guidelines, 159  H  hair, 85  happiness, 66  harassment, 201  harmony, 158  heat loss, 176  height, x, 21, 26, 27, 68, 94  helping behavior, 32  helplessness, 204  heuristic theory, 74  high school, viii, 59, 64, 65, 74, 112, 114, 117  higher education, 99, 203  homes, 100, 101  homework, 66, 87, 191, 200, 201  honesty, 69, 200  hormones, 198  hostility, 164, 201  House, 106, 113  human, 3, 30, 60, 73, 101, 119, 145, 147, 175, 176,  179, 182, 184, 189, 190, 193, 198  human development, 30, 119  human nature, 189, 190  human psychology, 198  humidity, 137, 138, 176, 178, 179, 180  hybrid, 151  hyperactivity, 92  hypothesis, 35, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 45, 48, 63, 123,  127, 206, 214  I  ideal, 31, 156  ideals, 71  identification, viii, 59, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 69,  70, 71, 72, 75, 151, 182  identity, 61, 63, 72, 73, 75, 119  image, 151  images, 113  imitation, 78, 79, 84  improvements, 104, 110  incidence, 65, 116, 217  income, 85, 98  increased competition, 68  independence, 36, 123  independent variable, 126  individual character, 129  individual students, 34, 99  individualized instruction, 107  individuals, 43, 70, 82  induction, 14  inefficiency, 203  infants, 130  inhibition, 35, 53  injury, 120  institutions, 60, 62, 68, 70, 99  instruction time, 107  instructional activities, 203  instructional feedback, viii, x, 1, 3, 4, 24, 26, 29, 93  instructional practice, 3, 6, 55, 103, 104  instructional time, ix, x, 77, 93, 104, 107  insulation, 182  integration, 54, 55, 56, 57  integrity, 68, 70  intelligence, 197, 199, 214  interaction effect, 46  interactive classroom, vii, 1, 3, 4, 7, 10  interdependence, 21, 68, 69, 70  interface, 139, 147  internal consistency, 206  interpersonal relations, 5, 6, 28  interpersonal relationships, 6, 28  Intervals, 205  intervention, ix, 5, 7, 9, 31, 78, 82, 87, 92, 99, 131,  172, 204, 216, 218  intervention strategies, 218  intrinsic motivation, 66  inventiveness, 29  investment, 60, 66, 158, 160  invitation to participate, 100  Israel, 172  issues, xi, 4, 9, 13, 14, 15, 22, 85, 91, 104, 112, 115,  129, 163, 166, 171, 172, 173  Italy, 59, 64, 160  J  Japan, 142, 143, 159  job performance, 72  justification, 3, 11, 13, 19  juvenile delinquency, 119  K  kill, 56, 160, 198  kindergarten, x, 112, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120,  121, 122, 125, 127, 128, 177, 178, 182, 183, 185  kindergartens, ix, 78   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Index  226  L  labeling, 116  laboratory studies, viii, 59  landscape, 7, 113  language acquisition, 119  languages, 4  laptop, 41  lead, 3, 5, 36, 39, 61, 118, 121, 134  leadership, 75, 218  learned helplessness, 204  learners, viii, 2, 5, 11, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 41, 42, 50,  52, 53, 54, 57, 71, 95, 100, 106, 114, 132  learning disabilities, 112, 113  learning environment, viii, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38, 39, 40,  41, 42, 43, 45, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 90, 98, 105,  107, 111, 189, 193  learning outcomes, x, 3, 6, 34, 35, 37, 38, 56, 93  learning process, xi, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 15, 17,  24, 28, 29, 36, 41, 52, 54, 159, 187, 194, 200  learning styles, 199  learning task, 61, 66  learning-teaching process, xii, 187, 188, 189  legs, 79  lesson plan, vii, 1, 4, 9, 10, 14, 15, 35  life course, 119  light, 40, 41, 42, 50, 51, 180  linear model, 129, 172  literacy, 96, 112, 113, 122  love, 194  loyalty, 69  LSD, xii, 188, 206, 209, 210, 211, 212  lying, 5, 201  M  magnitude, 69  majority, 8, 99  Malaysia, 1, 4  Malaysian secondary school, vii, 1, 3  management, iv, vii, ix, xii, 8, 61, 62, 73, 74, 77, 78,  80, 82, 84, 87, 89, 91, 92, 97, 100, 104, 105, 106,  107, 113, 172, 173, 182, 187, 188, 189, 190, 193,  194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 202, 205, 214,  216, 217, 218, 219  mapping, 164  masking, 134  mass, 176, 195  mass communication, 195  materials, 35, 86, 88, 97, 135, 136, 137, 148, 150,  152, 156, 157, 158, 198  maternal control, 91  mathematical knowledge, 4, 29  mathematics, vii, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 17, 20,  21, 24, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 38, 54, 74, 96, 113,  172, 197  mathematics education, 4, 31  matrix, 123  matter, iv, 29, 58, 82, 119, 203  measurement, 75, 142, 145, 166, 168, 169, 170  measurements, xi, 133, 134, 138, 139, 140, 142, 145,  148, 154, 158, 160, 164  media, 195, 196  mediation, 63  medical, 70  Mediterranean, xi, 175, 178, 181, 183, 184, 185  membership, 60, 75  memorizing, 197  memory, 57  mental representation, 35  mentoring, 97  mentorship, 99  meta-analysis, 31, 58, 171, 200  metaphor, 5, 6, 7, 17, 32  meter, 145, 147  methodology, vii, xi, 1, 8, 175, 178, 183  middle class, 90  Ministry of Education, 8, 14  minorities, 116, 122, 126, 128  minority students, 116, 122, 126  misconceptions, 25  misunderstanding, 23  models, 2, 62, 100, 118, 123, 126, 127, 130, 148,  150, 154, 166, 167, 169, 172, 190  modern society, 71  momentum, 112  Moses, 195, 217  motivation, viii, xii, 53, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62, 64, 66,  72, 73, 85, 172, 187, 188, 194, 195, 197, 198,  200, 214  multimedia, xi, 133, 134  multi-stage sampling, 121  music, 144  N  National Center for Education Statistics, 30, 131  naturalistic inquiry, vii, 1, 8  neglect, 111  negotiating, 4, 17  Netherlands, 57, 58, 163, 171, 173  neutral, 79, 81, 176   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Index  227 O  obedience, 4, 60, 61, 64  obstacles, 21  OH, 112  online learning, 41, 43, 56, 58  openness, 2, 69  operations, 11, 12, 188  opportunities, vii, x, 1, 6, 7, 17, 20, 22, 23, 28, 29,  65, 67, 71, 94, 96, 97, 104, 107, 192  organizational justice, 64, 73  organize, 4, 24, 41, 67, 71  organs, 214  P  Pacific, 30, 217  pacing, 96, 104, 106, 112  parallel, 12, 19, 126, 136, 137, 148  parameter estimates, 123  parental support, 95  Parent-Child Interaction Therapy PCIT, ix, 77, 83  parenting, 105, 129  parents, ix, 6, 57, 71, 77, 79, 80, 82, 83, 84, 91, 101,  114, 119, 121, 122, 126, 130, 173, 195, 196  participants, 5, 8, 10, 11, 29, 35, 40, 103, 105, 107  pathologist, 85  pedagogy, vii, 94, 95, 96, 98, 99, 111, 112, 113  peer group, 195, 196  performance appraisal, 74  permission, iv, 81, 194, 201, 207, 208, 213, 215  personal goals, 189  personality, 74, 171, 190, 192, 193  physical structure, xii, 187, 197, 198  physical therapist, 85  physics, 43  pilot study, 47, 53  pitch, 79  playing, 87, 207, 215  policy, 99  population, x, 85, 93, 98, 100, 110  portability, 145  Portugal, xi, 142, 143, 175, 177, 178, 182, 184, 185  positive attitudes, 37, 64, 193  positive behaviors, 65, 87, 91, 98, 191  positive relationship, 71, 78, 89, 191, 200  poverty, x, 93, 94, 98, 100, 112, 113, 119  praxis, 159  predictability, 69, 88  predictor variables, 169  preparation, iv, 42, 99, 110, 173  preparedness, x, 93, 105  preschool, 83, 84, 85, 90, 91, 92, 129, 134  preschool children, 90, 129, 134  preschoolers, 90, 92  prevention, 90, 91, 103, 113, 190, 196, 203  primary school, 134, 198  principles, 30, 54, 64, 69, 188, 196  prior knowledge, viii, 2, 7, 33, 34, 41, 44, 57  private schools, 123  probability, viii, 59  problem behavior, 79, 87, 88, 89, 97, 110, 114, 118,  120, 121  problem behaviors, 87, 88, 97, 111, 118, 120, 121  problem children, 92  problem-solving, 5, 17, 23, 28, 29, 36, 55, 56, 57,  196, 198  procedural fairness, 62, 73  procedural justice, 72, 73, 75  profanity, 81  professional development, 8, 55, 94, 99, 100, 103,  104, 105, 110, 113  professionalism, 71, 75  professionals, 88  profit, 69, 70  project, 40, 41, 42, 54, 99, 104, 111, 184  pronunciation, 78  propaganda, 112  propagation, 41, 135  property crimes, 119  prosocial behavior, 78, 80  prosperity, 71, 73  protection, 61, 68  psychiatric patients, 171  psychological processes, 32  psychologist, 190, 191  psychology, viii, 30, 32, 58, 59, 62, 73, 112, 130,  171, 193, 198, 216  psychosomatic, xii, 187  public schools, 123  publishing, 196, 217  punishment, 3, 60, 70, 98, 116, 117, 131, 188, 189,  190, 192, 194, 202  PVC, 152, 153, 154  Q  quality standards, 154  questionnaire, 34, 164  R  race, x, 115, 116, 117, 118, 120, 122, 126, 127, 128,  129, 130, 131   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Index  228  racial differences, 128  racism, 116, 117, 128  radiation, 176, 179, 180, 183  radio, 195  rating scale, 130  reactions, 62, 66, 72, 208, 216  reading, 38, 44, 49, 52, 96, 112, 113, 117, 160  reading comprehension, 117  reality, 68, 71, 190  recall, 15  recognition, 63, 78, 116, 195  recommendations, iv, x, 94, 150, 154, 155, 176  reform, 30, 71, 131, 190  regression, 123  regulations, 81, 82, 205  reinforcement, 79, 84, 89, 103  relational model, 62, 63, 75  relationship satisfaction, 171  relevance, 206  reliability, 69, 205, 206  relief, 88  reproduction, 131  reputation, 203, 204  requirements, xi, 43, 61, 66, 133, 154, 155, 159, 197,  199  researchers, x, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 17, 28, 80, 115,  116, 119, 123, 144, 171  residuals, 123  resilience, 72  resistance, 72  resolution, 176  resource management, 73  resources, 6, 37, 53, 58, 60, 63, 105, 134, 181, 195,  198  response, x, 7, 12, 43, 49, 54, 71, 79, 88, 94, 96, 97,  98, 101, 105, 106, 107, 112, 123, 138, 139, 142,  144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 160, 175, 179, 180, 181,  182  response format, 43  restoration, 150  Reverberation Time, xi, 133, 134, 135, 143, 154, 160  rewards, 3, 63, 67, 69, 86, 103  rights, iv, 200, 202  risk, 61, 68, 69, 72, 73, 96, 112, 119, 121, 128, 130  risk-taking, 72, 96  robberies, 122  rules, 2, 4, 60, 64, 65, 66, 67, 70, 71, 88, 102, 103,  104, 119, 121, 188, 189, 190, 192, 193, 195, 196,  197, 198, 201, 203, 204, 206, 207, 208, 209, 211,  212, 213, 214, 215, 216  S  safety, 81, 87  sanctions, x, 61, 70, 115, 116, 118, 129  sarcasm, 169  scarcity, 60  Scheffe test, xii, 188, 206  schema, 66  schemata, 2, 28  school activities, 61, 65, 66  school adjustment, 131  school climate, viii, 59, 61, 70  school culture, 54  school enrollment, 74, 117  school performance, 65, 72, 128, 130  school success, 130  schooling, 28, 94, 195  science, viii, 33, 34, 37, 38, 39, 44, 45, 52, 54, 55,  56, 57, 58, 68, 117, 196  screenand audio-capturing videos, viii, 33, 42  scripts, 34, 35, 36, 38, 42, 53, 54, 56  second generation, 6  ssecondary schools, 40, 74, 90  security, 131, 189  segregation, 129  self-confidence,7, 75, 94,  121, 126, 189, 196  self-discipline, 57, 72, 191, 197  self-interest, 9, 60, 113  self-report data, 55, 116, 120  seminars, 4  senses, 62  sensitivity, 30, 121  services, 85, 99, 198  SES, 120  sexual development, 199  shape, 13, 145, 181  shortage, 113  showing, 13, 18, 29, 40, 66, 117, 127, 193, 207, 208,  216  signals, 139  signal-to-noise ratio, 147  signs, 5, 6, 50, 110  simulation, xi, 133, 150, 151, 156, 157, 158, 177,  179, 182, 183  simulations, 57, 151, 156, 158, 178  skills training, 98  skin, 130  smoking, 201, 208, 214, 216  soccer, 42, 48  social activities, 7, 62,  198  social class, 72, 113  social comparison, 56, 57  social context, 2, 3, 4, 28, 31, 69   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Index  229 social development, xi, 163  social dilemma, 73, 75  social environment, 67, 172, 193, 198  social exchange, 60, 70  social identity, 63, 72, 75  social interactions, 2, 5, 6, 9, 10, 15, 28, 29, 121, 126  social justice, 4, 62  social problems, vii, 1, 17, 21, 90  social psychology, 62, 73, 171  social relations, 164  social skills, x, 98, 115, 116, 117, 118, 120, 121,  123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129  socialization, 30, 34, 71  society, x, 4, 5, 14, 32, 68, 71, 75, 133, 194  sociology, 68  software, 54, 123, 139, 147, 151, 156, 158, 160, 175  solution, vii, 1, 9, 13, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 24, 28,  29, 31, 43, 99, 192, 194, 203  special education, 130, 217  specialization, 71  specifications, 153  speech, xi, 5, 78, 85, 133, 134, 135, 138, 144, 145,  148, 150, 158, 160  Speech Transmission Index, xi, 133, 134, 135, 138,  145, 146, 148, 158, 159  spelling, 97, 111, 113  spending, 78, 86  Spring, 218  stability, 124, 188  staff members, 82, 87, 88  staffing, 99, 113  standard deviation, xii, 125, 126, 188, 206, 207, 208  standard error, 125  stars, 48, 51  state, 5, 7, 29, 68, 73, 97, 110, 130  states, 94, 191, 203  statistics, 127  steel, 148, 149  stress, ix, 77, 89, 97, 99, 192, 195, 198  structure, viii, xii, 5, 33, 35, 38, 40, 42, 53, 54, 57,  67, 71, 99, 168, 171, 172, 187, 197, 198, 199,  205, 217  student achievement, viii, 55, 59, 61, 70, 73, 112  student motivation, xii, 72, 187, 188  substitution, 154  succession, 134  supervision, 217  supervisors, 68  surveillance, 128  suspensions, 117, 119, 121, 127, 129, 132  Switzerland, 160, 185  synthesis, 74  T  tactics, 44, 47  talent, 67  target, 9, 10, 22, 23, 24, 78, 83  TDI, 80, 81, 83, 84, 85, 87, 88, 89  teacher effectiveness, x, 93, 107, 112  teacher instruction, 35, 67, 78, 83, 99, 195  Teacher-Child Interaction Training TCIT, ix, 77,  85  teacher-student relationship, xi, 133, 134, 164, 171,  200  teaching effectiveness, 100, 105, 107, 110, 168, 172  teaching experience, x, 93, 100, 110, 122, 210  teams, 84  techniques, xi, 82, 97, 133, 134, 145, 172, 205, 214  technological advances, 56  technology, viii, 33, 35, 36, 37, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58,  95, 197, 214  temperament, 92  temperature, 137, 176, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183  test anxiety, 196  testing, 85, 151, 171  textbook, 2, 11  theft, 122  therapist, 83, 85  therapy, 90, 91, 92, 190  third dimension, 210  thoughts, 16, 51, 190, 193, 194  threats, 190  time frame, 100, 104  tissue, 183  topology, 179, 180  total energy, 144  toys, 86, 87, 88  training, vii, ix, 77, 78, 83, 84, 85, 89, 90, 91, 92,  100, 105, 217  traits, 164, 172  transcription, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25  transcripts, 30  transformations, 15  transmission, xi, 2, 4, 6, 28, 133, 134, 145, 148, 158,  160  transport, 176  treatment, ix, 61, 62, 63, 64, 67, 75, 77, 82, 83, 84,  85, 88, 89, 91, 92, 158  trial, 83  triangulation, 9  trustworthiness, 61, 63, 64, 68, 72  Turkey, xii, 187, 198, 204, 205  turnover, 98  tutoring, 32, 54   EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.

Index  230  U  UK, 184, 185  underlying mechanisms, 128  United Kingdom, 142, 216  United States, 142, 143, 201  universe, 205  universities, 61, 62, 71  upper secondary schooling, 28  urban, vii, x, 73, 85, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100,  103, 104, 105, 106, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 117,  119  Urban Classroom Checklist UCC, x, 93, 103, 105,  108  urban population, 85  urban schools, x, 93, 94, 95, 96, 98, 99, 112, 114  USA, 77, 93, 115, 142, 160, 185  V  validation, 175, 179, 180, 182  vapor, 176  variables, xi, 39, 43, 45, 46, 63, 118, 120, 122, 124,  126, 128, 163, 166, 169, 170, 178, 200, 209  variations, 90  varimax rotation, 205  vector, 123  velocity, 176, 178  ventilation, xi, 146, 175, 178, 179, 180, 182, 183  versatility, 171  vibration, 159  victims, 201  videos, viii, 33, 41, 42  violence, 119, 131, 192, 195, 196  violent crime, 119, 122, 131  vocabulary, 79  vocalizations, 78  vulnerability, 68, 69, 195  Vygotskian school of thought, vii, 1, 5  Vygotsky, 2, 4, 5, 6, 11, 28, 29, 32  W  walking, 14, 189, 194, 198, 201  Washington, 30, 113, 131  waste, 27  water, 95, 176  weapons, 122  wear, 85  web, viii, 33, 35, 36, 41, 48, 53, 54, 97  web-based inquiry-learning, viii, 33, 35, 53, 54  welfare, 64, 71  well-being, xi, 62, 70, 163  Western countries, 71  WHO, 142, 143, 153, 161  windows, 148, 149, 176, 177, 179, 180, 181, 182,  183  witnesses, 71  wood, 148  workforce, 68, 71, 124  workplace, 2, 54  World Health Organization, 143, 161  Y  Yale University, 31  yesno, 104  young adults, 131  young teachers, 210, 214  Z  Zone of Proximal Development, vii, 1 

 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection EBSCOhost printed on 272025 1:44:40 AM UTC via UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https:www.ebsco.comterms-of-use.