Sensory Solutions  in the Classroom

of related interest Simple Stuff to Get Kids Self-Regulating in School Awesome and In Control Lesson Plans, Worksheets, and Strategies for Learning Lauren Brukner and Lauren Liebstein Singer Illustrated by John Smisson ISBN 978 1 78592 761 4 eISBN 978 1 78450 623 0 Can I tell you about Sensory Processing Difficulties? A guide for friends, family and professionals Sue Allen Illustrated by Mike Medaglia ISBN 978 1 84905 640 3 eISBN 978 1 78450 137 2 Stay Cool and In Control with the Keep-Calm Guru Wise Ways for Children to Regulate their Emotions and Senses Lauren Brukner Illustrated by Apsley ISBN 978 1 78592 714 0 eISBN 978 1 78450 300 0 Living Sensationally Understanding Your Senses Winnie Dunn ISBN 978 1 84310 915 0 eISBN 978 1 84642 733 6

SENSORY  SOLUTIONS IN  THE CLASSROOM The Teachers Guide to Fidgeting,  Inattention and Restlessness Monique Thoonsen and Carmen Lamp Foreword by Professor Winnie Dunn Translated by   Meike Ellens, Monique Thoonsen and Carmen Lamp Illustrations by Ruud Bijman

First edition published in the Netherlands in 2015 by Uitgeverij Pica First published in the English language in Great Britain in 2022 by Jessica Kingsley Publishers An Hachette Company 2 Copyright  Monique Thoonsen and Carmen Lamp 2015, 2022 Foreword copyright  Professor Winnie Dunn 2022 Illustrations copyright  Uitgeverij Pica 2015, 2022 The right of Monique Thoonsen and Carmen Lamp to be identified  as the Author of the Work has been asserted by them in accordance  with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. The Window of Tolerance image is reproduced with kind permission from Anton Horeweg.  The Fan-model images have been reproduced with kind permission from Robert Schmitz. Front cover image source: Ruud Bijman. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in  a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means without the  prior written permission of the publisher, nor be otherwise circulated in any  form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without  a similar condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.  All sections marked with     can be downloaded at https:library.jkp.comredeem  for personal use with this programme, but may not be reproduced for  any other purposes without the permission of the publisher. A CIP catalogue record for this title is available from the  British Library and the Library of Congress ISBN 978 1 78592 697 6  eISBN 978 1 78592 698 3 Printed and bound in the United States by Integrated Books International Jessica Kingsley Publishers policy is to use papers that are natural, renewable and recyclable  products and made from wood grown in sustainable forests. The logging and manufacturing  processes are expected to conform to the environmental regulations of the country of origin. Jessica Kingsley Publishers Carmelite House 50 Victoria Embankment London EC4Y 0DZ www.jkp.com

Contents  Foreword by Professor Winnie Dunn .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 9 Acknowledgements .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 11 Introduction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 13 Part I: Theory: Knowledge Is the Beginning of All Wisdom 1.	 Stimulate Your Sensory Side .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 19 We look at how you process sensory input, follow the process and  explain what SPI-Glasses are. We explain how the bouncer or the  sensory input filter treats sensory input. We explain what it means  to be underresponsive and overresponsive and give examples of  behaviour as a result of this, both inside and outside the classroom.  We introduce the Fan-model to visualise sensory processing. 2.	 Do You Prefer a Double Espresso or a Green Tea? .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 	 47 We explain how sensory processing affects your level of alertness. A  distinction is made between students who may try to influence and  students who may not try to influence sensory input themselves. We  provide examples of behaviour as a result of this. We also explain  how the student can get stressed from being overresponsive and  what the consequences are for their behaviour in the classroom. 3.	 The First Link: The Eight Senses .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 68 We practise using the SPI-Glasses. We discuss the eight senses and show  how they influence behaviour and choices in general. For each sense, we  give examples of the behaviour of underand overresponsive students.  We also show that everyone has their own experience of reality. Part II: Getting Started: What Can You Do? 4.	 Before You Begin .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 97 You will receive the instructions for using strategies the right way.  With the help of a SPI-viewing guide, you can choose an activating  or calming strategy. We also revisit the Fan-model introduced in  Chapter 1, which helps the student become aware of their personal  need for input. We also answer some practical questions.

5.	 Strategies in the Classroom  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 118 We share more than 250 strategies with you, for you to execute in class to  improve sensory processing. The strategies are categorized as activating  and calming, and strategies that can be carried out whilst sitting on  the chair, standing next to the chair or moving through the room.  6.	 Strategies Outside the Classroom .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 135 We leave the classroom and discuss activating and calming strategies  in other locations, including the hallway, PE, during school gatherings,  in the playground and on the road. We also look at special situations,  such as during school trips and on the bus to a museum. 7.	 More about Strategies and Tools .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 153 Different strategies are explained. Tools are discussed: what do they  do, how do you choose the right one and what to look for when  purchasing? We mention different scientific studies, which show that  the strategies mentioned can have a very positive effect on learning. Part III: What Else Can You Do? Layout, Organization and Didactics 8.	 Layout of the Classroom .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 173 We look at the classroom through the SPI-Glasses. We explain  how the layout affects sensory processing, and we give tips on  how you can influence that. We discuss the place of the underor  overresponsive student in the classroom, and your own place  as well. The organization of materials is discussed too. 9.	 Organize the Classroom  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 186 We explain how proper desk arrangement can influence different work  methods. The students organization of their work is discussed, and how  to give instructions in an activating or calming way. Fixed rituals to get  attention and ways to keep that attention afterwards are discussed as well. 10.	Tips for Teaching Methods .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 198 We discuss focus and give suggestions to introduce more movement  into your lessons. We provide examples of how students can use  all their senses during your lessons. We talk about goal-oriented  learning, tests and exams, and about using humour in class. Part IV: The Teacher with SPI-Glasses 11.	 Practice Makes Perfect .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 213 You can practise characterizing students using the SPI-viewing  guide, and selecting strategies inside and outside the classroom.  You do this on the basis of six specific situations.

12.	 He Never Does That When Hes with Me .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 231 We explain how your impression of a student can differ from that of  a parent or colleague. We describe four types of sensory processing  for the parent and the teacher and show how the student might react  to these types. We provide tips for you to reduce misunderstandings  about the different impressions people have about the student. Bibliography .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 252 Appendix 1: Further Research .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 255 Appendix 2: Additional Information .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 256 Index  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 257
Foreword  There was a time a few decades ago when the application of sensory  processing knowledge was a new and mysterious area. We knew how the  sensory systems worked from neuroscientists. Applied scientists were  beginning to experiment with how to take that neuroscience knowledge  and use it to conduct assessments and create interventions with children  and adults; some of our experiments were useful, and others were not.  As we began to talk about our findings with others, an interesting  thing started to happen. People would tell us about their personal life  experiences with their own sensory processing. They would tell us about  their spouses, neighbours and friends. None of these people had identified conditions we would associate with challenging sensory processing,  and yet they were describing similar experiences to people we had studied  as a risk group.  As these stories started coming my way, I realized that although what  we had learned from children and adults in special groups e.g. autism,  schizophrenia, ADHD helped us understand sensory processing, these  new insights applied to the human experience in general. We were learning about everybody, including ourselves! I began to think about how we  could talk about sensory processing as a characteristic rather than a deficit  or dysfunction. This realization opened many possibilities beyond our  wildest dreams. As we have all come to understand the importance of sensory processing knowledge for everyone, we have also had to consider new ways  to disseminate this information to others. What would parents want to  know about how to manage their home and life routines? How could we  support families to select community activities that would be satisfying  for everyone? How could we partner with teachers and schools to make  learning successful? 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 10 Monique Thoonsen and Carmen Lamp answered the call to make  sensory processing knowledge accessible to teachers and schools in  their book, Sensory Solutions in the Classroom: The Teachers Guide to  Fidgeting, Inattention and Restlessness. They translated seriously complex material from both neuroscience and applied sciences into everyday  explanations that retain accuracy while linking the ideas to the familiar  routines at school. Because their tone is conversational, their writing  invites educators to imagine ways they can adjust their already effective  routines to support students with various responses to sensory events  in the classroom. They break their material into manageable parts, so  that an educator can learn one part at a time and find pertinent material  later as situations arise. They provide many examples so educators can  find strategies that match their classroom culture. They give educators  another way to understand students behaviours, therefore expanding  the teachers tools for effectiveness. Not only is this book a great classroom reference, it is also a great  reference for therapists and other professionals because it provides ways  to explain sensory processing to others. It is a resource for knowledge  in addition to ideas, and so can serve as background support for idea  generation and planning. This book creates some common everyday  language that increases everyones ability to be heard and understood.  Everyone benefitsand I mean everyone. I defy any reader to say they  have not seen themselves or someone they know within the explanations,  examples and stories the authors provide. When we have more insights  about our humanity, we are all better for it.  Thank you, Monique and Carmen, for creating access to this vital  information.  Winnie Dunn, PhD, OTR, FAOTA Distinguished Professor, University of Missouri  Department of Occupational Therapy, USA
Acknowledgements Monique would like to thank Bart and Son Bram, who have given her all  the room needed in all these years to write, write and write some more.  During the week, but also evenings, weekends and holidays. She also  thanks her mom, dad, Astrid and Vincent, who have been cheering her  on all this time. I feel privileged, having all of you around me.  Carmen would like to thank her family: her mom, Marc, Tim and Laura  for their ongoing support wherever and whenever she needed it. She  also thanks Henk van Atteveld and Belinda van Boxtel, two wonderful  educators, who made a difference during her career. Also many thanks  to my frister Lynn Ross, who I could call late at night to ask about the  English school system. And okay, we will not go as far as thanking the first Homo sapiens, but we  would like to thank the people who made our very first Dutch edition  possible. Ruud Bijman, for making our words into beautiful accurate  drawings, with his unique talent to put a little wink in all of them. Heleen  Hess retired teacher and Carola Meijer educational counsellor for  their commitment and feedback that helped us to improve our text.  Primary school Het Klimduin in Groet, as they opened their doors for  us, so we could observe the lovely teachers and amazing children in their  classrooms.  Acknowledgements to the revised English language edition We would like to thank a number of people for their support in the  creation of this English language version of our book. First, Hanneke  Meijwaard and Mark Veerman from publishing house Uitgeverij Pica. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 12 Their belief in the possibility of a translation has supported our journey  to get it done and we couldnt be happier or prouder.  We would like to thank Emily Badger from Jessica Kingsley Publishers for being enthusiastic about our book and for guiding us through  the journey at JKP, answering our many questions and following our  suggestions.  Gwen, Kim and Karen, we appreciate the time you spent on the manuscript and sharing your thoughts and insight; they were very helpful.  We also thank Marijenne, co-author of the Fan-model, which was done  just in time to include in this English language edition. Most of all we thank Professor Winnie Dunn, for her willingness to  write a foreword to our book. We are still grinning and glowing from the  words you put on paper for us. Thank you so much!
Introduction This book is about sensory processing and its impact on learning. The  combination of these two things is at the core of this book. It is very  important for the teacher to know what happens to a student when they  are underor overresponsive. Everyone can imagine something when  they hear the word overresponsive. But many teachers are not aware  of the number of students who are underresponsive. As a result, the  behaviour of these students is regularly misjudged, leaving the teacher  without effective tools to offer. Trying to calm a student that is bouncing  around isnt always the solution. Perhaps this student is looking for extra  input which they need to be able to focus. In this book, we will find out  what happens exactly with underand overresponsivity. We wrote this book for primary education because in primary school  children are confronted with a system that is adjusted to the average child. The older the child, the more control theyll have in organizing  their life. Consequently, their environment and activities will gradually  align more with their way of sensory processing. And if a child learns  how to deal with underand overresponsivity at a young age, the more  they will benefit later in life. We provide background information in all chapters, consisting of  recognizable situations, examples, theory and research results. The  illustrations give you as clear a picture as possible of what sensory processing looks like. We use tables, so you can look things up quickly. You  can choose to skip in-depth parts, such as theoretical background and  examples of scientific research. To help you adopt the contents of the  book as much as possible, we have added assignments and tests. These  ensure that you become aware of and experience how sensory processing  works. So, its definitely handy to do these short tests and assignments.  But of course, you already know that when you work in education.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 14 Above all, the book is very practical. Because of the recognizable  situations, you quickly develop an insight into the process of sensory  processing in your students. Part II is intended as a reference work that  you can easily consult in the classroom. Our goal is for the student to  feel comfortable and safe and to be able to maintain focus during lessons  and that they arent too lethargic or hyper to learn. After reading this  book, you can ensure that both you and the student receive the amount  of input you need.  Comments The neurological mechanisms involved in sensory processing are complex. So complex that scientists are still busy discovering exactly how  they work. Because this book is an introduction to this subject, we will  give you a simplified version of the theory. The theory serves as a basis  for understanding what you are going to do. We also use exaggerated  examples, because extremes help make our point nice and clear. When  you become familiar with these extremes, it will eventually become easier  to recognize the many nuances. There are many reasons for peoples behaviour. In this book, we show  how sensory processing is connected to behaviour and how it influences  learning. That means that we view behaviours in this light. We understand that there are of course other causes of disruptive behaviour. With most of your students you can start with the information in  this book. If you think that a student has a problem for which our solutions are not sufficient, you can get a specialist in the field of sensory  processing involved.  The many sources we have consulted over the past more than 25  years can be found at the back of this book in the Bibliography. And, lastly, this: for readability, we have chosen to refer to the student as they, instead of heshe. We also write parent where we mean  parents andor caregivers. And where we say teacher, we also  mean other educational professionals who work with children. The following icons are used in this book:

Introduction 15 Theoretical background Scientific research Assignments and tests Using the SPI-Glasses Sections marked by      are available to download from   https:library.jkp.comredeem using the voucher code RYJGCWX
Part I THEORY: KNOWLEDGE  IS THE BEGINNING  OF ALL WISDOM Sensory processing is a beautiful but complex process. Because it is useful  to know how this process works, we start with a theoretical explanation.  By knowing the theory, you can better understand the consequences of  sensory processing in others and yourself. When you know how sensory  input is processed, you understand what the obstacles in this process  may look like and what behaviour those obstacles can lead to. Sensory  processing impacts the ability to focus and the degree of alertness, and  is crucial for being able to learn. It is very important for the student  and of course for you as a teacher that they can focus as needed, when  needed. In this part, we show which disruptive behaviour can be related  to disrupted sensory processing. This lays the foundation for being able  to support the student in this area. As soon as you are sufficiently capable  of recognizing this behaviour, you can start applying the strategies from  Part II and Part III.
1 Stimulate Your Sensory Side Whats this chapter about? In this chapter, we look at how you process sensory input and we explain  SPI-Glasses SPI  Sensory Processing of Input. These glasses will be  used to examine your students behaviour. We introduce the bouncer  and explain how he is involved with sensory input. How he grades that  input, and what these grades mean. We show what part of the brain the  bouncer resides in and how you can see him as a sensory input filter.  We explain what it means to be underresponsive and overresponsive. We  present examples of student behaviour you can encounter in class. And  finally, we explain how overresponsivity can cause stress. Lets just start from the beginning:  What is sensory processing SP? We will explain the following process in further detail later, but this is  the short version: SP means to register information coming from our  body and our surroundings through our senses, process it and respond  in an appropriate manner. Sensory processing is one of your bodys main tasks. Sensory processing is something everybody does, always and everywhere. You  too. Right now. At this moment, your senses are registering all different kinds of input, such as colours, smells and sounds. This input is  then transmitted to the brain for processing. The brain gets to work  and assesses whether something should be done with the input and, if  so, what. The sensory input is prioritized based on the information it contains.  It can be categorized as important, interesting, useful or inconsequential.  Depending on the priority assigned to the input, action will be taken. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 20 For example: you pinch your nose, because you think something is smelly  smell sensation, or you turn down the music, because it is too loud  sound sensation. HOW DOES SENSORY INPUT TRAVEL?  This is the course of events, simplified: Step 1: Registration Input is first registered by the senses, for example the ears or the  nose. The sound of students talking enters your ear, or the smell of  fresh coffee enters your nose. If the sense doesnt work, the process  of sensory processing ends here. The input cannot be registered, for  example, if you are deaf or have lost your sense of smell. Step 2: Prioritization The input is located through the senses into areas of the brain which  decide on their importance. Input that is registered a lot and that  doesnt require an immediate response is considered of less importance. New input, or input linked to survival, is considered very important. For example, the constant sound hum of the computer is  not deemed important, while the smell of fresh coffee in the morning  is. The consistent smell of your own deodorant is not considered  important, so this input will not be passed on. When input is found  to be unimportant, the process ends here.  Step 3: Cerebral cortex If the input is considered sufficiently important, it will be passed on  to the cerebral cortex. It isnt until then that you can become aware  of the input. You will hear the student or smell the coffee. Youre not  aware of all the input that is conveyed to the cerebral cortex. Step 4: Response After the input has arrived in the cerebral cortex, a response will  follow:

Unconscious response:

Stress hormones are issued into the bloodstream in  response to a fire alarm.

Stimulate Your Sensory Side 21

A tiny muscle in your ear tenses, to slightly muffle loud  sounds.

Conscious response:

Youre thinking: Hey, a car!

You wipe away a drop thats  running down your chin.

You walk away from something that smells very bad.  TO DO: YOUR SENSORY INPUT  The best and quickest way to find out what sensory processing is is to see how  it works for you. What input are you processing right now? To establish this,  we have created a short list of questions. These questions will make you pause  and become more aware of your senses. You will see that were talking about  eight senses instead of five. Balance and posturemovement are also registered  by specific senses. And sensing the input from tissues, organs, hormonally controlled processes and reflexes is called interoception. These will be explained in  Chapter 3. Take a few minutes, grab a pen, and answer the following questions. Eye What do you see right now? What kind of lighting is around you;  is it artificial or natural? Ear What do you hear right now? Is there background noise, andor  are there perhaps noises inside your body? Nose What do you smell right now? Do you smell deodorant, or  something else? Mouth What do you taste right now? Do you taste something you just  ate or drank, or something else?

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 22 Touch What do you feel right now? Do you feel your hair, your clothes,  your glasses, your shoes? Balance Are you balanced? Are you leaning more to the left or to the  right? Movement Are you moving a little? Are you wiggling your toes, are you  blinking? Interoception Are you hungry or have you had enough to eat? How fast does  your heart beat?  Looking through SPI-Glasses  This assignment should have made you more aware of the fact that  sensory input is happening all the time.  You have become someone who can look through imaginary SPI-Glasses!  SPI stands for Sensory Processing of Input, processing information passed  on through the senses we will explain this in a moment. When wearing 

Stimulate Your Sensory Side 23 SPI-Glasses, you can see everybody is constantly processing input from  outside and inside the body. You know the brain is busy processing all  of this input. You are someone who understands that as you are reading  this, you can also feel your left ear itching and youre hearing a siren.  And that a student is listening to your explanation and in the meantime: 

can hear the wind outside through the open window

is squinting against the bright sunlight

sees a fellow student laughing

feels their left sock slide down a little. This was a preview of looking through SPI-Glasses. In a later section, we  will use these glasses more intensively. This skill is incredibly important  for recognizing behaviours linked to sensory processing. We hope you  will use your SPI-Glasses very often. You now know: input enters through our senses and is processed in the  brain, where its decided if actions should follow. So, SP: Sensory Processing. The definition is as follows: SP is the ability to register information  from our body and surroundings through the senses, process it and give  an appropriate response. Lets take a closer look at that definition, so  we can explain the different sections by looking at the processing of  sound input. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 24 1. Registering information To get to the act of input processing, whichever sense is being used first  has to be able to properly sense the input and register it. If you are completely deaf, for example, you are simply incapable of noticing the sound  sensations. If the sense doesnt function properly, because you are hard  of hearing or partially sighted, there is still a little sensory processing  happening. However, the sense is less capable of properly processing the  information and conveying the input to the brain. As such, the brain receives partially incorrect information. For example: the ear only conveys  some sound sensations, even if the sound is very loud. SP is the ability to register information from our body and  surroundings through the senses, process it and give an appropriate response. 2. Processing input The second part of the definition is the processing of sensory input,  which means sending the signal  the input  through different nerve  cells and pathways. The input is considered of high or low importance  and processed in that order by the sensory filter in the brain. The input  also gets linked to previous experiences with similar input. For this, it is  again of importance that everything works accordingly. If the ear cant  convey sounds properly, because it cant register them correctly, you  cant say afterwards that the brain didnt consider the input of enough  importance.

Stimulate Your Sensory Side 25 3. An appropriate response The response must be suited to the situation you are in or the way you  are feeling. Examples of appropriate responses are hearing a sound and,  depending on the situation, you

think: What a good song!, because you are in a good mood and  want to listen to music 

get up and close the window, because you dont want to hear  the neighbours music while you are having a conversation. An appropriate response can be different for everyone. For some, an  appropriate response to feeling a draught would be to close the window,  because they dont like the feeling of the draught. Another, in the same  situation, would stay where they are and enjoy the draught, because  theyre very warm. Previous experiences heavily influence what your  response will be. When you associate loud noises with danger you might  get scared when a balloon pops. In this definition, the combination of receiving and processing information and the response to that information is what matters; this  should be a fluent process.  The miracle of SP Clearly, everything our body does is miraculous. But SP is a very special miracle. Its the wonderful cooperation between senses and brain.  Through sensory processing, we can register the outside world. By  registering input and processing it, we connect to the world, our environments, each other and ourselves. Yet we arent very aware of it when  its happening. Through sensory processing, we can register the outside world. Lets take a moment to look at a situation thats quite common and that  takes only a few seconds, to clarify the miracle that is SP.  Youre standing at the kitchen counter and are pouring juice from a  carton into a glass. Thats one way to describe the situation. But, looking  through SPI-Glasses, we notice much more is happening: 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 26 1. You need to stay balanced While pouring the juice, you are moving your arm and upper body. This  means your centre of gravity shifts, and a lot of postural muscles are  working to maintain your balance.  2. You need to hold the juice carton The muscles in your arm and hand sense the weight of the carton and  the material its made of. The fingers then know how hard they need to  squeeze the carton to keep a hold on it, so it doesnt fall or get squished. 3. You need to pour the liquid out of the carton While doing this, you are estimating how much juice is left inside of  the carton. You can sense this by the weight of the carton and how the  liquid inside of it moves around. Because of this, you know how fast to  move the carton, so the liquid comes out at the appropriate speed. If you  pour too fast, the liquid can spill over the edge of the glass, or you might  overfill the glass so the liquid pours over. 4. You need to pour precisely into the glass The eyes cooperate with your arm muscles to time the movement of your  arm and decide on the correct distance between the carton and the glass. 5. You need to pour the right amount of juice into the glass Your eyes are part of the decision-making process to determine the  pouring speed, by seeing how much juice is already in the glass. The  muscles in your arm slowly lift your arm, so the liquid pours out more  easily. Your ears hear the liquid pouring out of the carton, into the glass.  The higher-pitched this sound, the more liquid is in the glass. And then theres the input you arent aware of, but which is definitely  registered and processed by your body in those few seconds it takes to  pour a glass of juice:

the ring youre wearing

the ticking of the kitchen clock

the buzzing of the radiator

the ambient temperature

the sound of you swallowing 

the blinking of your eyes

your tongue pressing against the roof of your mouth

Stimulate Your Sensory Side 27

the clothes on your skin:

your sleeve is pressing against your wrist

your sock has twisted around your ankle

your underpants are uncomfortable

the collar of your sweater is touching your neck

the fabric of your sweater is touching your back

your trousers are rubbing the inside of your knee

your sweaters fabric is touching your stomach

your trouser waistband is a little too tight

one leg of your trousers has twisted slightly

your other trouser leg has not

your back is itchy

your hair is covering your ears

you can see and feel your glasses

you can see your nose

your lips might or might not be chapped

you can or cant breathe freely through your nose

the colours and materials of the kitchen counter

whats on the counter

the material of your shoe or slipper

the fly walking across the counter

the smell of the fresh flowers standing on the kitchen table

the position of your head

rumbling in your intestines

the brightness of the kitchen light

the material of the floor youre standing on

what part of your body is leaning against the counter

the humming of the refrigerator

people talking in the street outside

your heart skips a beat

you feel thirsty

you look forward to drinking, you love juice and are a bit  excited. You would be overwhelmed if you were aware of every single thing  your senses register. You would think twice before doing something as  complicated as pouring a drink into a glass. To make sure you can pour  a glass of juice without going mad, your brain is working fervently. First,  it filters out all information to decide what is important and what isnt.  It creates a hierarchy, based on the inputs priority.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 28 It is incredibly important that the brain knows which information  needs attention, and which can be ignored. The smell of smoke, for example, is important, because it needs to be acted upon  this is vital; but  the sound of an aeroplane flying overhead can be ignored. You would be overwhelmed if you were aware of everything  your senses register.  Pleased to meet you: I am the bouncer We use the bouncer as a metaphor for the sensory filter in the brain. Using this, we will explain how the brain decides which input is important,  and as such give a better idea of how input is processed. We take a look  at what happens in general with input when you are feeling well, and the  brain responds in an appropriate way. On average, every moment of the day that you are awake, countless  different types of sensory input are fighting to be granted access to the  cerebral cortex. You can picture this as a large group of people the input  wanting to get into a trendy nightclub the cerebral cortex. However,  not everybody is allowed in, and most certainly not all at the same time. The bouncer is working the door and uses a door policy to decide  which people input get in. He must ensure that the club cerebral  cortex doesnt stay empty, but it cant get too busy either. People are  crowding the door asking to be let in. The bouncer decides who gets  in first, and who will be let in after that. Everybody receives their own  stamp, signalling their priority. In this metaphor, getting into the nightclub means that the input  reaches the cerebral cortex,  which causes a response.  The door policy is made up  of guidelines: some people  are allowed in and some are  not. And some are allowed  in before others. The bouncers task is to stamp people  accordingly. These stamps  show who is allowed in, and  in which order. 

Stimulate Your Sensory Side 29 Who is allowed to go in first? The cerebral cortexs bouncer needs to pay  close attention to see if there are people input who immediately receive a HIGH PRIORITY! PAY ATTENTION  TO, NOW! LET IN IMMEDIATELY! stamp, who get to go  in first. These are the VIPs, Very Important to Process. Which input is VIP? Input that signals damage to your  body is imminent and input linked to survival should always be VIP. This  input warns us of danger, for example:

you can see and feel a wasp on your hand

you can smell fire

you need to go to the toilet. The next input to be granted access is the  highly interesting input. This is input that  stands out and grabs your attention. This  input is very special, for whatever reason. What is this interesting input? It might be very pleasant input which  has your preference, or it could be most unpleasant and needs your  attention. Examples are:

the taste of homemade apple pie

the smell of wet dog

the touch of a friend leaning against you. Note: input from interoception always has at least an interesting stamp  and thus takes precedence over many other stimuli. After this, it is useful inputs turn to go inside.  These are the nightclubs patrons who bring in  the most money; the average crowd. What input is useful? This is input that guarantees we make it  through the day okay. It makes sure we adjust to changing situations.  Useful input is:

hearing the sound of the first raindrops falling

staying balanced while riding your bike

feeling your hands are still a bit wet after washing them. Boring input is denied access. Theyre the ones who  are always telling the same stories. Of no interest to  a trendy, exclusive club.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 30 What input is boring? This input has been processed so often before;  its not getting any special attention any more. This way, most of the input can be filtered out into the background. It never reaches the cerebral  cortex. You are not aware of this input, you dont notice it, so you can  continue doing what you were doing. Input such as:

the glasses on your nose

the smell of your deodorant

the way youve been sitting for a while now. The bouncers task is to be a sensory input filter: a filter that  lets some input through easily, while other input is refused. WHERE CAN WE FIND THE BOUNCER  SENSORY INPUT FILTER EXACTLY?  In different parts of the brain: In the formatio reticularis reticular formation  RF, meaning net-like structure  This structure plays an important part in regulating attentiveness.  Its like a control room, where important decisions are being made.  Functions of the RF to do with senses:

The RF combines information coming from eyes, ears and  balance. Through this, an appropriate response can be  decided upon, such as tensing or relaxing muscles to maintain posture and balance.

The RF decides which sensory information you will be made  aware of. It works like a filter for sensory input.

The RF impacts our sleepwake rhythms.

The RF also plays a part in getting used to sensory input  which repeats itself and isnt of any importance, while  important input causes it to raise an alarm. This way, people  who live near train tracks can sleep through the sound of a  passing train but will wake up when a siren goes off. This is  regulated by the RF.

Stimulate Your Sensory Side 31 In the thalamus After sensory input has passed the reticular formation, it reaches the  thalamus. The thalamus functions, among other things, as a relay  station for sensory input. From the thalamus, input can be relayed  to the cerebral cortex, after which you will become aware of it. The  thalamus weighs input and decides whether its important, and to  what degree it should be passed on. This goes for all sensory input  except smell, which has its own way to the cerebral cortex and doesnt  pass the thalamus.  The neurohormonal system Situated in the brain are nuclei that can release certain chemicals.  These nuclei influence different areas of the brain and help determine  the bouncers door policy. Examples of these chemicals are:

norepinephrine, which has an activating effect. It causes  more input to be let through an open door policy

serotonin, which has a calming effect. It causes less input to  be let through a strict door policy. The insula  The insular cortex is the area of the brain where information from  the interoceptors, for instance located in internal organs and skin, is  processed. The insula processes the sensory input to figure out how  we feel. Based on this feeling we undertake action eat, run away, ask  someone out on a date. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 32 Door policy Based on the door policy, important decisions are made; the bouncer  is suited to this task, so usually you can leave this up to him. However,  sometimes it can go wrong. No matter how hot the DJ is, or how beautiful the light show, if the  bouncer doesnt let anyone in, the club will go bankrupt. And letting  everybody in will cause the club to be too crowded, which people dont  like, and neither does the fire department. So, lets see how the bouncer  works and how this affects you. A good bouncer guarantees a successful night If the bouncer does his job right, sensory processing will go smoothly. The  bouncer makes all the right decisions,  and awards everybody the correct  stamps. You can function successfully,  even though an abundance of input is  registered simultaneously. If this is the  case, we call this neutral sensory processing. All VIPs, all highly interesting  and some useful input is granted access  by the bouncer. Some useful and all  boring input is denied access. A properly  functioning bouncer ensures not too  much and not too little input. You can pour the juice without spilling. How does a person with neutral sensory processing function?

You dont feel your clothes or your glasses.

Youre not constantly aware of:

the buzzing of the computer

the ticking of the clock.

You enjoy many different flavours; youre not afraid to try new  things. How does a student with neutral sensory processing function? The student: 

does not experience classmates discussing something or other  background noise as distracting

isnt bothered by people walking past them and accidentally  pushing them or touching them in a different way

Stimulate Your Sensory Side 33

can stay focused working at their table for quite a while,  without moving too much

will raise their hand and ask for permission to go to the toilet,  when they feel they need to go.  A strict door policy causes underresponsivity A strict door policy leads to the bouncer  dismissing too much input as boring;  therefore, this input is hardly noticed.  VIP stamps are rarely awarded and barely  any input is considered interesting or  useful. A lot of input has to stay outside.  Input people the bouncer has a personal  interest in his own friends, for example  do get noticed and let in. That isnt necessarily input which is considered interesting according to the door policy. The  club cerebral cortex is pretty empty and theres a crowd waiting outside. A strict door policy allows less and weaker input through. This  causes you to be less aware of certain things; you might not notice a  small abrasion, for example. Your skin registers the sensation, but the  signal isnt put through to the appropriate receiver. You dont respond  as much to information picked up by your senses. This causes you to be  less responsive to your environment. You dont receive the right amount  of input to wake up your body and stay awake. When pouring juice, you dont notice the carton is sticky and leaves  a sticky residue on your fingers. And if youre talking while pouring, you  will pour for just a little too long, because you didnt register the glass  was full. When so little input is let in, we call this underresponsive. Examples of input you might miss when youre underresponsive:

You dont feel when your clothes are twisted or your trousers  are stuck in your sock, and you dont notice your glasses are  dirty.

You arent bothered by:

the computer making strange noises

the antique wall clock chiming every half hour.

You are very flexible when it comes to eating, enjoying strange  flavour combinations.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 34 How does an underresponsive student function? The student: 

isnt distracted by people discussing something, or other  background noise. They might daydream a little, even if the  classroom is a bit noisy

can be a bit rough and clumsy in their movement. They often  bump into other people and dont seem to be aware that this  might bother them

has a hard time concentrating. They are a bit sluggish and have  difficulty staying alert

cant stop wriggling because they need to go to the toilet.  But they dont understand that the annoying thing they are  feeling is an overfilled bladder, which can be solved by going to  the toilet.  An overly easy-going bouncer can cause overresponsivity If the bouncer considers all input to be Very Important to Process or  highly interesting, all this input is let in with a lot of fuss. The bouncer  opens the door wide, too many VIP stamps are awarded, and even useful  or boring input gets a VIP stamp. Consequently, its way too busy and  crowded inside. When the cerebral cortex gets this much input to process, you might feel too many sensations and you might feel them too  strongly, which can be overwhelming. If too much information is passed  on to the cerebral cortex, this information can bother you. You cant have a conversation and pour a drink at the same time, because  it will cause you to miss the glass. You are overly sensitive to the cold carton, and the cat rubbing against your leg makes you jump. Its exhausting  to be flooded with so much information. It takes a lot of energy and can 

Stimulate Your Sensory Side 35 even be painful for example, when being touched or hearing sounds;  we call this brain overload. This can cause you to respond in an extreme  way. When far too much input is let through, we call this overresponsive. Examples of input youre aware of when overresponsive: 

You feel your clothes and accessories all day, like twisted socks  or glasses.

Youre easily distracted by the sounds of:

a computer buzzing

a clock ticking.

Youre a picky eater and you prefer eating things you know. How does an overresponsive student function? The student:

cant focus when others are talking, theyre constantly hearing  things they want to respond to

jumps every time someone touches them, because the sensation  of touch is so strong that it startles them

is very good at sitting still, and they enjoy doing this. As long as  theyre sitting quietly at their table, other input doesnt bother  them as much

wants to go to the toilet when feeling the slightest urge, because  it feels as if they are about to wet themselves.  Variable door policy If the nightclub wants to make a big profit, its a good idea to have a door  policy that considers many different possibilities. A Saturday night would  require a stricter door policy than a Wednesday night, because Saturdays are much busier. Because of this, input thats considered useful on  Saturday night could just as well be considered highly interesting on a  Wednesday. Information priority is variable and influenced by circumstances and the presence of other input. Feeling poorly When you are in good health, its easier for the bouncer to discern between things that are of importance and things that arent. Stamps are  awarded properly: pain is considered VIP and the sound of your cell  phone is highly interesting. The bouncer is more prone to making mistakes when youre tired, sick or stressed, because recovery is prioritized,  and more energy is sent there. The bouncer can be too easy-going in these  situations, because he doesnt have the energy to make the right choices. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 36 More input is coming in, and it doesnt always have the right stamps. It  could occur that an innocent touch gets a VIP stamp and comes through  in an exaggerated manner, which causes an agitated response from you.  Or maybe the bouncer fails to add a useful stamp to the fact that the  floor feels a little slippery. This is inconvenient as it can cause you to slip. Precedence Another door policy is the precedence policy. Certain input thats already  been stamped before and is allowed into the club cerebral cortex will not  be allowed inside in the same capacity, because of the arrival of new input.  Imagine a line of people wearing blue sweaters who all get an interesting  stamp. Suddenly, a line of people wearing purple sweaters is forming, which  catches the bouncers interest. They will get an interesting stamp now, and  the people wearing blue sweaters will receive a useful or boring stamp. New input can cause old input to receive a different stamp. The input  coming from the educational video about sharks might have received an  interesting stamp and the student is completely focused on the video. New  input announces itself: the bell announcing lunch break rings, and that  sound immediately receives an interesting stamp, because the student  wants to play outside. The shark video loses importance. At this point,  the shark video might be considered useful the student is watching it  half-heartedly, but isnt listening to the audio commentary, or even boring  discussing what he brought for lunch with a friend is more interesting. This mechanism can be a useful tool to influence sensory processing.  For example, if students are distracted and watching a worker outside  paving the road, which is highly interesting input, because it is different  from what they usually see outside. In this situation, you could use call  and response to redirect the students attention to you, as most students  find this fun and interesting. Safety first: How feeling safe influences sensory processing How safe you feel affects how sensitive you are to sensory input. The  more threatening the environment is or appears, the more sensitive you  are. If you are in danger of falling, you focus on where to find support, not  on what someone is saying to you. Thats because in order to survive you  need as much information as possible about the threatening situation  to estimate whether there is sensory input that will cause damage and  whether you should respond immediately.

Stimulate Your Sensory Side 37 You can experience both physical and emotional danger. For example,  there is physical danger when you have to cross a very busy road and there  is emotional danger when you are bullied or abused.  When there are perceived threats, your body functions in a way that  makes sure you are as safe as possible. This involves the body making  choices over which you have no conscious control but which ensure  that your survival chances are at a maximum. During a response to stress you are temporarily not functioning  routinely, because you are in survival mode, instead of being able to live  and learn. At that moment you cannot expect someone to display the  skills they normally have. This is how it works It is helpful to know what happens in your body when you yourself or  a student react stressed to sensory input. When the brain receives the  message that damage may occur to the body, stress mechanisms kick  in. A signal of something threatening is, for example, seeing someone  approaching fast. But the signal can also consist of sensory input that is  too strong, such as a brusque touch, a very loud noise or a bright light.  One of the stress mechanisms that comes into effect is that the sensory  input filter remains open to all input, because all sensory input may be  important for survival. With this information your body decides to fight,  flee or freeze in response to the threat.  Imagine a situation where you are face to face with a tiger. It is of vital  importance that you can run away, that you hear where the tiger is and  that you can estimate how far away it is. You must experience all sensory  input to be able to decide upon which action to take. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 38 The mechanism of being hyper-alert and taking action is meant to help  you for a short period of time. Being stressed and therefore hyper-alert  for a long time is unhealthy. For instance, its not functional and certainly  not healthy when your sensory input filter remains wide open for a long  time after only hearing one loud sound. We have to do something that  will relax our body, to regain our balance. People who are overresponsive are sharply tuned. People dealing with  chronic stress or trauma therefore respond more defensively than people  who do not experience stress. The three systems and behaviour To be able to socially interact, which also means being able to ask for help,  and to be able to grow, be healthy and respond to danger or life-threatening situations, we have three systems that work together Porges, 2008,  2011. It is the autonomic nervous system that has the task of adapting  the bodys actions to a changing environment. It has two types of systems  to do this: the parasympathetic  divided into two systems  and the  sympathetic system. Each of these three systems can be active and each  affects sensory processing differently. The systems are active in accordance with the requirements of the  situation. This usually happens automatically and unconsciously, but we  can learn to influence the systems.  The first system   The first system is part of the parasympathetic nervous system. It helps  us to be alert and active, but also to rest and recover. We call this the  engage and recovery system. Through this system we can process and focus on all sensory stimuli  in everyday, normal, safe life. We can focus more or less attention on  something. If the engage and recovery system functions well, we can  perceive, experience, investigate, communicate and learn. We focus on  social sensory input and social resources  and can establish and maintain  contact and ask for help or comfort.  However, this system is not sufficiently in balance in every person:  the underresponsive person does not process all sensory input.  As long as the autonomic nervous system experiences the situation  as sufficiently safe, you can continue to function in this system and there 

Stimulate Your Sensory Side 39 is room for focus, processing, and rest and recovery. With this first system  being active, we are able to look for support and comfort when we need it.  The second system  The second system is the sympathetic nervous system. We call this the  stress system. It controls a fast response to danger. As soon as the situation  is no longer sufficiently safe, the second system takes over from the first  system. Then we see the survival mechanisms fight, flight or active  freeze tensing muscles, to be ready for action occur. This second system knows which response creates the best chance  of survival and damage control in a stressful or unsafe situation. If our  situation is not safe, we limit the processing of sensory input to two things:

input that is related to the threat 

input that is related to increasing our safety. For example, we are extra focused on high sounds screaming for help, on  low sounds from predators and on movement that signals danger. This  sensory input is given priority. We can no longer properly processunderstand the sounds of people who talk to us. We focus on our surroundings,  to look for sources of help, a flightpath or weapons to defend ourselves. There are also reactions to sensory input that increase the chance of  survival. For example, by laughing, screaming or making primal sounds  to release tension, we increase our chance of survival.  The third system  However, if the situation is even more threatening, the third system takes  over. This system is part of the parasympathetic nervous system, and it  activates in life-threatening situations. We call it the emergency system.  The survival mechanism involved is the shutdown passive freeze,  which causes immobilization no more movement and dissociation no  longer perceiving to save energy and to avoid physical and emotional  damage, in order to maximize the chance of survival. When our safety  is seriously threatened, we feel paralysed, faint or numb. We disable our  basic physical, cognitive and emotional systems and switch off physically  to lower the amount of energy our bodily functions need. We may feel  we are not present or this is not happening to me. Bowel functioning  may stop and we no longer feel or think anything.  Very little sensory input is experienced, only the input that indicates 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 40 that the complete shutdown immobilization and dissociation can be  ended. The body must first restart itself before it can function again in  a more normal way. You may see behaviour that can be linked to overresponsivity and behaviour that resembles underresponsivity, but that  arises from being extremely overwhelmed.  The first system takes over from the second and third systems as soon  as the environment is safer. The first system is compared to a brake  pedal and allows recovery and rest. A brake pedal, because it makes the  heart rate go down, among other things. The second system is compared  to an accelerator pedal and speed of action, so that we can act quickly to  survive. The third system blocks action fast and forcefully, just like an  emergency brake. It is harder to go back to the first system from here. Which behaviours belong with the different systems?  Imagine the following stressful situation: the student will be giving a  presentation, which will be graded. There are about 25 students and his  teacher looking at him. He has some notes and is using PowerPoint to  show pictures and a video. His friend will help him with the PowerPoint  presentation. He is very excited, because he will talk about architecture  and he loves this subject! But having to present causes him stress too.  Will he be able to follow his notes? Are the others going to like it? Will  the video work? These are all stress factors that the student tries to keep  within bounds. What reactions may the student show? Engage and recovery system system 1 The student starts by looking around and smiling to his friends and  the teacher. When he discovers there is a problem with the PowerPoint  presentation, he walks towards his friend who is helping him set up  the presentation. He asks what the problem is and makes a joke. After a  while, when he and his friend are not successful in solving the problem,  he asks the teacher if they can help. When the PowerPoint presentation  is working, he starts his presentation.  Engage and recovery is also being able to:

relate to how other people feel

ask for help 

ask someone to comfort you

make friends

help others see that others need help

Stimulate Your Sensory Side 41

pick up on friendly intentions

say you are sorry. Fight: stress system system 2 The student is about to give his presentation. He tries to stay calm, but  expresses his tension by being irritated. He expresses this verbally  not  in a nice way  to his friend who is helping him set up the PowerPoint  presentation. He may clench his fists and is unable to relax. He starts  arguing with his friend and is ordering him around. He picks up the  keyboard and almost wants to throw it down. With all these actions  he subconsciously tries to keep the tension under control. Eventually,  the teacher asks him if he needs to visit the toilet before starting his  presentation, and says that they will see to starting his presentation for  him. After this he is able to relax and start his presentation. Fighting is also:

being irritated

showing strong emotion bursting into tears

laughing very hard at someone 

showing dominant behaviour

challenging

swearing

clenching fists

resisting

not being approachable. Flight: stress system system 2 The student is still in his chair, waiting for his turn. He feels his stomach  is clenched, his heart is pounding and when he thinks about the presentation he starts sweating. He goes up to his teacher and tells them he wants  to go home, he feels ill. His teacher convinces him to stay and suggests  that he may feel better after moving around a bit and eating something.  He goes to the toilet and then eats his snack, but keeps fussing. I could  do it tomorrow. I just dont think I am ready. It would be so much better  if I could just prepare some more. His teacher tells him they thought the  presentation was great on the trial run the week before. When its his  turn and he stands in front of the class, the tension abates somewhat and  his own passion for the subject overrules most of the stress. Although he  has a squeaky voice, he is able to start the presentation. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 42 Fleeing is also:

refusing

crying to get out of something

no longer listeninganswering

not being approachable

coming up with alternatives

running away. Freeze: stress system system 2 The student cannot sit still, he paces back and forth. He is tense, his  shoulders hunched, his hands clenched into fists. He doesnt respond to  others and is constantly scanning his surroundings. When its his turn,  he marches forward, walking very tensely. He frowns at his classmates.  Then he sees his best friend make a funny gesture, something they came  up with together. It makes him laugh and he is able to relax a bit. When  the presentation doesnt immediately work, he almost starts pacing again.  But one look at his friend is enough to make him feel better. When the  PowerPoint presentation finally starts up, he breathes a deep sigh of relief  and his shoulders relax. Freeze is also:

having a clenched jaw

clawed hands at the ready

standing at the ready to fight or flee

constantly checking everything

not being able to talk

not being able to listen. Shutdown: emergency system system 3 The shutdown is sometimes described as freeze; this is a passive freeze  and differs from the active freeze described in the above example.  The student walks around, staring vacantly and sits down in his chair,  not responding to others. When it is his turn to present, he doesnt seem  able to get up from his chair. He produces a blank stare. The teacher and  his friend who is helping to set up the PowerPoint presentation have to  encourage him multiple times. He finally gets up. He feels lightheaded,  as if he is about to pass out. After a short pause, he is able to walk to  the front of the classroom. When he discovers there is a problem with the  PowerPoint, he sees a way out of having to give the presentation and he 

Stimulate Your Sensory Side 43 starts feeling better. But when that problem is solved with the assistance  of the teacher, he feels his legs go weak again. He starts his presentation,  but is not able to focus and is chaotic. After a while, he is relieved to see  he has passed the halfway point of his presentation. He then becomes more  enthusiastic and is able to engage with the other students and the teacher.  Shutdown is also:

losing oneself in ones own world

no longer seeing the big picture

no longer feeling; not thinking about anything

creating a childs voice or falling back in age

giving up after stiffening first, then giving up and releasing all  muscle tension

fainting. If someone shows any of the above responses except for the responses  in the engage and recovery system, they are stressed and overresponsive; they need calming down. Strategies and ways to calm them will be  discussed in the following chapters.  CONFLICTING TERMS In trauma counseling, the way in which we can process input is sometimes explained by means of an image of a window: the window of  tolerance Siegel, 1999. The window of tolerance cannot be used  point-to-point, to explain underand overresponsivity from sensory  integration SI theory. The terminology is similar, but the meaning 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 44 of the terms is not. Also, in this model, underresponsivity in safe  situations the first system does not have a clear position.  Window of tolerance Hyperarousal  ght, ight, active freeze Optimal arousal  Hypoarousal  passive freeze, dissociation  Anton Horeweg 2018 Capable of reasoning, social behaviour S T R E S S Using the window of tolerance model to explain underand overresponsivity can create confusion. People may associate the terms  under-arousal or hypo-arousal, with the term underresponsive as  it is used in SI-theory. However, this is not the same. The shutdown  being illustrated at the bottom of the window of tolerance, together  with the terms under-arousal or hypo-arousal, is the ultimate survival response the emergency brake. It is a response to a life-threatening situation. In SI-theory, being underresponsive means that you  do not process enough sensory input to be sufficiently alert; it usually  has nothing to do with a survival response.  The Fan-model The Fan-model illustrates the three systems. It is meant as an aid for  explaining to your student what systems are active in their body and how  they can influence the systems. Although these systems usually function  automatically and unconsciously, we can learn to influence them. One  of the ways in which you can do this is by using activating and calming  strategies. Youll find more on how to use the Fan-model in Chapter 4.  First, lets take a look at the model. 

Stimulate Your Sensory Side 45 Fan-model by Thoonsen and van der Gaag 2021 The engage and recovery system is shown on the left-hand side of the  fan. The stress system is shown towards the right-hand side of the fan,  and the emergency system on the far right.  An underresponsive person needs more activating sensations, so the  left-hand part folds together and the centre unfolds more.  An overresponsive person needs calming sensations, folding the righthand-side and at the same time further unfolding from the centre. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 46 You would like your student to move to a state where they function  mostly in the area in the middle of the model. This does not mean they  are never in the areas to either side. Rest and recovery happen on the  left-hand side. And sometimes you experience stress, which means you  are on the right-hand side of the fan. This does not have to be a negative  thing. Stress can be a helpful part of life, as long as it is not chronic and  debilitating Parker, 2015. 
2  Do You Prefer a Double  Espresso or a Green Tea? Whats this chapter about? In this chapter, we start off with a test to see how underor overresponsive you are. We also explain how sensory processing affects your  level of alertness. Through different examples we show behaviour which  may be associated with underand overresponsivity. We differentiate  between the behaviour of a student who actively fights the underor  overresponsivity and a student for whom its something that simply  happens to them. Neutral, underresponsive or overresponsive:  Whats your situation? As weve seen in Chapter 1, sensory processing works differently for  everyone. One person might not experience enough input and input  that is too weak; they are underresponsive. Another might experience too  much and too intense input and is overresponsive. Both ways of sensory  processing lead to making certain choices, because those choices cause  you to receive more or actually less sensory input. Sensory processing  can also be mostly well-balanced; we call this neutral. Now lets look  at your personal situation. Is everything going smoothly neutral, are  you generally underresponsive or are you more overresponsive? Lets see  where you classify on account of the choices you make. We use the following test to bring you along to the next step in  understanding underand overresponsivity. In this test we look at the  choices people make as a result of their sensory processing. Make sure  you read the explanation at the end of the chapter, so you can better 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 48 understand how underand overresponsivity affect your choices and,  as such, your life. The result, found after the test, gives an indication of the amount  of input you are comfortable with. This short test cant conclusively say  anything about your underor overresponsivity. TO DO: DOUBLE ESPRESSO OR GREEN TEA?  Below are a few example situations. After each example, pick the option that  suits you the most. 1.	 For your birthday, your friend gifts you a dinner at a restaurant of your  choice. What will it be? a.	 Well go to the Italian place around the corner. I will order the  spaghetti bolognese as usual, which is prepared according to a  family recipe. b.	 Ill let my friend pick the restaurant. c.	 This is my chance to try that new, trendy Peruvian restaurant. Causa  is supposed to be delicious! 2.	 You really need new sleepwear. What will you buy? a.	 A comfortable sleeping T-shirt with a funny print. b.	 As long as its shiny and semi-transparent, Ill like it. c.	 A lovely soft and warm flannel pyjama set. 3.	 While out shopping, you accidentally rip a button off your coat. It falls  down a manhole. What do you do? a.	 I keep on walking; I dont mind going with one less button for a short  while, with my coat half open. b.	 I walk back two blocks, to a small haberdashery located there. Ive  seen similar buttons in the window. c.	 I look around to see if I can buy a button somewhere. If I cant, Ill  check if I have something at home. 4.	 When youre at the cinema and the film has ended: a.	 I calmly collect my things and move towards the exit. b.	 I remain seated until most people have left. c.	 I already have my coat on and immediately leave the cinema. I have  plans. 5.	 You prefer to start your day drinking a: a.	 double espresso. b.	 cup of green tea. c.	 coffee, black tea or juice.

Do You Prefer a Double Espresso or a Green Tea? 49 Results Question 1 Answer A 1 point Answer B 2 points Answer C 3 points Question 2 Answer A 2 points Answer B 3 points Answer C 1 point Question 3 Answer A 3 points Answer B 1 point Answer C 2 points Question 4 Answer A 2 points Answer B 1 point Answer C 3 points Question 5 Answer A 3 points Answer B 1 point Answer C 2 points What type are you? 1015 points: you are generally underresponsive. 610 points: you are generally neither undernor overresponsive. You are  neutral. 5 points or less: you are generally overresponsive. So, what do my answers say about me? Your answers say something about the amount of input you experience  as comfortable. If you prefer to experience neither too much nor too  little input, you seem to have a neutral response to input. If you mostly  chose the answers that show you prefer a lot of input, you lean towards  underresponsivity. If you mostly picked answers with little input, you  are probably overresponsive. Besides this, there are other aspects that  are brought forward by your choices. Well clarify this:

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 50 What choices does an underresponsive person make? As an underresponsive person you might look for more and stronger  input, because you are lacking this input. See answers 2b and 5a. Surprises  and unfamiliar or unexpected input are fine. You dont scare easily, and  input doesnt bother you that much. See answer 1c. Because input doesnt  come through strongly enough, you can be a bit forgetful and planning  isnt your strong suit. But this doesnt matter to you; you dont worry  easily, are flexible and dont mind doing things last minute. See answer  3a. You like to go exploring and you dont mind if something is a little  exciting. You also like variety: diverse input comes through more strongly.  See answer 4c. A warm blanket and a pillow are nice, but if push  comes to shove you can sleep anywhere.  What choices does a neutral  person make? If your response to sensory input is neutral, you generally arent bothered  by too much or too little input, because you can filter them appropriately.  Because of this, what input is surrounding you is of less importance, and  you can handle all input types and quantities. See answers 1b and 2a.  Variation isnt necessary, but it is allowed, and you can wait and see what  happens in different situations. See answers 3c and 5c. Making plans isnt  impacted by the amount of input you can expect from certain surroundings. See answer 4a. You dont notice the different pillow or sheets when you are staying somewhere else. You can sleep in almost every decent bed.  What choices does an overresponsive person make? As an overresponsive person, you try to avoid input or you  choose more subtle input, because you experience input as too intense,  which is unpleasant for you. You are partial to comfort, because comfort  means soft and subtle input. See answers 2c and 5b. You like to be in  control of the input in your surroundings. You also prefer known input,  and you like to organize and plan to ensure this is achieved. You are good  at this. This is because it is easier for you to deal with known and expected input. See answers 1a and 3b. You prefer a relatively quiet environment, because there is less input, which lets you recover from 

Do You Prefer a Double Espresso or a Green Tea? 51 overresponsivity. Because of this, you like an environment that isnt too  busy, and you enjoy being alone. See answer 4b. You cant sleep if the sheet beneath you is wrinkled and the  duvet cover feels rough. You prefer sleeping at home, because  youre used to your own mattress and sheets, and the temperature and darkness of your room.  There are very few people who can be perfectly fitted into  one category. And what if my student cant be pigeonholed? There are very few people who perfectly fit into one category which  isnt the goal of the test. You might recognize things from both the  underresponsive and overresponsive options. How you respond to input  partly depends on the circumstances. Students might, for example, be  overresponsive more often in November and December, because there  are so many exciting things taking place in those months. Of course,  teachers might too, because so much must get done during these holiday  months. This includes excitement, but also stress, which causes the input  filter to be more open. However, usually you will respond either in a neutral, underresponsive or overresponsive manner. It is good to know this about your  student and yourself; it becomes easier to understand their wiggling  and fiddling, because you know the underlying cause of that might be  underor overresponsivity. Morning rituals exist for a reason The moment you wake up in the morning, you start processing input. And  so you also start regulating underor overresponsivity. This is an important  part of getting ready for work. To do this well, you need to become alert. By  alert, we mean how awake you are and how fast you can respond to your  environment. The whole day long, you are at a certain level of alertness.  That level varies: one moment youre more alert, the next a little less. Every  situation requires different levels of alertness; when you are at home on  the couch reading a good book, you will need to be less alert than when  you are standing in front of the class explaining a complicated equation. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 52 You can build alertness or scale it back by seeking input or avoiding it.  A workdays morning ritual is a prime example of this. Lets look at that. A properly functioning input filter neutral A properly functioning input filter allows the right amount of input to  be let through  not too much, and not too little. People whose input  filter works properly are generally capable of functioning well without  it costing too much energy. From waking up until the start of their work school day they build the right level of alertness relatively easily: their  alarm goes off, they wake up, get out of bed, take a shower, etc. Every  action wakes them up a bit more and raises their alertness.  Waking up Showering Having breakfast Riding a bike to work Arriving at work Lets go! Strict door policy underresponsive If an input filter is too strict, not enough input is let through to become  and stay alert. When the input filter stops too much input from coming  through, youll need a lot more and much stronger input than the  average person. Otherwise you will stay sleepy and inactive: thus  underresponsive.  Waking up Showering Having breakfast with  the radio on  Riding a bike to work Arriving at work Im still not fully awake yet. Drink a double espresso  maybe even two Begin work Okay, might as well get going.  Better get another cup of coffee  in a minute.

Do You Prefer a Double Espresso or a Green Tea? 53 Open door policy overresponsive  Then theres the open door policy, which allows  input to come through very intensely and literally  act as a wake-up call. This input filter lets too much  input through. More input causes you to become  more than awake and alert. Input leads to being  hyper-alert and stressed: overresponsive. Waking up Showering Now for a quiet breakfast Riding a bike to work, through busy traffic Arriving at work RED ALERT. First, lets have a cup of green tea Begin work Easy now Here we go. Of your students, who is the double espresso? In the test at the beginning of this chapter and the part about alertness,  we spoke about the double espresso and the cup of green tea.

The double espresso means a lot of caffeine and represents  intense input. Caffeine is activating and as a result, more  input is let through by the input filter. This is pleasant for the  underresponsive student.

The green tea represents the opposite, it represents mild input.  It has a calming effect; less input is let through. This answers  the needs of an overresponsive student. Self-regulation can be a reason for wiggling and fiddling  behaviour. The espresso and tea are metaphors for the behaviours a student might  apply to regulate their sensory processing. The behaviours a student  exhibits serve the purpose of reaching or preserving the right level of  alertness, and as such are self-regulating behaviours. You regulate your  level of alertness yourself with activating or calming activities. Since its 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 54 uncomfortable to experience too much or too little input you want to  change this. These behaviours are relatively subconscious, but often effective. There is a mechanism in your body that pushes you into action  to restore the input balance. We all do this. All day long. If your attention  slips during a meeting, youll bite your pen, take a sip of your drink or  wiggle your leg. You might not have been aware that you were self-regulating when you did these things. However, self-regulation can be a  reason for wiggling and fiddling behaviours. Very competent of this  student, regulating their own alertness! Active or passive: Its not a choice  An underresponsive or overresponsive student can go in two directions:  they can do something active or they can do nothing passive. Be aware:  we dont say the student has two choices, because the direction theyll  go in isnt really a conscious choice. The behaviours mentioned in the  lists arent calculated either. You could compare it to: if you have an  itch, youll scratch it. Children want to do things right. Behaviours you  see as disruptive are, most of the time, those of a student that is trying  their hardest to pay attention, trying their best to stay in their chair, to  participate. Many students do this by wiggling and fiddling. Below, we explain what we mean by active and passive. Active A student who does something about their disrupted input balance is  called active. They try to get more or less input through their actions. A  student who is underresponsive and is feeling too sluggish to do a drawing assignment at their table might get up from their chair or balance  their chair on two legs, for example. They are actively underresponsive.  If a student is overresponsive to loud noises and puts their hands over  their ears, they are also active. This student acts too, trying to get less  input. They are actively overresponsive. Passive There is also a group where a disrupted input balance is something that  simply happens to them. They dont do anything to regulate their sensory  processing themselves; they are passive. When a student is underresponsive and is daydreaming during the instruction, and doesnt do anything  about that, they are passively underresponsive. They dont try and find 

Do You Prefer a Double Espresso or a Green Tea? 55 extra input, so theyll know what to do later. They undergo their sluggishness and stay passive. Or the child doesnt protect themselves and doesnt  put their hands over their ears if its very noisy in the classroom. This  student is passively overresponsive. They dont do anything to ensure  they receive less input. Active or passive, what does that look like? The student is underresponsive overresponsive ACTIVE: takes action, tries  to restore input balance seeks input Characteristics: lively,  spontaneous, boisterous chaotic, asks for a lot of  attention, goes on and on  and on avoids input andor  self-soothes Characteristics: structured  and decisive, eye for  detail, gets tense easily,  wants to be in control PASSIVE: doesnt take  action, the situation  happens to them stays sluggish, isnt  awake and has a hard  time coming into action Characteristics: flexible  and sluggish, isnt  easily disturbed, misses  information, hard to  reach is mostly bothered  by input, grumbles,  complains and cries Characteristics: sensitive,  perceptive, likes quiet,  nervous, can suddenly  get upset Following Dunns model of sensory processing, 1997 e.g. Dunn, 2013 The four types of non-neutral behaviours To practise with your brand new SPI-Glasses, a list of behaviours you can  expect with the underand overresponsive student follows. Of course,  this list isnt complete, but it gives an impression of which behaviours  might be linked to underor overresponsivity. Were leaving out the  neutral fifth type as we dont expect any problems to do with being  underor overresponsive there. Actively underresponsive lively, spontaneous, boisterous chaotic, asks for a lot of attention, goes on and on and on This student needs the equivalent of a double espresso to become and  stay alert. By moving, the student feels better, and it becomes easier for  them to pay attention; their body starts snoozing if they sit still for too  long. They will do anything to receive more input, because its not enjoyable to miss things and not understand what is going on because of that. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 56 They get bored relatively easily, especially in a low-input environment.  You cannot tell this student: Sit still and pay attention! because as soon  as they sit still, their attention drops, and they cannot stay focused. You cannot tell this student: Sit still and pay attention! They need more input to be able to perform their tasks to a higher standard. They can be extremely active students because of this. When you  are wearing your SPI-Glasses, you know: this behaviour works favourably  for the student. So, if its not disturbing anyone, I can leave it like this. What behaviours are typical of an actively  underresponsive student? What might you encounter with a student who is generally underresponsive and takes action, so seeks extra input? They:

talk a lot

move a lot and intensely

chew on anything and everything

are hyper and very enthusiastic

walk on their toes instead of their  whole foot

would rather run than walk

are impulsive

know little or no fear

want to touch everybody and  everything

put objects, fingers or clothes in their mouth to suck on, bite,  or eat

stuff their mouth with food

are enthusiastically looking for excitement and for more input

enjoy being active, they are always moving around

are constantly doing other things need a lot of direction

get bored easily. Passively underresponsive flexible and sluggish, isnt  easily disturbed, misses information, is hard to reach This student can seem absent, sluggish and disinterested. Their input  filter doesnt let enough input in to become and stay alert, so they are 

Do You Prefer a Double Espresso or a Green Tea? 57 often dozing off. This makes it hard to get through to the student and  they miss a lot of information. It doesnt have to be the case that the student isnt interested. They just need more and stronger input remember  the double espresso before it gets through to them. Clearly, this student  isnt dreaming all day long. You can expect them to pay better attention  after gym class, for example. And because an underresponsive student  doesnt get distracted as easily, sometimes they can focus extremely well.  This student wont be bothered by things as quickly, and this makes them  very flexible. What is less pleasant is that they often miss information  and can quickly fall behind. What behaviours are typical of a passively underresponsive student? What can you see in a student who is predominantly underresponsive  and passive, so doesnt seek extra input? They:

dont jump at a loud noise

are passive, seem uninterested

are difficult to get into action

dont respond to their environment;  its harder to make contact with them

have a lower activity level compared  with their peers

find it difficult to clean up their  things

arent aware of scrapes or bruises

are clumsy

bump into furniture

throw things on the floor by accident

tripfall often

have a hard time keeping up in gym class compared with their  peers

slouch down

put their head on their arms or on the table

arent good at using objects which require fine motor skills,  such as zippers, scissors and pens

write in letters of varying size

put either too little or too much pressure on their pencil or pen

dont respond to being touched

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 58

have difficulty following instructions that contain multiple  steps

dont recognize the needs of others

dont respect others personal space

daydream

are messy eaters and drinkers

are very flexible, dont get upset easily

miss information, need direction. Actively overresponsive structured and decisive, eye  for detail, gets tense easily, wants to be in control This student benefits from the equivalent of a mug of calming green  tea. Perhaps you can imagine that the world can feel threatening to this  student, filled with too much and too intense input. It makes sense that  they try to control as much as they can. If everything goes the way they  want it to, the world becomes easier to deal with because they dont get  surprised by unknown input. That they try to regulate as much as possible themselves is very competent of them. The student isnt as flexible  and cant easily deviate from set rules. The unknown is unpleasant. As  long as everything goes the way Im used to, Ill be fine. I will know how  to adapt or where I have to brace myself. This student is very adept at  structuring situations; for them, this is a survival strategy. They dont  mind being alone; they can enjoy this. What behaviours are typical of the actively overresponsive student? What can you see in a student who is generally overresponsive and who  takes action to influence their input balance? They:

want to decide what happens

are good at regulating and structuring

use rituals

like to retreat, for example in the playground

drift off; close themselves off

respond badly to soft or unexpected touches   if someone strokes their head or back, they  might respond in an angry or startled manner

are overly sensitive to bright light, so even  indoors theyll want to wear a hat or sunglasses, or they are  often squinting

Do You Prefer a Double Espresso or a Green Tea? 59

are a picky eater

stand at either the front or the back of the line

would rather not play in a busy playground or crowded gym  class

dont want to climb

pull their hood over their face to withdraw from the world

wear soft, loose clothing

fear gym class activities that require them to take their feet off  the floor

dont want to work with glue, finger paint, water, sand and  other sticky materials

are very bossy

make noises, for example: 

hhmmmm

tongue clicking

singing a song, humming

avoid new situations, changes and challenges

would rather not participate in group activities

have difficulty shifting from one situation to another. Passively overresponsive sensitive, perceptive,  likes quiet, nervous, can suddenly get upset This is the student who undergoes too much input and too intense input.  This often causes them to be stressed and there is no space for changes  in the regular routine. Controlling the environment and activities means  controlling the input. But this child isnt good at planning or structuring,  which means they often run into unexpected input. In an unfamiliar situation, input can startle them, because it simply happens to them. They  also forget their likes and dislikes, so they cant predict what a situation  will be like for them. Simply functioning within a known environment  and routine already takes a lot of energy out of them. They will grumble  and cry relatively often, because the input disturbs them. The student  fears new input; they feel unsafe and this can cause extreme responses.  The student can also perceive details well.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 60 What behaviours are typical of the passively  overresponsive student? What can you see in a student who is predominantly overresponsive and  passive, so doesnt try to regulate their input balance as much? They:

notice smells other people dont, which can make  them feel sick

notice details more than other people

are very aware of their environment, respect  others personal space

are lively and stressed

will grumble and be angry more than average

are easily irritated by, or even get angry about,  things others dont understand, for example someone  accidentally bumping into them 

have unpredictable explosions of emotion

have difficulty with activities that require fine motor skills, such  as cutting and pasting, because touching materials is a problem

get startled by and have an extreme response to loud and  unexpected sounds

are easily distracted

have a strong need for personal space and alone time

say: yes please, because they forget they didnt like that food

tire faster after demanding or intense activities

pay attention to their work, colour inside the lines, have neat  handwriting

would rather play with one or two other students than in a  large group

like repetition  the same song or film again

keep a close eye on everything. Characteristics of the five types This table shows the most important characteristics of neutral  and underor overresponsive behaviour. These can help you  when you are observing your student and arent sure which  behaviour you are dealing with. 

Do You Prefer a Double Espresso or a Green Tea? 61

Neutral  Actively  underresponsive  Passively  underresponsive Actively  overresponsive Passively  overresponsive  Response  to the  amount   of input Can deal  with the  amount of  input they  encounter Its not too  much and  not too little  Receives  too little  input or  input that  is too weak Needs extra  input Receives  too little  input or  input that  is too weak Needs extra  input Receives  too much  input or  input that  is too  intense Is bothered  by input Receives  too much  input or  input that  is too  intense Is bothered  by input Does  something  or  nothing Usually  does what  is required  or asked for Seeks extra  input Doesnt  seek extra  input Avoids  input Doesnt  avoid input What  emotion is  present? Emotions  suit the  situation Is too  enthusiastic  and too  active Is sluggish sleepy  and too  relaxed Is tense and  controlling Is nervous  and tense Behaviour Suits the  situation,  not too  active and  not too  quiet, and  relatively  flexible Wants  more: come on,  come on,  its never  enough Is flexible Is  indifferent absent Takes care  of things  Wants to be  in control Grumbles,  cries, is  withdrawn The misconception about hyperactive behaviour We often hear about teachers who classify their students behaviour as  overresponsive behaviour. An instinctive response to this is that one  wants to calm the student down, for example by removing sensory input.  But you have read just now that the underresponsive active student can  portray very lively behaviour because they are looking for more input. The  student needs this input to feel good and to be able to function better. By utilizing the characteristics mentioned in the scheme above, its  easy to quickly differentiate between a very lively underresponsive or 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 62 very lively overresponsive student. Is the student tense? Then they are  probably experiencing too much input and calming them down would  indeed be the right strategy. Is the student relaxed and incredibly  enthusiastic? Then they are probably underresponsive and need more  input. The student might still need guidance in finding input, so they  dont exaggerate and seek too much input, which can cause hyperactivity. Being underor overresponsive also affects how you feel and  how you think about yourself.  What other behaviour can you see? Being underor overresponsive also affects how you feel and how you  think about yourself. Most children dont realize they process input differently than others. They only see that they have more difficulty with  things than their peers, and they dont understand why. They think they  must be doing something wrong, or that they must be stupid. More characteristics of the underor overresponsive student can be:

negative self-image doesnt understand why things dont work  for them that work for others

would rather not accept challenges to prevent failure

appears lazy and unmotivated this can seem to be the case, but  the student is trying to avoid activities they think they might  not be able to do or handle

appears difficult, stubborn andor manipulative this can seem  to be the case, but the student is just trying to control the  amount of input, so they will be able to cope better. Do I need to do something with all these behaviours? Are all behaviours that have been mentioned disruptive? Perhaps not as  often as you might think. Its nice to be able to put on your SPI-Glasses  and consider if the student might be bouncing in their chair to enable  themselves to pay better attention. If this is the case, it is in fact competent behaviour. And if it isnt bothering anyone else, you dont need to  react to it. When a student doesnt want to come to the school musical,  you can talk to them to see if they might have ideas on how to organize  this activity so they can come as well: perhaps if they have access to ear 

Do You Prefer a Double Espresso or a Green Tea? 63 protection and sit at the back, close to the exit, they will be comfortable.  Perhaps you cant find a solution, and you leave behind a happy student  who is relieved that they dont have to go to the loud auditorium, giving them a good chance of getting through the rest of the day without  problems. Know your student  By their choice of clothes, sports, music and hobbies, you can tell a thing  or two about a students response to input: if input generally bothers  them or if they seek input. A student who often comes to school wearing  sweatpants and with their head covered by their hood might be overresponsive. Wearing certain clothes doesnt only have to be linked to their  style preferences but can also be linked to the sensation of the clothes on  their skin. Soft and comfortable or rough and prickly, pleasant or itchy. The student who happily talks about their numerous visits to a  theme park and what roller coasters they rode while there is more of an  input-seeker. The fact that they enjoy theme parks tells you something  about how they perceive sounds, lights and movement.  The student who is good at planning and structuring might have a  desire to avoid unknown input, perhaps because they are overresponsive. There are many areas where you can look at a students preferences  and wonder if those preferences might be linked to their level of sensory  input sensitivity. Hobbies, room decoration, social contacts and activities,  food preferences, music preferences, sports. In the areas where they could  make their own decisions, they probably made these decisions because  they match their sensory preferences. Impaired sensory processing in primary school Why so much attention on the underand overresponsive student in  primary school? Does sensory processing not affect younger or older children? Yes, it definitely does, and attention needs to be paid to that as well.  However, in primary school, sensory processing is especially important,  because children are functioning within a system that is tuned to the  average child. At home, there is a bigger chance that the environment  and routine are adjusted to the younger childs capabilities. The parent  has known the child for their entire life and therefore knows what they  need to feel good. At home, there will be more consideration for the 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 64 childs preferences, and this is also more possible at home. As a child ages,  they get more of a say in their own life. Sports, hobbies, friends, room  decoration, higher education and, later in life, their work environment  are all areas where they can make more and more of their own decisions.  This leads to them being in surroundings where they fit in, where they  feel good and that better suit their way of processing sensory input. These choices arent as present in primary school. In primary school,  a student has relatively little say in how their life is structured. The student has little say in which activities they will be part of, and when and  how these will take place. They share the classroom with 20 to 30 other  students, must sit still in a chair for elongated periods of time, are not  allowed to eat whenever they are hungry, have to go to gym class, play in  the playground and come to school meetings. It is impossible for teachers  to consider 20 or 30 individual preferences. This means primary school is  more likely to be a place where disruptive behaviour linked to impaired  sensory processing might show. And the teacher? For you as a teacher, it can be useful to know if you are more or less  sensitive to sensory input. You respond differently to a group of students  if you are overresponsive, and you will allow more commotion if you are  underresponsive. Perhaps the test has already provided you with some  insight in this matter. It is impossible for teachers to take into account 20 or 30  individual preferences. Imagine a classroom that is in turmoil because the students just heard  they are going to do a fun photography project. You stand in front of the  class and take in the wave of sounds and movement. The students are all  talking at the same time and walking around the room. You enjoy seeing  the students this excited, and you take part just as enthusiastically. You  walk around and participate in several debates. A colleague might take a  completely different approach. She would call for quiet and ask the students to get back in their chairs and be silent. This teacher enjoys the  students enthusiasm about the project as well but prefers discussing it  in a calm and structured way. The students each get a turn to tell their  ideas, which she then writes down on the interactive whiteboard.

Do You Prefer a Double Espresso or a Green Tea? 65 You might end up in a conversation with this same colleague where  you dont understand each other at all. Why does that one student bother  her, even drive her crazy? You have taught that girl as well, and shes simply an incredibly outgoing, fun girl with a big imagination. Yes, shes very  lively and can barely sit still, but that doesnt bother you much. Which  one of you is mostly underresponsive and which is overresponsive? This  student could be someone who seeks input, and your colleague probably  gets overstimulated more easily than you. A student who is overresponsive might have difficulties with a teacher  who enjoys a lot of sensory input. That teacher might talk more and  louder, move around more and use a lot of colourful materials. And the  other way around, an overresponsive teacher can have a difficult relationship with a student who is often loud and wiggling and fidgeting a lot. It  makes sense that a teacher like that wants this student to sit still and be  quieter, because that would make it easier for the teacher to function. With the knowledge from this book you can start making different  decisions as a teacher. Wearing the SPI-Glasses you can ensure your  student gets exactly the input they need  and you do too. TEST EXPLANATION Question 1: The restaurant If you have a desire for more input, that points towards being underresponsive. You would sooner choose to be surprised and you enjoy  trying new things. You are curious about new experiences. When you let your friend decide which restaurant to go to, it  points towards neutral sensory processing and you are less dependent  on your environment to have a successful evening. You can have a  pleasant evening in a busy restaurant, but also in a quiet restaurant  or anything in-between. If you are overresponsive, you prefer to look for input you are already familiar with. You prefer to go the same restaurant over and  over, and you always order the same dish so there will be no surprises. Question 2: New sleepwear An underresponsive person isnt easily bothered by skin sensations, so  it doesnt really matter to them what material their clothing is made  of. You mostly care about the aesthetics of the clothes and enjoy 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 66 interesting details such as a shiny or semi-transparent fabric. Whether  or not something is comfortable is much less important. Someone who is neutral chooses an average sleeping shirt with  a nice print. You dont choose extra input and you also dont go for  the extremely comfortable option. If it is reasonably comfortable,  youre okay. Someone who is overresponsive is more likely to experience clothes  as itchy, prickly and tight, and will choose the most comfortable item.  The flannel mentioned in the test is a seamless fit. You prefer oversized sweaters and jump into sweatpants and house slippers as soon  as you get home. No noisy, cold and itchy accessories for you. Question 3: Losing a button If you are less aware of input, youre underresponsive and arent as  bothered that you lost a coat button. Perhaps you have a button at  home, perhaps you dont. And perhaps youll sew it on soon, and  perhaps you wont. Really, youve probably already forgotten about  that button as soon as you turn the corner. Until your overresponsive  partner points it out to you.  If you process sensory input and respond in a neutral way, you deal  with situations the moment they arise. You dont plan much, and you  dont fail to do things because you forget about them. Overresponsive people are very perceptive of details. They often  know exactly where to find things their roommates cannot find. When  their partner or child is looking for their shoes, theyll say: They are  to the left of the umbrella stand, under the coat rack in the hallway.  While out shopping, they are aware of many things, even things that  dont matter at that moment. When losing the button, they connect  several facts from their extensive database and remember the little  haberdashery. And they will go there and buy a button immediately,  because they cant deal with a draughty hole in their coat. Question 4: The end of the film People who dont strongly experience sensory input, who are underresponsive, arent easily bothered by things. Aside from that, they also  often seek extra input. So, when the film has ended, theyve already  made a new plan. Come on, lets go to that fun new bar around the  corner, that serves 40 different types of beer! That the cinema lights 

Do You Prefer a Double Espresso or a Green Tea? 67 havent been turned on yet, and they must wrestle past people who  are still sitting in their chairs, doesnt matter that much to them. A neutral persons response to the end of the film would be to  slowly get moving and leave the cinema. As an overresponsive person you would rather wait until the crowd  has left the cinema, so you can move towards the exit without any  pushing or tripping. You also enjoy listening to the film score accompanying the end credits. Question 5: Starting your day The underresponsive person needs more and stronger input to get  and stay appropriately awake. The caffeine in a double espresso is  a handy tool. If you wake up in a pleasant way and every action wakes you up a  bit more, you have a neutral response, and a cup of coffee fits perfectly  into that routine. You might vary and have a glass of juice or a cup of  tea every now and then. When you are overresponsive, youd rather avoid stimulating  beverages such as caffeinated coffee or sugary sodas. Green tea or a  sugar-free beverage is a more fitting option. You are already awake  enough and will start to feel hyper if you drink too much coffee.
3  The First Link: The  Eight Senses Whats this chapter about? In this chapter, we discuss choices you make based on your sensory processing, and we practise using the SPI-Glasses. We cover all the senses  and show for each sense how behaviour and choices are influenced by  sensory processing.  Choices, choices, choices  Do you have a favourite sweater? Do you wear jewellery around your neck,  in your ears, on your fingers and around your wrist, or does even reading  this sentence give you the chills? Is there a certain beverage that makes  you incredibly happy, because it tastes so good, perhaps feels good as well,  leaving a tingling sensation on your tongue, or simply because it quenches  your thirst? What choice do you make when you put on music? Do you  listen to a live concert of a rap artist or do you prefer a cello concert? Why  do you make these choices? Its partly because of the way you process input  through your senses. The sweater and jewellery relate to your sense of  touch, what you like to feel against your skin. The drink relates to taste  and the feeling in your mouth. The music relates to your sense of hearing. Behaviour and choices are influenced by sensory processing. How much input can you handle? Different types of input dont neatly enter one after another; you dont  first see flowers through your eyes and then smell them through your 

The First Link: The Eight Senses 69 nose. This happens simultaneously. As such, input enters through your  senses throughout the day, all of which must be registered at the same  time. Therefore the senses need to work together. Many things happen  at once; you read about this in the example of pouring juice into a glass  in Chapter 2. For people who are generally underresponsive this isnt  much of a problem. They can function just fine in a situation where their  senses are bombarded with an excessive amount of input, at a busy party,  for example. This is because they dont process all input. This also means  they miss input. For instance, at this party, someone has repeatedly been  asking for silence because they want to make an announcement. The  underresponsive person doesnt notice this and continues their story  about one of their adventures. People who are overresponsive like to keep things calmer for their  senses. They have more difficulties in situations with a lot of input. For  example, a busy party will create a lot of input to process. Your ears deal  with music and a lot of people talking at once, your eyes take in the environment, partly unfamiliar people and presents, your mouth and nose  process a range of different drinks, snacks and smells, and your skin gets  touched more often because you are standing andor sitting relatively  close to other people. This also causes your balance to be challenged  more, because you have to ensure you can walk to the kitchen or toilet  without knocking over someones drink or tripping over feet or bags.  And there was something in the snacks that doesnt agree at all with your  stomach, you shouldnt have eaten unfamiliar things. Overresponsive  people may prefer not to go to a party, or to not stay as long. When do you experience the amount of input arriving at your cerebral cortex as enough? Lets use a car journey where you are the one  driving as an example. Do you always have the radio on, do you like  talking to your passengers? Can you focus sufficiently on driving if this  is the case? Youre already doing so much! 

Sight: you have to keep an eye  on traffic.

Hearing: you are listening to the  sounds of the engine and traffic.

Smell: you smell the washer  fluid.

Taste: you are chewing on a  sweet.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 70

Touch: you are dealing with the temperature in the car.

Movement: you are controlling the pressure you are putting on  the accelerator pedal, brake and clutch.

Balance: you take a quick look over your shoulder.

Interoception: you are peckish, your stomach is asking for a  little something to eat. What choices do you make in the car? If you do have the radio turned  on, do you leave it on when youre driving in a strange city and youve  almost reached your destination? Or do you turn the radio off, because  you need to be able to focus extra hard on certain input to find the right  address? And does the same go for conversations with your passenger?  Do you end the conversation when youve almost reached the unfamiliar  destination? The overresponsive person will indeed turn off the radio and  end the conversation. The person who is mostly underresponsive isnt  as bothered by all this input, and will most likely leave the radio on and  continue the conversation. They can handle more input at once, because  not all input reaches the cerebral cortex.  TO DO: HELLO! IN THREE SECONDS  Imagine the following situation: you are standing in the doorway, you hear the  first school bell ring, the first student is standing in front of you, you shake their  hand to welcome them and they shake your hand. Write below, after each sense,  what input comes in through that sense in these few seconds. Sound

Movement and posture

The First Link: The Eight Senses 71 Sight

Touch

Balance

Taste

Smell

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 72 Interoception

This is what we noticed in our senses: Sound

You hear voices: high-pitched voices, low-pitched voices.

You register words: your name, for example.

You hear sounds coming in from outside.

The student wishes you a good morning.

A chair is put on the floor. Movement and posture

The student shakes your hand.

You feel if the handshake is firm or weak.

You are standing; your postural muscles are working to keep  you balanced.

You bend your knees slightly so you can look the student in  the eyes.

You move your head to look around.

The First Link: The Eight Senses 73 Sight

You see and hear the student; you register what they are  wearing.

You see how they styled their hair and what their face looks like  for example, red from the cold, healthy.

You see their facial expression; theyre smiling at you.

You see a drawing has fallen down from the wall.

You see the lights in the hallway. Touch

You feel the students hand the hand is warm or cold, wet or  dry.

You feel the fingers being pressed together and your ring getting  trapped for a second.

You feel the fabric of the students sweater brushing against  your fingers.

You feel your glasses sliding down your nose from bending  over.

Your mouth is dry. Balance

You feel how fast you are bending over.

You move one foot to stay balanced.

Postural muscles are tensing to keep you balanced.

Your head moves to keep your eyes and head aligned, to help  your balance. Taste

You taste the tea you were drinking before, with just a little too  much sugar. Smell

You smell the students wet clothes.

You smell something like perfume or fabric softener on the  student; the smell is familiar, you like it.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 74 Interoception

You feel you are still thirsty.

Your heart is pounding with excitement; this is going to be a  great day!  That is a lot of input for a short couple of seconds, and we could mention  much more. It shows once more how much input is out there and of how  much of that input we become aware. And how much more input there  is that gets ignored. Your own unique reality The senses cooperate with the brain so you can become aware of what is  happening around you and in your own body. You experience the world  around you and receive information about your body through your  senses. You use them to perceive a small part of reality. Take the buzzing  of the computer: that buzz is always there when the computer is turned  on. These sound waves are in the air constantly and are constantly being  received by the ear. Yet, most of the time, you dont hear them. It isnt  until you turn off the computer that the silence makes you aware of the  fact that youve been perceiving this buzzing all this time, without consciously realizing it. So: sometimes you do consciously experience input,  and sometimes you dont. At those moments, it might seem as though  not all input has been transmitted to your cerebral cortex, but this isnt  the case. All input has been registered by the sense and transmitted to  the brain, but it was marked as boringunimportant by the sensory input  filter, and as such has not been brought to your awareness. These decisions are made in the input filter without you knowing it. Its not until  someone points out the buzzing to you, or it disappears suddenly, that  you become conscious of it. Therefore, we can say that sensory processing  affects how you experience reality. Before, it seemed as though the world  was made up of a not-buzzing computer. Afterwards, it turned out there  was buzzing in the world, but you just werent aware of it. This shows how your reality is influenced by sensory processing. So  this is one of the reasons that you have certain preferences: one person  might love sweet, another prefers savoury. This has nothing to do with  the flavours in the food, because these are the same for everyone and  everyone registers them as such through the taste sensors. What matters  is your perception of reality in this case: the taste of the food. The 

The First Link: The Eight Senses 75 input registered by the sense isnt necessarily the same input that arrives  at the cerebral cortex. Between registering and becoming conscious of  input lies a long and winding road, with a doorman and stamps, i.e.  the input filter. On this road, true reality is changed into your own personal reality. Your reality is created by how you see, how hungry you are,  how you smell. This has to do with how your sensory processing takes  place. This means that your awareness is an interpretation of reality. And  that is incredibly important knowledge! You cant assume someone else  experiences the outside temperature the same way you do, perceives a  sound at the same volume, enjoys the spiciness of the hot sauce the way  you do, or experiences the itching of a knitted sweater as just as annoying  as you do. Come ride the roller coaster with me, its fun! is a strange  thing to say, when looking at it like this. You cannot know what another  person might think is fun, pleasant, beautiful or comfortable. Your reality is created by how you see, how hungry you are,  how you smell. So, lets see what senses we are talking about and how they can determine  our behaviour. By discussing each sense individually, you will get a good  impression of the influence sensory processing has on behaviour. I thought there were only five senses? In school, we learned that there are five senses; the senses named by  Aristotle in classic antiquity. However, experts have come to disagree  about the idea that these are all the senses. Depending on what definition  you use, different numbers are mentioned. Within the field of sensory  processing, we recognize that there are eight senses. Eight? Yes, Aristotles: sight, hearing, smell, touch and taste. And then three lesser known  ones: balance and posturemovement these two senses are also called  the vestibular system and proprioception. Finally, interoception lets you  sense feelings within your body, for instance temperature, heartbeat,  thirst, muscle tension and emotions.  We will discuss all eight senses one by one. We will tell you:

the theory behind how the sense functions

how the sense working with the input filter, naturally directs  our life

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 76

a little bit of scientific information about how the sense  influences our behaviour

how you encounter the sense in general at school

how the underresponsive student experiences input through  this sense

how the overresponsive student experiences input through this  sense. Sensitivity per sense For all the eight senses, the input filter makes individual decisions on if  and how strongly the input will be transmitted. It can happen that the  input filter treats all sounds as VIP, which can cause overresponsivity  to sounds. Simultaneously, the input filter might consider input from  muscles and joints to be boring, which can lead to you not experiencing  enough movement input. This means you are overresponsive to sounds,  and underresponsive to movement. There are many different possible  combinations of underresponsive, neutral and overresponsive. This  would be too much to discuss in this book. HEARING  Sound waves arrive at the cochlea through the  outer, middle and inner ear. The cochlea is a  small, spiral-shaped tube filled with fluid. In the  cochlea, sound waves are transformed into an  electric signal, which is sent to the brain through  the acoustic nerve. How does hearing direct our life? An example is your choice of a place to live. Living in a rural area, you  will be exposed to fewer sounds than when you are living in a busy city.  Some people enjoy sounds and are uncomfortable when surrounded by  silence. Others would rather retreat occasionally, to escape the mishmash  of sounds, and they prefer living in a quiet environment. Indoors, people  also make different decisions regarding sound: whether to turn on the  radio or TV, and at higher or lower volume.

The First Link: The Eight Senses 77 In severe cases, sounds can hurt, which can cause a fight, flight or  freeze response. HEARING AND SCIENCE Music is known for its capability to help us regulate our emotions,  influencing our mood and changing our physical state of being by  quickening or slowing down our heart rate Saarikallio, 2011. Emily Anthes writes in Psychology Today 2010: Shoppers make  more impulsive purchases when theyre overstimulated. Loud volume  leads to sensory overload, which weakens self-control. Hearing in school  Every school environment has a wide array of sounds: there are a lot of  kids in one space, teachers are providing instructions, there are sounds  in the auditorium during assemblies. And then there are the many voices  outside during recess, the chaos in the changing rooms and the exuberance during PE. There arent many places in a school that are consistently  quiet during the day, barring a few designated quiet zones. The acoustics in a classroom change depending on where you are in  the room. This can cause a teacher to think a student isnt paying attention, while actually the student is incapable of following the instructions  as they cant hear them the instructions or you. Performing regular  checks to ensure everybody can hear you properly is never time wasted. From our 35th year of life, we are unable to hear the highest pitched  sounds. The older teacher hears sounds differently than the younger  students. The underresponsive student When a student, despite proper acoustics, doesnt hear enough sounds,  they dont always respond when being called and they can miss part  of the verbal instructions. The underresponsive student will therefore  ask you to repeat words more often: What? Huh? What did you say?  They might seem deaf, but they arent. The underresponsive student also  continues talking when a bell rings or when something hits the floor  loudly. They simply dont notice these sounds and are surprised when  others are distracted by them.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 78 The overresponsive student The student who cant properly isolate themselves from sounds can have  a hard time working independently. When a student is overly sensitive to  sounds, they are distracted by the buzzing of the smart board, the ticking  of the clock or a group of students discussing something on the other side  of the classroom. It takes more energy from this student to perform their  task satisfactorily, because their cerebral cortex is receiving more input. A student might also be bothered by the sirens of an ambulance or  fire engine long after the vehicle has passed. Their body has released a  lot more adrenaline due to this loud noise than the body of a student  of average sensitivity. The overresponsive student needs more time to  recover from this shock. When working together in groups, the overresponsive student can  have difficulty registering and interpreting different voices, because they  cannot distinguish well between sounds that they hear at the same time. SIGHT The eye transmits information about your surroundings to the brain, which results in your  ability to see things. Light enters the eye through  the pupil, the black area in the centre of the eye,  and arrives at the cornea. From the cornea, light  signals are transmitted to the cerebral cortex  through photoreceptors. Once there, the signals become an image.  The eye itself doesnt see; seeing takes place in the cerebral cortex.  How does sight direct our life? Light can be used to create a certain mood. When you are in an environment lit by fluorescent lights, you will feel differently than in an environment lit by dimmed lights or candlelight. A day with little sunshine  because of a dense layer of cloud feels different than a bright and sunny  day. Too much light can be uncomfortable, which may cause you to put  on sunglasses or pull down the blinds.

The First Link: The Eight Senses 79 SIGHT AND SCIENCE Light therapy seems to have a positive effect on people suffering from  depression, whether the depression is caused by light deficiency or  not, at least in addition to medication. And in some cases, light therapy could make medication obsolete Golden et al., 2005. Studies have been conducted to research the effect of overly decorated classrooms. A small study showed that a heavily decorated space  had negative effects on learning results. Children received six lessons  and were tested on how much they remembered. The control group,  who had had lessons in a moderately decorated classroom, answered  55 percent of the answers correctly, while the group in the heavily  decorated classroom gave 42 percent correct answers. Students in  the heavily decorated classroom were less focused on their task and  more easily distracted Fisher, Godwin and Seltman, 2014. Sight in school  The walls in the classroom are covered in information about reading and  maths, drawings, photographs, posters, etc. This is cosy and is supposed  to convey information. It can be nice to slip into a daydream, staring  at the busy walls. The student can picture themselves in an alphabet  paradise, where every letter has a different flavour, or in a mathematics  playground, where numbers are meant to be climbed on and slid down off.  But, as you have read above, all this information can also be a distraction.  Another important thing is the lighting in the classroom. Perhaps some  students are sitting in full sunlight while the bright light bothers them. Chapter 8 discusses decoration of the classroom and how it affects  students in more detail. The underresponsive student The student who needs more input to function  properly will not get to work easily when their view  is a boring, empty wall. The student who is visually  underresponsive works more efficiently when they  receive more visual information, for example with  books crowded with content that screams off the 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 80 pages  alternating between text, text boxes, images, cartoons, etc. They  will need brighter lights to be able to focus. The screens brightness settings will be on 100 percent. The overresponsive student The student who is visually overresponsive might be bothered by bright  lights, and heavily adorned walls will distract them more than average.  When this student is sitting next to a window, or has a view of the corridor, they will be more easily distracted when they can see movement  happening. The visually overresponsive student can have a hard time  finding the right material or right image in a busy background. Its  difficult for them to find the right instructions in a jam-packed book  that offers information in many different ways text, text boxes, images,  cartoons, etc. MOVEMENT The movement sense proprioception registers  input through receptors in our muscles, tendons  and ligaments. This sense makes you feel the  position of your joints and ensures you feel  movements. Without having to look, you can feel  exactly where and in what position your body  parts are and how you are moving. This enables  you to negotiate kerbs, without having to look at your legs and the  kerb, and allows you to know without looking at your hand whether  your fingers are extended or flexed. Movement works together with  touch, balance and sight. You need movement sense, among other  things, to keep body parts in a specific position for a prolonged period.  The muscles tense or relax in order to maintain a certain position.  This happens mostly subconsciously. How does movement direct our life? You are unaware of how much you can move on autopilot because you  use the movement sense, until something changes. When a chair is lower  than you expected, you will fall the last few centimetres to the seat. 

The First Link: The Eight Senses 81 And when you step into an unfamiliar car, you might bump your head  because the door frame is lower than youre used to. In a familiar situation, the receptors know exactly where and  when to stop a movement. In a familiar situation, the receptors know exactly where and when to  stop a movement. In a new situation, however, you will need to use sight  and sometimes touch to calibrate the movements, for example when you  walk up a set of stairs that has very different dimensions regarding step  length and height than youre used to. In our daily life, we use this sense  often; it allows us to move around without thought. MOVEMENT AND SCIENCE Steps vary in height and depth, but building standards for stairs do  exist: the height between two steps is called the riser, and the depth  the tread. A decently climbable set of stairs follows the following  formula: 2 x riser  1 x tread  590 mm. In this calculation, 590 is the  so-called step modulus. This formula for calculating the climbability  of stairs is called the tripping formula De Vree, n.d. Ankle injuries are the second most common sports injury in the  Netherlands Veiligheid.nl, n.d. One study set out to see if a training  programme would influence reoccurrence of ankle injuries. Results  showed that people who had followed a training programme that  focused on movement and balance sense were far less likely to injure their ankle again. This research showed a decrease of 35 percent  Hupperets, Verhagen and van Mechelen, 2009. Movement in school  When kids start a new class, they will be a bit clumsy during the first  days or weeks when it comes to walking around, sitting down, grabbing  things from the cupboard, etc. However, once theyre used to where all  the desks and chairs are and how high they are, how drawers open and  close and where everything needs to be put away, their movements will  become more fluent and faster, and they wont bump into things as often anymore. Their receptors have calibrated to how small, big and fast  movements can or should be.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 82 The underresponsive student A student who is underresponsive when it comes to movement doesnt  feel their body as much, and will have more difficulty retaining the right  position. This can cause them to slouch or to move a lot. Moving allows  them to collect information in their body and can make them feel things  better. They can also be much rougher in their movements, for example  when playing tag or during PE. They will be less sensitive to how hard they bump into something  or someone. They will probably bump into things or people more often,  because they dont feel their movement as well, and arent as aware of  their position in space in relation to others. Its easier for them to trip,  because they dont have sufficient awareness of where their feet are in  relation to their environment. Movements are generally less coordinated.  This can also impact their writing skills: because they dont fully feel  what they are doing, they might not push their pen down hard enough,  or might push it too hard. The overresponsive student The student who is overresponsive might be more comfortable staying  put in their seat. This limits the input entering their body through the  movement sense. Even when they are sitting still, they can feel their  muscles and joints, which can be incredibly distracting. The student  can have stiff posture and avoid movement, because they experience all  movement very intensely in their muscles and joints. They have difficulty  with other people moving them around for example, taking their hand  to lead them somewhere. TOUCH The skin contains receptors that allow you  to feel. Different receptors as there are three  different touch receptors register touch touch  receptors, temperature thermoreceptors and  pain nociceptors. Some areas of our skin have many touch  receptors, like the fingertips and lips. Other areas, like your back, have significantly fewer; consequently, those areas  are less sensitive. Light touch is detected by different receptors than 

The First Link: The Eight Senses 83 firm touch. Signals of firm touch have precedence over signals that  are being transmitted by pain receptors. Therefore, firmly rubbing a  painful spot can help alleviate pain. How does touch direct our life? People can calm down when someone else comforts them by rubbing  their back or holding their hand. Skin-to-skin contact can have a calming and bonding effect. Touching each other is a way to feel socially  connected as well. Choices you make regarding the fabric of your clothing, type of towels  and bedding influence your comfort. This also applies to materials your  furniture is made of, and whether you have cushions on your couch.  The flooring in your house will influence your choice to go barefoot, or  wear socks or slippers. When you lift a mug or glass, the heat you feel will tell you the approximate temperature of your tea or coffee and whether you can drink it. TOUCH AND SCIENCE Failure to meet tactile and stimulation needs produced poor health  outcomes and marked developmental delays in infants and children  Frank et al., 1996. A meta-analysis showed that even single applications of massage  therapy reduced patient state anxiety, blood pressure and heart-rate,  but not depressive mood. However, when multiple applications of  massage therapy were used, depression was found to be significantly  reduced Moyer, Rounds and Hannum, 2004.  Touch in school At the start of the school day, when going outside or changing classrooms, many students are in the corridor at the same time. This increases  the chance of being touched. Not everyone enjoys this. During PE, some students will prefer hard balls and others soft balls.  And some might want to exercise barefoot, while others will want to  wear trainers at all times.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 84 The underresponsive student The student who is underresponsive when it comes to touch will cross  other peoples boundaries faster. This is because they are looking for extra  sensory information through touch. They do this by coming too close,  because they are not aware of what an appropriate distance is. During  PE, they might be a bit rougher. When the game requires touching each  other, helping each other with certain movements or involves other  ways of cooperating, this student might be a bit rough when handling  someone else. This student will also be fidgeting a lot, with themselves  and materials, but sometimes also with fellow students. The overresponsive student The student who is overresponsive when it comes to touch can respond  in an irritated or angry manner to unexpected touch. The student might  choose to be the first or last to get into the corridor, so they dont have  to push and shove as much. Preference for the end of the line makes  sense when you prefer not to be touched unexpectedly. When you are  sitting at a desk in the classroom that has lots of students walking by,  the chances of being touched unexpectedly are higher. This is stressful  for the overresponsive student. The overresponsive student can complain about socks, shoes and  labels, because they feel them all day long. When they have been playing  with sand, they would rather shower before moving on to another activity, because they feel every grain of sand on their skin. BALANCE  In the inner ear we find the vestibular system. This organ contains sensory cells which  are sensitive to accelerationdeceleration and  rotation. These cells are connected to a nerve  which transmits the signals to the brain. Through the vestibular system, you become aware of gravity. It  helps the body orientate on the environment and literally to stay  balanced. The vestibular system collects information on movement  and balance; it registers how we rotate and how fast or slow we are  moving. The vestibular system signals whether we are accelerating 

The First Link: The Eight Senses 85 or decelerating. This allows us to learn about moving around in the  space surrounding us and helps us develop a sense of depth. The vestibular system influences our postural muscles and eye  muscles. It can influence the position of the eyes and the body in  order to put or keep these in the correct position. This involves cooperating with other senses, such as movement, touch and sight.  How does balance direct our life? How well you process input in your vestibular system affects how you  move around. Can you ride a bike with two heavy bags of groceries,  holding flowers in your hand, and with a kid on the back of your bike?  Does climbing a high ladder to clean the gutters pose no problem for  you, or would you rather have someone else do this? The choice to play sports and which sports to play can also be linked  to the vestibular system. Sports like parachuting, racing, ballet, skiing  and mountain biking cause a high input to your vestibular system. These  sports are more likely to be chosen by underresponsive people. BALANCE AND SCIENCE Schilling and colleagues 2003 studied the effects of using a therapy  ball in class, which stimulates the vestibular system and movement  sensors. They saw that students with ADHD, when sitting on a  therapy ball, were more likely to stay at their desk and their writing  became more legible. After a brain haemorrhage, approximately 10 percent of patients  end up with Pusher syndrome Pedersen et al., 1996, which causes  the awareness of their posture in relation to gravity to change. When  these patients are sitting down or standing up, theyll push themselves  towards their affected side, which causes them to fall over. They have  a deviating sense of upright; the information coming from their  vestibular system is no longer correct. Because the processing of  visual input remains the same, rehabilitation therapy can use this to  teach people what it feels like to sit or stand up straight, using vertical  structures in the environment as reference points. They will use a  doorpost, for example, to see what upright means and they need to  teach their vestibular system this new sense of being upright Karnath  and Broetz, 2003.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 86 Balance in school There are careful students, there are skilful movers and there are reckless acrobats. How a student moves, on the stairs, in the playground  and during PE, is partially due to how well their vestibular system  processes input. The underresponsive student The student whose vestibular system is underresponsive can be clumsy  and have a slouching posture. Control over their postural muscles is  insufficient. Movements are stiff and awkward, causing this student to be  more likely to bump into people and things. The latter can also happen  on purpose, because bumping into things provides the student with more  information. There is a big overlap in behaviour with the movement  sense proprioception. Balance and movement work together a lot. To receive more information in the vestibular system, the student  might make extra movements like swaying their head, jumping, bumping  into things, rocking their chair and hanging their head upside down.  When the playground has a swing set, they will spend a lot of time there,  whenever they can. This student does not always pay attention to safety;  their body does not sufficiently notice when it becomes unbalanced and  does not transmit these alarm signals, or not in time. The overresponsive student The student who is overresponsive will feel dizzy faster and is more likely  to feel unbalanced. This might cause them to be uncomfortable walking  down stairs or playing tag, because the latter involves them running and  promptly changing direction. Their body alerts them early on: you are  losing your balance! They ignore the swings and the monkey bars, and  they wont be getting on the slide soon either. They dont like heights  and are most comfortable on smooth, hard surfaces, with both feet on  the ground. This student is often late at learning to ride a bike.

The First Link: The Eight Senses 87 SMELL The receptors for registering scents are located  in the nasal cavity. When you inhale, scents from  outside the body pass these receptors. When you  exhale, scents from the food and drink youve  consumed pass the receptors. Because of this,  the nose is an important part of tasting. You can  easily test this by tasting food and drink while  pinching your nose. You will not taste what you are eating or drinking  as well. When you have a stuffy nose, scents cant reach the receptors. Sense of smell plays an important part in survival; it functions  as an alarm system. Your nose can detect when something is safe or  unsafe. Just think of smoke, spoiled food or gas. Another important  function of your sense of smell is bonding. Parent and child unconsciously recognize each other by their scent. How does smell direct our life? There are scents that are considered pleasant by most people, such as  the scent of freshly baked bread and that of vanilla. By using scents in  the form of perfume or by putting fresh flowers, scented candles or reed  diffusers in your house you can influence your own mood, or that of  others. Or perhaps you prefer not to use any scents at all, because you  quickly experience them as unpleasant. Past experience with a scent plays  a big part in this. It is also important whether youve smelled this scent before, during  a pleasant experience or an unpleasant or painful experience. Additionally, you can get used to scents. The plumber is no longer  bothered by the odour of the sewer they have to work in. People who dont  wash themselves as often dont smell the unpleasant odours this causes. SMELL AND SCIENCE Businesses use scents to influence people. There are even companies  that specialize in scent marketing. To do this well, its important that  they keep their target audience in mind, because there can be big 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 88 differences in how people from different cultures judge scents. For  example, in the United States, methyl salicylate wintergreen is considered a pleasant fragrance, because it was used only for mint sweets  Cain and Johnson, 1978. This same scent has a negative association  in the United Kingdom, because wintergreen is used in medication  Moncrieff, 1966. Scent influences our choice of romantic partners. Wedekind and  colleagues 1995 let women smell T-shirts that were worn by men for  two nights and asked them to rate the scents. The women showed  a preference for the scent of those men that had different genes for  coding proteins that are essential to the adaptive immune system.  This shows that it might be just chemistry when choosing a mate.  Having different gene sets increases the survival rate of their offspring  and having combinations of genes allows for a better ability to adapt  to changing environments than having the same set of genes.  Smell in school  During the year, scents in a classroom may vary, partly due to the ventilation system in a school building. During the summer, windows will  be open more often, resulting in more ventilation. With bad ventilation,  higher temperatures will lead to more nuisance from sweaty odours.  During exciting events, like the end-of-year test, some children might  suffer from cold sweats. In winter, moist jackets, hats, scarves and gloves  will be hanging from the coat racks, while there will be relatively less  ventilation. That stinks! The underresponsive student The student who is less aware of scents might frequently smell objects  or people to receive more information. This student might like to put on  way too much strong-smelling deodorant. For some, scented lip gloss  and pens might be among their favourite things. The overresponsive student The student who is sensitive to scents might complain about a scent and  even feel sick because of it, while others dont smell anything. Odours in  the gyms changing room can cause this student to not want to follow  PE at all, or they will be sure to get changed really fast.

The First Link: The Eight Senses 89 TASTE Taste receptors can be found on your tongue and in  the back of your mouth, in the form of taste buds.  They allow us to recognize five primary flavours:  bitter, sweet, sour, salty and umami savoury. The  widespread assumption that different flavours are  identified on different spots of the tongue is incorrect. Every taste bud contains all taste receptors. Taste receptors  are also found in the cheek, the roof of the mouth and the windpipe,  and in organs in the body. It is still unclear what function those taste  receptors have.  After food has ended up on the taste buds, information from the  chemical composition is converted into an electric signal. This signal  is transmitted to the brain.  To experience taste, three other senses are of importance: sense of  touch to be aware of how the food feels, sense of smell to experience  scents and sight to recognize the food. The four senses work together. How does taste direct our life? Taste largely determines the joy you experience in eating. Enjoying a tasty  meal together is an important social event. Older people have fewer taste  buds and dont taste their food as well, or they may experience it as bitter.  This reduces their appetite. People who dont have a good sense of taste  might even be living less healthily, because they add large quantities of  sugar and salt to their food. There are people who prefer varied and strong flavours. Mustard and  hot sauce are often seen in their fridge. Others might enjoy less intense  flavours or structures. This all depends on their sensory processing. Taste in combination with smell gives a warning when food is  spoiled. TASTE AND SCIENCE Researchers have found good reasons why children have a preference  for sweet-tasting foods: Most children have a natural preference for sweet flavours. Babies 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 90 innately prefer sweet. This is for two reasons. First, in nature, bitter  and sour often represent things that arent good, like toxins. Therefore, the preference for sweet is a kind of innate survival mechanism:  youd better stay away from bitter and sour things, because they are  unhealthy. However, the preference for sweet also arises from a strong  need for carbohydrates starches and sugars to support the immense  growth children go through during their first year. De Vos, 2010 The Japanese chemist Ikeda discovered that glutamic acid, the mono sodium salt of the amino acid glutamic acid, is the substance thats  responsible for umami flavour savoury. His discovery was immediately put into practice. Using monosodium glutamate or MSG  as a flavour enhancer has since become common practice in Asian  cuisine. In the early 20th century, MSG was extracted from seaweed.  Nowadays, MSG is produced by fermenting molasses from sugar cane,  sugar beets, starches or corn Kurihara, 2009. Taste in school  Taste is less likely to be an issue in class. Students usually bring fruit, food  and drinks to school that parents know they will like.  The underresponsive student This student doesnt taste their food as well, which can reduce their  appetite. They also prefer foods with strong flavours in their lunch box,  like crisps or a chocolate bar. Theyd rather not have a slice of white bread  and bland cheese.  The overresponsive student The student who is pickier about their food will perhaps refuse snacks  that are being handed out, because they dont like them. However, because treats handed out in class are often sweet, they probably wont  refuse them that often. Sweet is a flavour that even overresponsive people  generally enjoy. 

The First Link: The Eight Senses 91 INTEROCEPTION The term interoception means experiencing the  inside. It describes the sense that registers what we  sense in organs and other tissues in our body, for  instance the lining of the stomach, bladder, heart  or intestines. The sensors are located throughout  your body. Some locations have a lot, for instance  the lining of organs such as the bladder. A large proportion of the interoceptive signals are processed  fully automatically by the nervous system. Reactions  to these sensations are a balance between actions of  which you are aware and unaware. You can be aware  of being tired and then go to sleep. You can be unaware of a potential  danger: your pupils have already widened, even before you are aware  of being fearful. Interoceptive signals usually are treated as having  priority over signals from other senses, because they are linked to  survival food, excreting, danger, reproduction. Understanding signals from interoception are important for self-regulating behaviour  to help you feel better if you feel full, stopping eating will make you  feel better.  How does interoception direct our life? To be able to function in daily life, you need to be able to interpret interoceptive signals that require action. For instance, you need to be able  to match the feeling of a tense bladder to the experience of emptying  your bladder and to go to the toilet in a timely manner. To not become  dehydrated, you need to learn what being thirsty feels like, so you can get  a glass of water. Do you have shaky legs and butterflies in your stomach?  You may be nervous, ill or in love. Emotions can arise from interoceptive  stimuli. A child with an asthma attack, for example, can panic because  they have to gasp for breath. In a weakened form, a child with a cold may  feel nervous because of this. By learning to match what you feel inside  your body to a situation or emotion, you can take the required action to  survive, for instance run away because you experience fear.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 92 INTEROCEPTION AND SCIENCE In their research, Umeda and colleagues 2016 link higher interoceptive accuracy being able to better sense the physiological condition  of your body with an ability to better invoke prospective memories  PM. A PM is a memory that is retained to be used for future intentions. Participants with better interoceptive accuracy showed better  PM task performance. These results show that this higher cognition  task PM recall is dependent on the sense of interoception Umeda  et al., 2016. Contemporary experiments demonstrate the neural and mental  representation of internal bodily sensations as integral for the  experience of emotions; those individuals with heightened interoception tend to experience emotions with greater intensity Barrett  et al., 2004. Interoceptive signals can guide and inform without fully penetrating conscious awareness. In addition, interoceptive dysregulation  appears to underlie alexithymia  difficulty identifying ones own  emotions and sensations Brewer et al., 2016. Alexithymia is a common hallmark of psychological disorders such as Autism Spectrum  Conditions that present with social difficulties Bird and Cook, 2013  Arnold, Winkielman and Dobkins, 2019. Interoception in school  When students get hungry, need to go to the toilet or are in love, they will  be less able to pay attention to the teacher and to their work. Signals from  interoception are interpreted as being the number one priority by the  brain, because they are important for survival. Therefore interoceptive  signals get most or all attention.  The underresponsive student This student will get restless when they need to eat or drink, but they are  unable to translate the signal to needing food or being thirsty. They will  have a harder time with toilet-training and may have accidents past an  age where this usually has stopped occurring. This student may not feel  scrapes and bruises. They may all of a sudden become furious, because 

The First Link: The Eight Senses 93 they did not feel the irritation and anger build up. This feeling has been  building in their body, but they are not aware of it until it has passed the  bursting point. Or a student will deny being angry, whilst having tightly  closed fists, tension in their body and thunder in their face, just because  they do not perceive these anger signals.  The overresponsive student This student experiences signals from their body as very strong. A slightly  filled bladder will feel like its about to burst, so the student will often  need to use the toilet. They will respond more strongly than seems necessary, for instance when they are lightly bumped against. This student  may be very irritated when feeling mild hunger or thirst.  The predictive brain There are many factors involved in experiencing sensations, for instance  past experience, the sensory input filter we speak about in this book, and  safety and danger mechanisms in the brain. One of the factors is the  predictive brain, where the brain predicts what you should experience,  based on past experience with sensory input.  It would take too much time and energy to only respond to the sensory input of the moment, therefore the brain makes predictions based  on the many experiences you have had with sensory input. What you  experience as being true is based on these predictions, instead of on  what is actually there the factual truth. The predictions are not always  correct, but the brain usually corrects based on the incoming sensory  input. This way the predictions are weighed against the actual input. But  the brain may also decide not to correct based on the actual input. The  brain will then filter in a way that only the sensory input that matches  the prediction is processed and experienced, making the prediction true  Feldman Barret, 2017.
PART II  GETTING STARTED:  WHAT CAN YOU DO? If all went well, you are now more than ready and cannot wait to support  your students. That is why this book was written: to help you respond to  behaviour in school which has to do with underand overresponsivity.  You will be the one to work on this, but of course we will guide you, so  you have the greatest chance of success.  In this part we use frames so you can look things up quickly. You can  pick up the book in the classroom and quickly find the information you  need at that moment: practical tips, an activating or calming strategy,  in the classroom or outside the classroom. We provide many different  strategies so you can choose what best suits you, the student and the  situation. If you want to know more about a certain strategy or about  tools, you can find information at the end of this part.
4  Before You Begin Whats this chapter about? This chapter is a manual to help you utilize the strategies described in  Chapters 510 appropriately. To get started, we have created a convenient  SPI-viewing guide, which helps you choose a fitting strategy: activating or  calming. We also revisit the Fan-model introduced in Chapter 1, which  helps the student become aware of their personal input needs. By means  of two outlines, we explain how you can tell if an inactive or hyperactive  student is underor overresponsive. Furthermore, we explain what applying the strategies can look like in daily life, and we answer practical  questions you may have before getting started. The SPI-viewing guide  The SPI-viewing guide helps you determine which strategy is required.  You use the viewing guide when you notice disruptive behaviour, or  behaviour that shows your student isnt functioning optimally in the  current situation. First, the SPI-Glasses will help you classify the behaviour and then you can check if a strategy is needed. In Chapter 2, we  discussed which behaviours suggest being underand overresponsive.  The SPI-viewing guide along with a list of these behaviours is available  to download. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 98 The SPI-viewing guide The child is displaying disruptive behaviour Step 1:  situation Step 2:  classification Step 3:  assessment Step 4:  strategy Actively Underresponsive  Wiggles and fiddles Is constantly active Impulsive  Talks, talks, talks, talks Crosses boundaries Is too enthusiastic, acts silly Needs extra input  Seeks extra input Passively Underresponsive Sleepy and relaxed No initiative for action Isnt quickly bothered by  things Seems lazy and  uninterested Clumsy and untidy Difficult to get through to Needs extra input  Does NOT seek extra input Students own solution  works, and behaviour really  isnt disruptive Tell the student their  strategy is working Passively   Underresponsive Own solution 	 not present 	 not working 	 working, but is disruptive Offer a strategy Actively   Underresponsive

Before You Begin 99 The child is displaying disruptive behaviour Step 1:  situation Step 2:  classification Step 3:  assessment Step 4:  strategy Actively Overresponsive  Not flexible, wants routine Makes decisions easily  Notices every little change  Is easily annoyed  Refuses, often doesnt want  to come or play along  Wants to determine how  things go Is bothered by input  Avoids input Passively Overresponsive Responds to everything in  their environment Easily angered, grumbles,  cries Impressions last for a long  time Likes to be on their own Things often suddenly  become too much Becomes fearful easily Is bothered by input  Does NOT avoid input Students own solution  works, and behaviour really  isnt disruptive Tell the student their  strategy is working Passively   Overresponsive Own solution 	 not present 	 not working  	 works, but is disruptive Offer a strategy Actively   Overresponsive

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 100 With the following example, we will show you how the SPI-viewing  guide works.  1.	 The student is balancing their chair on two legs during reading  time. Youre thinking: Sit still please! In short, you notice  disruptive behaviour, Step 1 in the diagram. 2.	 This is when you put on your SPI-Glasses and consider if the  behaviour can be linked to underor overresponsivity. Is the  student behaving like this to stay focused, to regulate their  alertness? Is the student active to receive more input? Probably.  An underresponsive student can apply rocking their chair for  extra input. This is Step 2 in the diagram, classification. 3.	 Then, Step 3, assessing the behaviour: is the behaviour truly  disruptive? The student is moving around a bit, isnt touching  anyone and is quiet. No, its not that disruptive after all. 4.	 Now, you arrive at Step 4, choosing a strategy: telling the  student their strategy is working. However, sometimes the students behaviour is disruptive. Its nice that  the student is trying to regulate their alertness, but if the chair legs squeak  with every movement this is very disruptive. Similarly, if the student  moves a lot, or talks, talks, talks, talks, talks Through the SPI-viewing  guide, you will now end up at a different strategy. This helps you offer  the student  and thus yourself and other students as well!  a good,  non-disruptive alternative. You put on your SPI-Glasses and see something is wrong with  sensory processing. Another example: the student is slouching in their chair; they are quiet  and withdrawn. Typical underresponsive behaviour, which the student  isnt trying to change themselves. You once again put on your SPI-Glasses  and see something is wrong with sensory processing. By going through  the SPI-viewing guide, you know you can offer an activating strategy. You can test at which classification of the student you end up and if  this is the right classification. Chapter 11 offers opportunities to practise  classifying disruptive behaviour with the SPI-viewing guide. We provide  examples of student behaviour in different situations. If you want to  practise right now, you can skip ahead to Chapter 11.

Before You Begin 101 The Fan-model: Extra help with Step 2, classification Fan-model by Thoonsen and van der Gaag 2021 Through the Fan-model, the student will learn to recognize the state their  sensory processing is in. Without a visual aid, this can be complicated. It  can be difficult for a child to indicate when they are overresponsive, for  example. Consequently, they may suddenly become overwhelmed. When  that happens, your student has missed certain signals. Therefore, its nice  if they themselves can indicate if they are underor overresponsive, or  when they notice they have reached a limit. You, the teacher, will also learn  to recognize the signals better and sooner, which means you can warn the  student in time and you can prevent them from becoming overwhelmed. When you think your student isnt fully aware of when they experience too much or too little input, go ahead and use the Fan-model to  practise together. The fan shows you how they are doing, which system is  active and therefore if they are maybe underor overresponsive. Can they  do their task, or is that not quite possible? If they cant, is this because  they lack input, are they functioning in the left-hand part of the fan, or  are they experiencing too much input and are they functioning in the  right-hand or far-right part?

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 102 The student now has a helpful tool to check for themselves if they need  something to continue to feel comfortable, so they can do what they  need to in that moment. You can respond to what the student needs:  more or less input. TO DO: THE FAN-MODEL  Having read and discussed this tutorial, you can start using the Fan-model. Do  this in specific situations, for example during independent working time, arts  and crafts or when doing group activities.  Further explanation on the use of the Fan-model can be found at  www.DutchSensorySolutions.com.  It depends on the situation The Fan-model parts differ in each situation with regards to energy and  behaviour. When giving a presentation, its okay to be a bit nervous and  function in the right-hand zone. This makes you more active and enables  you to respond well to your classmates questions. In that moment, this  could mean you are a bit over-active. Therefore, a very active student  will indicate the right-hand part of the fan is unfolded a bit. However,  when they are so active that they no longer respond to classmates who  want to ask them a question, the right-hand part is unfolded too much  and the student may even unfold the very far right corner.  When a student is enjoying the sunshine in the playground, its okay  if they are very relaxed, because that is exactly right for the situation.  Consequently, a student who is relaxing in the sun will show that the  left-hand side is unfolded a bit. But if they dont notice break is over  and everybody is supposed to go back to their classroom, that side is  unfolded too much. 

Before You Begin 103 After having practised using the Fan-model several times, your student  will most likely be able to indicate themselves what state they are in.  And perhaps, after a while, without even using the fan. They will then  also be capable of applying some strategies independently, so they can  start self-regulating. The SPI-viewing guide: Extra help with Step 2, classification When dealing with a hyperactive or very passive student who is absorbed  in their own world it can be difficult to recognize if they are underor  overresponsive. Below, we explain how you can tell the difference by  looking at physical characteristics. The hyperactive student When we say hyperactive, we mean a student who is so active that they  cannot focus on the task at hand. They started out by seeking more input  but overshot the mark. They may constantly be standing up and walking  around, no longer paying attention to their task. Perhaps pencils or books  fall on the floor, but they dont notice. This student has lost track of the input surrounding them; it engulfs  them. This makes them feel bad, but its difficult for them to get out of  this situation on their own. The hyperactive student may at first come across as an underresponsive student who is actively looking for more input. But the overresponsive  student can be hyperactive too, because they are experiencing a lot of  stress. Often, its possible to tell the difference, because an underresponsive and hyperactive student is moving a lot, stomping around.  An overresponsive and hyperactive student predominantly moves in a  nervous manner. They are clumsy and active, but their movements arent  as big as those of the underresponsive student.  Because it can be tricky to determine whether a hyperactive student  is underor overresponsive, we will discuss four characteristics below,  which will help you tell the difference. These four points  which can also  be found in the following diagram  describe what the eyes, breathing  and muscular tension look like and which emotions you can expect. The  last row of the diagram shows what you can do.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 104

Hyperactive and underresponsive  Hyperactive and overresponsive Eyes Wide open and enthusiastic  seeking input Wide open, stressedfearful  picking up all signals Breathing Relaxed abdominal breathing Tense chest breathing Muscle  tension Relaxed muscles, enthusiastic,  fluid movements Tense muscles, shoulders  hunched, chaotic movements Emotions Hyper and enthusiastic The student is losing it, cannot  stop themselves Extreme emotions, such as super  happy Hyper and stressed Has a meltdown  Grumblingcomplaining, angry  or crying Not flexible The student is in survival mode Supportive  action First, help them to calm down Then, offer less intensely  activating input that is not  disruptive for the student and  their environment Decrease input Offer calming input  Remove from situation The underresponsive and hyperactive student mostly shows extreme  enthusiasm and boisterous behaviour. This student is having fun.  However, they are a little too enthusiastic, which negatively affects  them and the environment. The student loses it and shows extreme  emotions. The overresponsive and hyperactive student mostly shows stress and  extreme nervousness. This student is overwhelmed by all the sensory  input and is feeling uncomfortable. They are in survival mode. The student living in their own little world By this, we mean a student who does nothing when a situation requires  active engagement. This student fails to take action. They dont respond  to their environment, including your encouragement to do something. You would think this student is underresponsive. There simply isnt  enough input coming in to get and keep them awake. But an overresponsive student can also be in their own little world. The student has  become so overresponsive that they retreat completely, to ensure no  more input can get in. In this case, you check the eyes, breathing, muscle  tension and emotion as well, to see if you are dealing with an underor  overresponsive student.

Before You Begin 105

In their own world and  underresponsive In their own world and  overresponsive Eyes Sleepysluggish little to no input  is getting in Avoids direct eye contact Breathing Relaxed abdominal breathing Tense chest breathing Muscle  tension Relaxed muscles, slouched  posture, sluggish movements Tense muscles, shoulders  hunched, when they move, the  movements are jerky Body and head turned away from  the hustle and bustle Emotions Not showing Fearful can have bursts of  extreme emotions Supportive  action Offer activating input that is not  disruptive for the student and  their environment Decrease input Offer calming input  Remove from situation The underresponsive student who is off in their own little world  mostly shows sleepysluggish behaviour and is relaxed. It can be  difficult to connect with this student; you have to call them multiple  times before they hear that the task is at an end and their stuff needs  to be put away. The overresponsive student who is off in their own little world will  show stress and tension. This student is overwhelmed by all the  sensory input and feels threatened. They will retreat and become  unresponsive. The SPI-viewing guide: Extra help  with Step 3, the assessment What do you do? Let it go or choose a strategy? When you have established whether the student is underor overresponsive, Step 3 will help you decide if you should interfere. You have  three choices:

Dont offer a strategy, because the students behaviour is helping  them gain better input balance and is not disruptive. They have  come up with their own solution and its working.

Choose a strategy for an underresponsive student, because  they will need more input to be comfortable and be able to  participate.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 106

Choose a strategy for an overresponsive student, because the  amount of input around them is bothering them and they need  to be calmed down andor be exposed to less input. If it ends with Step 3 If the student has their own strategy to restore their input balance and  its working fine, you will be done after Step 3. Or so you thought This is a great time to tell this student: Its fantastic you know exactly  what you need! Because this is the desired end goal: that they recognize  their needs and come up with solutions themselves. It is important to  acknowledge this. The information about the four types only matters, because the behaviours of an active and passive type are different. It is important  that you can recognize this to be able to tell if a student is underor  overresponsive. This is what you base your strategy on. The strategy  itself doesnt depend on active or passive behaviour. Eventually, you  will find just two categories with our strategies:

strategies for the underresponsive student

strategies for the overresponsive student. The SPI-viewing guide: Extra help   with Step 4, the strategy How to get off to a good start? Well begun is half done. With help from the instructions on the next  page, you will be off to a good start. By preparing your students and  coming to clear agreements, you will ensure the use of strategies will  not cause commotion. First of all, you tell the students why you will be working with short  activities that affect how they feel. We advise you to spend one or two  lessons on sensory processing, so the students will understand why these  new things are happening in their class. A short way to explain the goal  of these strategies is by telling them there are moments where their body  is too sleepy to learn properly, and there are other moments where they  are too restless or stressed to learn properly. A student who is too sleepy  to do what they have to do needs to be activated, and a student who is  too restless or stressed will need to be calmed down, or maybe even let 

Before You Begin 107 off steam to release tension. The goal is to get the student to be calm  and focused enough to perform their task as needed. The goal is always  to get the students alertness level to suit their task. Then you provide a few examples of strategies and try to mention  things the student is already doing of their own accord, such as fiddling  with a rubber band while they are reading. Afterwards, you discuss what the results of a strategy can be. When  you are fiddling with a rubber band while reading, you are able to stay  focused. You will tell them that it may not work the first time. Lets try  this a couple of times, shall we? Because we cant really tell if it helps or  not without practising and trying it a few times. The goal is always to get the students alertness level to suit  their task. Instructions for a good start

See if the student can think of what they need when a situation  arises. What could help you? and How can we make that  happen?

Practise with your students, so they can execute the strategies  appropriately.

When individual strategies are applied, you will explain these to  all students, so they understand what that one student is doing  and why. Make separate arrangements with the student who  needs these strategies, enabling them to self-regulate.

Explain how the students should behave while strategies are  executed:

Will they execute the strategy in silence?

Are they allowed to touch each other?

What will happen to the furniture?

Come to clear agreements with the students. Decide whether  they are allowed to fiddle with a shoelace or rubber band while  you are reading to the class, and if they are allowed to get up to  stretch during independent working moments.

Ask the student to pay attention to if they are feeling better and  are better equipped to perform their task.

Tell them how the strategy is finalized:

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 108

Separate arrangements have been made with the student for  individual strategies.

Its best that strategies involving the entire class always end  the same way, for example: everybody is back in their chairs  at the count of three, in silence. In Chapter 9, in Fixed  rituals in class, we will reflect on this extensively.

Steadily build up the use of strategies, so you and your students  can familiarize yourselves with them. Dont try too many new  things at once.

Slowly expand on the strategies you are using. Strategies  involving the entire class can first be applied during reading  time only, then also during circle time, then also during art,  etc. The individual strategy can first be applied to two students,  then four, and so on. Allow a trial period for each strategy. When the strategy has been practised and has been applied for a week, you should be able to see results.  The student should now really be capable of focusing better on their task.  If you dont see these changes, its time to try out a different strategy. The whole class, or individually  You choose to involve the whole class:

when the students are noisy and this doesnt go well with the  task set for them. Then you can use a calming strategy involving  the entire class. For instance, when you are discussing a test  and the kids are getting rowdy, you can ask all students to close  their eyes and lead them in a calming breathing exercise.

when the students are dozing off when they really should  be paying attention. Then youll use an activating strategy  involving the entire class. When the students have had to listen or read for an  extended time, they need to be activated before they can  continue. You should plan moments like this at least every  15 minutes when students have to sit still for a prolonged  period. Standing next to their chair for a minute and running  on the spot is done quickly and has scientifically been proven  to have a positive effect on the learning abilities of students see  Science about movement and learning in Chapter 7.

Before You Begin 109 You pick an individual strategy:

for the student who is bothered by their problematic sensory  processing the entire day. This student is suffering from problems with sensory  processing at various times during the day; there is no set  pattern. You probably recognize this student. Theyre the one  who gets distracted sometimes when they should be listening  to a fellow students presentation, a clip showing on the digital  whiteboard or the teacher explaining something. This same  student will drift off at some other moment, while working  independently. You can practise strategies with this student. When you  notice they are becoming distracted when listening, you can,  for instance, give them an agreed upon signal to write down key  words from what they are being told at that moment. During  independent working time they could always grab hearing  protection which they will use on their own initiative or after  receiving a signal from you.

for the student who is bothered by their sensory processing at  fixed moments. This student shows disruptive behaviour during specific  activities or times of the day. This is the student who is so  hyper when entering the classroom every morning that they  disturb you and their classmates by talking and running around  the classroom. That student who always needs a little extra  encouragement during independent reading time. Do the  exact same thing with this student: practise the strategies and  come to agreements about their execution, and decide together  at what moments and with what degree of independence  the student can execute the strategies. In the morning, for  example, they could take the chairs off the tables and wipe the  chalkboard clean; prior to independent reading time they could  run up and down the stairs twice and while reading they will  fiddle with a rubber band.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 110 How do you support the individual student?  You should come to individual agreements  with the student beforehand about when and  how they can execute their strategies. After  practising a few times, the student has a firm  understanding of what the possibilities are and  they can execute the strategies independently.  Should the student be unable to estimate on  their own when they need to use a strategy,  you and the student can think of a way for you  to help them with this. For example: when the  student exhibits disruptive behaviour, you will point to images  which  the student can make themselves  or you will act out the strategy, for  instance, by pretending you are putting on hearing protection.  The duration of a strategy You can choose from strategies ranging from a length of a few seconds to  a few minutes, although you can make most strategies last as long as you  want. When reading the strategy, it will become clear how much time is  needed. This will never be more than a few minutes and will regularly be  less than a minute. Besides that, you are free to do as you choose. You can:

have a student jump in place three times, or ten times

during a breathing exercise, have a student breathe in and out  three times before you continue the class, or have the students  pay attention to their breathing longer and with their eyes closed. You make a choice depending on whats needed activating or calming  and what you have space for; not just physically, but especially in terms  of time. When you have used the strategies a few times, you will have  a good idea of the possibilities. And the better you have practised the  strategies, the less time they will take. Interrupting class  or not  Take a situation where you are reading a story to the entire class. Some  students are starting to wiggle and fiddle. They are exhibiting restless  behaviour. You assess their behaviour and the situation. You think they  might be drifting off a little or they are self-regulating to be able to keep 

Before You Begin 111 following the story, but they are doing this in a disruptive manner. These  students need to be activated. You can stop reading and start stretching  with the whole class, after which you continue reading. You can also  choose to ask the restless students to grab their kneading putty and fiddle  with that in silence. The answer to the question Do I use a strategy during the lesson, or  do we stop what we are doing? depends on a couple of considerations:

Is everyone working independently? Choose individual strategies. During independent working  time youll probably choose not to disrupt the work.

Are all students ready to take a break  i.e. there are many  restless students  andor are you in-between two activities? This is a great time for a strategy involving the whole class.

Is there one student who needs to be activated or calmed?  Choose an individual strategy. How do you choose the right strategy?  First of all, you will have decided if you need a strategy for underor  overresponsivity, if this needs to applied to the entire class or individually  and where this strategy will be executed: on the chair, next to the chair  or in the classroom. However, within these choices there are several  different possibilities. Which strategy do you choose then?

Perhaps you dont need to choose, because the student has  already made a choice. See what type of self-regulation they are  already using:

If their own strategy is effective, you will not have to make a  choice at all. All you have to do is to give positive feedback,  so you will both know what their successful strategy is.

If their own strategy is not working or if it is disruptive, you  will offer an alternative option.

Look at your own sensory processing when choosing a strategy.  If you dont like having a lot of movement or fuss around you,  choose in your seat strategies.

Look at practical issues: no drinking water when using the  computer, for example.

Talk to the student: what do they think they will need to be able  to continue with their task? You can give them a choice, if the 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 112 student has not yet had much practice with using strategies.  Limit the choice to two options; making a decision can also be a  taxing job.

Start with the strategies that appeal to you most, and that fit in  the room when it comes to space and materials. For instance,  you could choose an activating strategy involving the entire  class, where the students march on the spot. This strategy is  appealing to you and there is enough space in the classroom to  execute it.

See if the strategy has the desired effect. Maybe the students  arent responding the way you want them to. They might be  getting more active, but the marching is making them rather  hyperactive. If this is still the case after having practised a couple of  times, choose a different strategy. For example, this time you  will start stretching and try to touch the ceiling. Very activating,  but everyone remains nice and quiet.

Decide whats best in that moment:

Do you want a sitting-down or standing-up strategy?

Is there time and space to move around the classroom?

How long can the strategy last?

What would you yourself prefer to be doing? There are so many strategies that there is bound to be one for every  moment and situation. And after having read all our examples, you might  think of even more strategies that suit you and your students perfectly. When you are in doubt about whether your student is underor overresponsive, always choose a strategy for an overresponsive student. What if you are in doubt about the student  being underor overresponsive? A strategy is necessary, because the student isnt feeling comfortable  and cant handle their task. But you are in doubt about whether they  are underor overresponsive. Therefore, you dont know what type of  strategy to choose. In this case, you will always choose a strategy for an 

Before You Begin 113 overresponsive student. It is never a bad thing to remove input, but it  can be counterproductive to add input at the wrong time. The reasons  for this are outlined below. Strategies for overresponsive students are generally calming

The effect of a calming strategy on an underresponsive student:  they are even less alert, because input is removed when they  need it. Not ideal, but not damaging. When this happens, at  least you dont have to doubt the situation anymore. You can  now see more clearly that the student is underresponsive  and you will consequently choose a fitting strategy. Compare it  to: you are lying on the couch, feeling groggy, and you get a cup  of tea. It doesnt change the grogginess; it might even make you  feel groggier, but its not a problem either.

The effect of a calming strategy on an overresponsive student:  they will start to feel better. This is good. Strategies for underresponsive students are generally activating

The effect of an activating strategy on an underresponsive  student: it enables them to better respond to their environ ment. Fine.

Butthe effect of an activating strategy on an overresponsive  student is even more stress and tension. This is very unpleasant  for the student and you want to prevent this. Compare it to:  you are lying on the couch with a headache and someone puts  on really loud music. This will make you feel worse. As you can see, offering an activating strategy to an overresponsive  student can exacerbate the situation. The student, who is already overresponsive, is receiving more sensory input and cannot process this. You  want to prevent this, so, when in doubt, first choose a strategy suited to  the overresponsive student.  Pay close attention to the first response of the student to the strategy  you are offering, and if necessary, adjust the strategy accordingly.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 114 What do you need? In theory, you only need yourself and the students. Most of the strategies  are very easy to understand and execute. You dont have to download  video clips, mark the floor with xs or move to specific songs in special  ways. The only things you have to do are:

notice disruptive behaviour

put on SPI-Glasses

choose a strategy

witness success. There are strategies that use special tools, such as a balance cushion or  chewing materials. The rest use general basic household supplies where  possible. The student can fiddle with shoelaces, feel Velcro strips and  wiggle their legs while sitting in their chair. At what pace should a strategy be executed? A couple of the strategies from the next chapters can be found under  both activating and calming strategies. This has to do with the fact that  the way a strategy is executed influences whether it has an activating or  calming effect. There are a few rules for this: Activating Calming Move quickly Move slowly Vary Repeat Move irregularly Move rhythmically Changes Not too much variation Unexpected things Expected things New things Familiar things Brief activity Longer lasting activity In the following cartoons, you will see that the same strategy can be  executed in an activating and calming way. 

Before You Begin 115 BREATHING EXERCISE, ACTIVATING  Breathe in powerfully  and deep through  your nose. Hold for two  seconds. Make an O with your lips  and breathe out in one  powerful breath.  Everybody, count to  five out loud. ONE, TWO,  THREE, FOUR,  FIVE! Okay, well  do that  again.  Dont tell the students in advance how many times the exercise will be repeated. Repeat two to five times.  BREATHING EXERCISE, CALMING Close your  eyes. We are doing a breathing  exercise, and we will repeat it  five times. Breathe in through  your nose slowly. As  deep as you can. Feel  how your lungs are  filling with air. Hold for three  seconds; 1, 2, 3.  Breathe out  through your  mouth. Slowly and with  relaxed lips. Okay   Were doing  that again,  keep your  eyes closed. PRESSING THE PALMS OF YOUR HANDS  TOGETHER, ACTIVATING Put your palms together, look: like this. Press them against  each other as hard  as you can. Come on, press  harder! And keep  breathing, please! 8, 9, 10 and  let go. We will do that  again, here  we go!

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 116 PRESSING THE PALMS OF YOUR HANDS  TOGETHER, CALMING Press the palms of  your hands together,  like this.  Close  your  eyes. We will repeat this  exercise five times. Press your hands together,  building pressure slowlyuntil  you are pressing hard, but not  with full force.  Keep breathing  calmly, 1, 2, 3, 4,  5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and release. Keep  your eyes closed,  lets do it again. Tools Strategies for which tools can be used will be regularly discussed in the  next chapters. Many of these tools are available in regular stores.  Whats the difference between energizers  and relaxation exercises? The internet offers an abundance of energizers and relaxation exercises  to use in class. These games and exercises can be played on the digital  whiteboard andor contain directions for the teacher. By doing the exercises and playing the games, the students will regain energy or will be  able to relax. You may have a few favourite energizers and relaxation  exercises of your own which you use in class. The goals of the energizers  and relaxation exercises partly overlap with the goals of our strategies.  However, there are differences between them. Strategies Energizers and relaxation exercises Are prompted by disruptive behaviour  The cause of this behaviour is underor  overresponsivity Arent always meant as a solution to  certain behaviour Are deployed for a specific purpose Dont have to be part of a specific vision Are executed with the whole class or  individually Are generally done with the whole class Can be executed independently Are performed under supervision Can be executed while doing class work Are mainly done between activities Often take less than one minute Generally need more preparation time

Before You Begin 117 It needs getting used to  And then, suddenly, theres a student getting up during class to stretch,  while another does push-ups in-between maths exercises and a third is  wearing a necklace they are chewing on. When you start using strategies to support sensory processing, the  classroom is going to look a little different. Usually, hats, hoodies and  sunglasses are not accepted in class. But when viewed through SPIGlasses, they are incredibly useful tools for the student who is easily  distracted and cant get to work because of this. Because you are now able  to look at behaviour through SPI-Glasses, you can see the advantages of  this strategy. You no longer see a hoody, but a protection device against  input, a tool to help combat interfering input. It would be a waste not  to use such a good tool. Based on this idea, you can come to agreements  with the students about when and how long they can use such tools. To prevent confusion Miss Lynn allows kids to wear their hoody, so  weird, its a good idea to announce this new approach. Then, everybody  will know why hats, hoodies or sunglasses can be worn in certain situations, for example during independent working time.
5  Strategies in the Classroom Whats this chapter about? In this chapter, we provide more than two hundred strategies for you to  execute in class to improve sensory processing. We categorize the strategies as activating and calming. In addition, we categorize the strategies  according to where they can be done in the classroom  sitting on or  standing next to your chair or moving around the classroom. TO DO: ACTIVATE  While reading this book, your attention could be dropping a little as well. You  are actually underresponsive. A good time to test the waters and try out one of  our strategies! Take some time after each strategy to experience how it affects  your alertness and how long this effect lasts.

Put the palms of your hands together, fingers pointing upwards, and  push them against each other as hard as you can, while continuing  to breathe calmly hold for ten seconds and repeat the exercise three  times.

Only do this second one if you dont have back or neck problems: stand  up from your chair and drop yourself back into the chair.

Take three powerful breaths. Breathe in through your nose and out  through your mouth. When breathing out for the last time, make it  extra powerful.

Stand next to your chair and run on the spot for ten seconds. These are short and simple activities which will provide long-lasting energy.  They give a taste of the possibilities and how fast they work.

Strategies in the Classroom 119 Activating and calming One student may need extra input, whereas another may need input  removed. Therefore, we have categorized the strategies as activating  and calming. Activating is to be used for the underresponsive student,  calming for the overresponsive student.

Some of the calming strategies are meant for blowing off steam,  for example by moving or fiddling with something. Assessing  what the student needs can be done with the help of the SPI  viewing guide in Chapter 4.

Some strategies can be executed in both an activating and a  calming manner. Revisit the section in Chapter 4, At what  pace should a strategy be executed? This explains how certain  strategies can have both an activating and calming effect.

A few strategies will be further explained in Chapter 7. There,  we will explain why some strategies are activating or calming,  tell you more about helpful tools and provide information from  scientific studies concerning some of the strategies. Notes

When you is used in the strategies, it refers to the student. You,  the teacher, provide instruction and demonstrate the exercise.

In the exercises, you will see some words are italicized. This  indicates mention of tools that arent general household items  and should therefore be organized before starting.

The locations where the strategies should be executed have  been divided into different categories: in your chair, next to  your chair or in the classroom.

 Our favourite strategies have been marked with an asterisk. In your chair First, we will look at the strategies that can be executed by the student  while sitting in their chair. They are predominantly very simple and short  activities. Most of these strategies can be executed while the student  is thinking, listening or reading. They are highly suited to individual  execution. Nevertheless, most strategies can also be executed with the  entire class.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 120 The underresponsive student needs a little extra input every now and  then. This extra input stimulates them to get or stay focused on their  work. Activating input doesnt always require them to leave their chair.  Below, you will find different options for the student to fulfil their extra  input requirements while staying seated. Activating in your chair Fingers 

Overstretch your fingers by pushing against them  or pressing them down on the table or in your lap.

Squeeze your hands, twist and fiddle with your fingers, press your thumb into the palm of your other  hand.

Fiddle with silent materials, such as a kneaded eraser,  rubber bands or a shoelace.

Create a figure or necklace from paperclips, then  untangle the paperclips.

Fiddle with the soft side the soft side doesnt make much noise of  Velcro which has been attached to the underside of your desk.

Craft something, using finger paint, glue, adhesive tape and other sticky  materials.

Rapidly squeeze a kneaded eraser, or a rubber stress ball. 

Move a pen or pencil through the fingers of one hand.

Play Simon Says, with finger movements.

Tap your fingers on the table, repeating the rhythm the teacher or a  fellow student is tapping the overresponsive student might want to  put on hearing protection during this exercise. Head 

Grab your hair and softly pull it.

Rub your face firmly with your fingers or your  entire hand.

Softly pull your ears; grab your ears between your  thumb and forefinger and firmly massage them.

Firmly and quickly rub your fingers on your forehead and your temples.

Firmly and in a controlled manner, shake your head no we use no, 

Strategies in the Classroom 121 because firmly shaking yes can be painful when the head is overextended backwards.

Move your head: bend your head forwards, backwards and to the sides,  turn your head clockwise and anticlockwise. Mouth

Chew on specially designed chewing tools. 

Chew pieces of sugar free chewing gum. 

Drink water from a water bottle:

drink water with lemon or lime 

drink ice water

drink through a straw. 

Bring activating items in your lunchsnack box:

crunchy foods, such as carrots and apples

heavy-duty chewing foods, such as raisins, dried fruits, sugar free  chewing gum

citrus fruits and drinks

strong flavours mustard, hot sauce, wasabi

yoghurt or apple sauce, to drink through a straw.

Take a couple of deep breaths. Breathe in through your nose, hold for  two seconds and breathe out through your mouth. Repeat this two to  five times. Breathe out strongly the last time.

Use a straw to blow cotton balls over the table into an open goal. 

Put a pencil on the table and blow this across on the table, taking care  it stays on the table.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 122 Arms

Wave.

Put the palms of your hands together, fingers pointing upwards, and  push them together as hard as you can, while keeping on breathing. 

Push your hands firmly and quickly against your body on your legs, on  your arms, against each other.

Push yourself up slowly put your hands on the seat of your chair, lift  your feet off the ground and push, so your bottom doesnt touch the  seat.

Try to lift your chair by its seat, while sitting on it.

Stretch your body completely.  Legs 

Push your feet against an elastic band tied between the feet of the chair or the table.

Sit with your legs crossed.

Lift your heels and toes a few times, as high as  you can, alternating feet.

Roll your feet wearing socks or barefoot over  a spiky massage ball. 

Put one footlower leg on the seat of your chair  and sit on it.

Wrap your legs around the legs of the chair or  table and tense your leg muscles.

Put one leg over the other and wiggle the upper leg.

Strategies in the Classroom 123 Posture 

Change your sitting position: for example, slouch  down with your legs spread wide, put your legs  over each other or put one leg up.

Turn your chair around, sit down, straddling the  chair, with your belly against the back of the chair.

Do the back-of-the-chair stretch. See This is  how you do it, below. 

Sit on a balance cushion for a short while maximum of half an hour at a time.

Balance on two legs of your chair.

Lie down across your chair, on your back, with  your head leaning down. Other 

Listen to music on an MP3 player or other music carrier.

Write down key words about what is being taught that moment.

Use, if possible, an appealing notebook and book, and a pretty pen  with lots of colours.

Use a pen with bumps or ridges on the outside. 

Use a coloured andor scented pen. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 124 This is how you do it Turn to one side, grab the back of the chair with both your  hands and try to turn your upper body as far as you can  while your knees keep pointing forward.  The overresponsive student needs time every now and  then to recover from all the input. A calming strategy  ensures they will calm down and allow them to learn.  The student can perform most of these strategies  alone and independently, without any fuss, while  sitting in their own chair. Calming down in your chair Fingers 

Use hand lotion with a pleasant scent. Smell your hand regularly. Do this  during a difficult task or to mask unpleasant smells.

Slowly squeeze a rubber stress ball. 

Fiddle with quiet materials, such as kneaded erasers, a rubber band,  koosh ball or shoelace. 

Play string games: make figures using a piece of wool or string. 

Craft something in a way that you dont get sticky stuff on your fingers:

make sure you are the one cutting and tearing during the crafts  projects, instead of being the one gluing things

use a brush instead of your fingers during finger painting

use paint markers instead of paint

use a tape dispenser instead of loose tape

use tweezers instead of your fingers to hold things.

Take a big ring from a key chain and put it around your fingers, one by  one.

Tap each finger against your thumb three times, both hands separately  or at the same time.

Use the sign alphabet to spell out your name. 

Spread your fingers as far as you can, make fists and relax. Repeat a  couple of times. 

Entwine your fingers, separate them, play with them.

Squeeze one hand with your other hand, squeeze your fingers and then  do this with your other hand. 

Strategies in the Classroom 125 Head

Very slowly pull your ears; down, to the side and up. Close your eyes  and make sure your breathing is calm.

Calmly rub your temples and your forehead with your fingertips. 

Softly massage your head with your fingers:  put your fingers on your head and slowly  circle them around. You can close your  eyes while doing this. 

Rub your face calmly with the flats of your  hands, out from your nose to your ears.

Put your hands on top of your head and  press down softly.

Pull up the hood of your sweater or put on  a cap. 

Put on sunglasses.

Slowly turn your head, stretching your neck  and shoulder muscles.

Put a small pillow on your desk and lay your head down on it. Ears

Put on a hearing protection aid or put in ear plugs no more than twice  a day for a maximum of half an hour. 

Put in ear plugs for listening to music.

Listen to nature sounds sea, rain, birds, etc.

Listen to a story being read to you, by a teacher or a fellow student.

What you, as a teacher, can do:

Tell rhymes, instead of a story.

Play a game where sounds must be identified. The students listen  closely to the sounds happening in school and around it.

Turn a metronome to 60 beats per minute and let the students listen  to this with their eyes closed. There are apps for the phone or tablet  that have adjustable metronomes. Mouth

Chew specially made chewing tools.

Chew a piece of sugar free chewing gum. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 126

Try to yawn.

Drink water at a neutral temperature, through a straw. 

Close your eyes and calmly breathe into your lower abdomen. Breathe  in through your nose, hold for three seconds and breathe out calmly  through your mouth. Repeat this five to ten times.

Put your hands on your stomach, close your eyes and breathe calmly.  Ensure you can feel your belly expanding when you breathe in, and deflate when you breathe out. Breathe in through your nose, out through  your mouth. Repeat this five to ten times. Arms

Put the palms of your hands together, fingers pointing up, and press  them firmly against each other. See This is how you do it, below.  Slowly build the pressure when youre doing this, and keep breathing.

Push your hands on the desk try to push the desk into the ground.

Push yourself up slowly put your hands on the seat of your chair, lift  your feet off the ground and push, so your bottom doesnt touch  the seat.

Try to lift your chair by its seat, while sitting on it.

Massage your own shoulders, the right shoulder  with your left hand and vice versa.

Let a classmate calmly massage your shoulders. Tell  them if you want it to be done more firmly, less  firmly, slower or faster.

Calmly rub your skin and your clothes.

Put a big shawl around your shoulders and upper  arms and pull it tightly around yourself.  Legs

Stretch your legs in front of you and slowly rub your hands up and down  from your upper legs to your shins or feet.

Stretch your legs as far as you can and wiggle your feet up and down,  as if you are treading water.

Put your feet up with your toes on the ground and shake your legs. Posture

Rock your body back and forth.

Strategies in the Classroom 127

Turn your chair around and sit down, straddling the chair, with your  belly against the back of the chair. Cross your arms on the back of the  chair and rest your head on your arms. Other

Put on something warm or pull a blanket around yourself.

Work in a quiet place in the classroom for example, using a privacy  shield.

Quietly count back from ten to one. Or from a higher number, if  necessary. This is how you do it  Put the palms of your hands together, fingers pointing up.  Press your hands together for ten seconds, breathing continuously this is, in most cases, an instruction everybody  really needs. Let go for two seconds, then repeat. This technique can be applied to be both activating  and calming. See the explanation on activating and calming executions in Chapter 4. Next to your chair The following strategies can be executed by the student while standing  next to their chair. These, too, are quick and easy to execute, and particularly suited to be executed by the whole class. For instance, when attention is fading during an exercise in comprehensive listening activating  or when there is too much noise and excitement calming. The student can execute these strategies next to their chair during  independent working time as well, because there are several strategies  that involve little noise. These strategies offer the underresponsive student the possibility to  move more vigorously than when they remain seated. Our most popular tip is: work standing up!

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 128 Activate next to your chair Little space for movement needed

Work standing up, at an elevated work surface; this can  also be a cabinet or windowsill. 

Stand up and drop yourself in your chair.

Stretch, making yourself as tall as possible try touching  the ceiling.

Give your lungs some space: breathe in deeply while you  stretch your arms up and move them backwards to give  your chest as much space as possible and breathe out  while bringing your arms down again.

Gently shake your arms, legs and head.

Balance on one leg first, then the other with or  without your hands on your back or your head.

Everybody stand up and sing a song.

Wave.

Clap your hands. Mimic the rhythm of the teacher  or a classmate.

Do repetition exercises, such as multiplication tables,  while standing up and possibly while marching.

Stand up while listening to an explanation or when  the teacher is reading to the class; you can shift from  your toes to your heels, but do stay in the same spot. More space for movement needed

Mirror a classmate: stand in front of each other and mirror each others  movements. Do this as fluently as possible, so it is unclear who starts  and who follows. 

Strategies in the Classroom 129

Alternate between performing a movement for the other student  to copy and copying the other students movement.

Bend forwards to touch the ground; try keeping your knees extended.

Bend forward, with your head between your legs.

Stand next to your chair and successively tap: 

your right hand on your left knee

your left hand on your right knee

your right hand on your left foot, along the front

your left hand on your right foot, along the front

your right hand on your left foot, along the back

your left hand on your right foot, along the back

and start again from the beginning.

Jump up and down on the spot:

with your hands in the air

try and touch the ceiling

jump low

do jumping jacks. 

Stamp your feet on the spot providing this isnt a nuisance to other  classes.

March on the spot, lifting your knees as high as you can.

Run on the spot.

Dance on the spot, to music, if possible.

Sing and participate in a movement song, such as head-shouldersknees-and-toes. Sometimes its nice for the student to get out of their chair for a bit  to calm down. For example, when overresponsivity has caused so much  tension to accumulate, its nice to get rid of that tension through big  movements. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 130 Calming next to your chair Little space needed

Lie on your back, with your legs up against the  desk or on your chair.

Stretch, using slow movements. For example:

put one leg on your chair and bend forward towards your toes

grab your hands behind your back and  extend and flex your back. 

Rock from left to right and forwards and backwards.

Move your hands in big circles slowly turning the steering wheel.

Slowly point from the ceiling to the wall and then the floor.

Slowly draw figures such as geometric or fantasy shapes, letters or  numbers in the air, in front of you or on the ceiling. You can alternate  between using your left and your right hand or use them simultaneously.

Stand up straight, your arms relaxed next to your body and your eyes  closed. Focus on your breathing. Breathe in slowly, into your lower  abdomen, hold for three seconds and breathe out slowly through your  mouth. Repeat this five to ten times.

Stand up straight, your arms relaxed next to your body and your eyes  closed. Focus on your body. First your feet, then your lower legs, your  knees and upwards through your entire body. Breathe in deeply, once,  then breathe out calmly. Open your eyes and sit down.

Stand up straight, your arms relaxed next to your body and your eyes  closed. Push your arms into your body as hard as you can, hold for three  seconds and let go. Pull your shoulders up as high as you can, hold for  three seconds and let go.

Strategies in the Classroom 131 More space needed

Slowly draw figures in the air, starting out  really big, then slowly making them smaller,  until they are as small as you can draw them.

Let your upper body hang forwards bend forwards at the hips, let your arms hang down. 

Sit down on the ground, pull your knees up,  wrap your arms around your legs and pull  your legs towards your body as tightly as  you can. 

Stand up and spread your arms to the side,  look over your right hand. Breathe in deeply, into  your lower abdomen. When breathing out, turn to  your right, as far as you can. See what point on the  wall your fingers are pointing to. Turn back and repeat. Are you getting past the point on the wall you  reached before? Repeat to the left. In the classroom For these strategies, the students will need more space. Theyre very  appropriate for times when students have been sitting still for a while  and there is no break or gym class coming up. A few strategies are more  suitable for the underresponsive student who needs more movement than  others. This student can be sent to do chores, for instance. You can also  use the whole classroom to offer everyone a chance to catch their breath,  for example when theyve just had an intense lesson or a test, or as a  strategy preceding an exciting event. It can also be nice for the underresponsive student to get away from  their spot completely and be allowed to move around the entire classroom. Being able to make big movements provides them with the opportunity to regain their alertness. Activating in the classroom Individual

Do chores that require moving around:

take the chairs off the tables

hand out materials

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 132

wipe the chalkboard or whiteboard clean

water the plants using a watering can filled all the way up, because  that will be heavy, which has an activating effect

sweep a part of the classroom with a broom.

Wash your hands using cold water.

Stand on a balance board while answering the teachers questions.

Walk around while trying to solve a problem. For the whole class

Perform a call and response song.

Do the crab-walk without touching  other students walking sideways on  hands and feet, while your bottom is  pointing to the floor.

March through the classroom, without touching people or things.

Lie on your back, knees bent, feet flat  on the floor. Make a bridge by lifting  your bottom as high as you can.

Turn around in circles on your bottom: sit on the floor with your arms  wrapped around your knees and make circles,  without falling over. 

Jump around the classroom can also be done  with frog jumps.

Crawl around the classroom.

Dance to music. 

Listen or dance to activating music such as  dance or house music or rock n roll.

Push with stretched arms:

against a wall or windowsill; trying to make  the classroom bigger 

against a classmates hands. See This is how you do it, below.

Strategies in the Classroom 133

Walk around in circles through the classroom without touching things  or people.

Play patty cake or other clapping  games or songs.

Do the coffee grinder: put one arm  on the floor, stretched, put your feet  as far away from your arm as you can  and now walk around your arm in a  circle. 

Sit down in front of a fellow student,  legs wide, feet touching each other.  Grab each others wrists and move  forwards and backwards as far as you  can rowing.  This is how you do it  Have students stand in front of each other  and have them put their hands flat against  each other. The goal is for them to push each  others hands as hard as they can, without the  other falling over. When one of the students  says stop, both will calmly stop pushing. There are fewer options that utilize the entire classroom for calming down. Moving  around the classroom can easily lead to activation. This is because of all the obstacles  in the classroom and all the students you  might bump into. Its best to relax while  sitting down or standing still, or walking  around outside the classroom. The overresponsive student can do their own, personal chores; chores  that dont require them to walk around a lot, but that offer them the  possibility to find a quiet place. Calming in the classroom Individual

Do calming chores: 

sharpen pencils

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 134

staple papers together preferably slightly bigger piles of paper

use a hole puncher to punch holes in paper preferably slightly bigger  piles of paper

clean the fish tank.

Watch the fish in the fish tank this can also be done on a screen.

Count or look at the shoes of everyone in the classroom.

Retreat to a corner, for example with a bean bag or big box to sit in. For the whole class

Put on calming music slow tempo and listen to it. Look for a space in  the classroom that feels comfortable, or stay in your chair.

Walk through the classroom in slow motion, touching nothing and  nobody.

What you, as a teacher, can do:

Let students find their own spot in the classroom where they can  comfortably sit, stand or lie down. Have them close their eyes and  read a relaxing visualization Imagine you are lying on a blanket  in the sun, you hear the birds sing softly. Use a book, podcast  or other source that has visualizations for children. Search words  are visualizations, relaxation and guided meditation. You might  include the word children. 

Use yoga exercises for children. There are many examples available  online.
6  Strategies Outside  the Classroom Whats this chapter about? In this chapter, we provide strategies for situations outside the classroom,  for example in the hallway or in PE lessons. We also look at situations in  the playground and during school gatherings. Furthermore, we provide  strategies for when you are out and about, such as on a school trip, on  the bus to swimming lessons or during an excursion. Activating and calming One student may need extra input, whereas another may need input  removed. Therefore, we have categorized the strategies as activating  and calming. Activating is to be used for the underresponsive student,  calming for the overresponsive student. 

Some of the calming strategies are meant for blowing off steam,  for example by moving or fiddling with something. Assessing  what the student needs can be done with the help of the SPIviewing guide in Chapter 4.

Some strategies can be executed in both an activating and a  calming manner. Revisit the section in Chapter 4, At what  pace should a strategy be executed? This explains how certain  strategies can have both an activating and calming effect.

A few strategies will be further explained in Chapter 7. There,  we will explain why some strategies are activating or calming,  tell you more about tools and provide information from  scientific studies concerning some of the strategies.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 136 Notes

When you is used in the strategies, it refers to the student. You,  the teacher, provide instruction and demonstrate the exercise.

In the exercises, you will see that some words are italicized. This  indicates mention of tools that arent general household items  and should therefore be organized before starting. Four types  For each part, we first look at the individual situation. We explain what  the differences with the situation in the classroom are. Then, examples  of reactions from the underresponsive and overresponsive student are  discussed. The examples are somewhat exaggerated, so its easier to  recognize the type of student. Once again, we distinguish four types of  student, as they appear in the SPI-viewing guide.

Actively underresponsive needs extra input and looks for it. 

Passively underresponsive needs extra input and doesnt look  for it.

Actively overresponsive is bothered by input and avoids it.

Passively overresponsive is bothered by input and doesnt  avoid it. Leaving the classroom Situation  When you move from one space to another with your students, a lot  needs to be done. Everyone needs to:

hear what is going to happen, where, how long it will take and  so on

clean up their things

Strategies outside the Classroom 137

bring the right things

bring their coat andor bag

leave the room

stand in a line

walk away at the same time. Behaviour  The underresponsive student has difficulty following instructions and  performing all those actions. They do not get the instructions very well  and are less aware of what is required of them. They dont receive all the  information. This student can be overly active in order to experience  more input active. But they can also be a bit sluggish, for example they  get in the way passive. Activating while changing locations

Give the student a task, a responsibility, that is linked to the transition  to the next activity. The task provides focus, which helps alertness.  For instance:

carrying part of the required materials

holding doors open

counting classmates and reporting whether everyone is there.

Pair the student who absorbs less information with a student who  knows what needs to be done.

Give the student something in their hands to fiddle with.

Have the student jump up and down five times before you leave.

Let the student lead the way, keep the doors open for everyone and  then race-walk to the front again limit disturbance by having them  do this in silence.

Let the student run up and down the stairs before walking along.

Have the student walk hand in hand with another student.

Give the student a place in the middle of the line or group, so they  receive sensory input from classmates all around them, in terms of  sounds, movement and touch. The overresponsive student has problems with changing environments. Unfamiliar input is introduced, which requires a lot of attention. The student  mainly wants to keep their distance from others and is not flexible active,  or they are irritated and therefore snappy and easily angered passive.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 138 Calming while changing locations

Give the student things to carry; the weight has a calming effect:

a stack of books for the library

PE equipment

materials that will be used in the other room.

Give the student something they can fiddle with in their hands.

Prepare the overresponsive student in good time if the transition is an  exception, so they know what to expect as much as possible. Let them  know when they will return to the familiar schedule, to the routine.

Also announce scheduled activities that require changing location, for  example: In 15 minutes we will go to the PE hall.

See if it is possible for a student who is upset every morning because  of the hustle and bustle in the corridor to enter the room first or last  in the morning, when everyone is already sitting and the corridors are  almost empty.

Have the student take their coat and bag first or last, so they do not end  up in the crowd when everyone is grabbing their coat and bag.

Have the student hang their coat on the side of the coat rack in an easily  accessible place.

Have the student join the line last, so that there is no hustle behind  them, they have a good overview and the chances of being touched  unexpectedly are lower.

If possible, avoid busy moments in the corridor, or let the overresponsive  student go into the corridor before or after a busy moment.

Give the overresponsive student the choice whether to walk hand in  hand.

Have the student put on a cap or hoody when they are in the corridor. In the changing room Situation  It is usually noisy in the changing room. There is an excited atmosphere  and people are talking and laughing out loud. The underresponsive student will feel fine because of this, because  they experience more input. They are having fun and are getting dressed  active. If there still isnt enough input to activate them, their thoughts  will wander and getting dressed will go slower passive. 

Strategies outside the Classroom 139 Activating in the dressing room

Make sure the student is standing up while changing clothes, instead  of sitting down.

Ask the student to take off their shoes and socks first so feeling the cool  floor can activate them. Have them put on their trainers last.

Connect the student with a classmate and have them improve their  personal changing record. In silence. Let the partner count silently or  use a stopwatch. 

Keep extra PE clothing at school if the student often forgets to bring  it from home.

Attach a list to the PE bag with everything it needs to contain.

If possible, talk to the student, ask questions, make jokes. Behaviour  The overresponsive student will mostly be bothered by the proximity of  others and by smells, movements and sounds. They will try to claim their  own space, as far away from others as possible active. The smaller and  noisier the dressing room is, the tenser this student will get, and they  might become withdrawn or angry. This student is in survival mode and  is therefore unable to communicate properly passive. Calming in the dressing room 

Provide this student with  a quiet place in the dressing room.

Let the student create a  routine, so they always  put on their clothes in the  same order. They could put this order on a laminated card to hang on  their PE bag. This could say:

Take off coat and shoes. Hang up coat.

Take off and hang up trousers and shirt.

Put on PE bottoms.

Put on PE shirt.

Put on trainers. The back of the card could show the order for getting dressed after  PE class.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 140

Have the student use hearing protection e.g. ear defenders in the  dressing room.

Bring PE clothes that are easy to put on and take off. This will be less  frustrating: bottoms with an elastic waistband; trainers with Velcro; a  baggy T-shirt. 

This also applies to regular clothing. For example, clothing thats easily  fastened and socks and shoes that can easily be taken off and put on. 

Put up long hair or wear it in a braid on PE days. In the PE hall Situation The PE hall is a large space where students move, climb, run and throw  balls. The atmosphere is exuberant; people talk louder than in the  classroom. For the underresponsive student, the PE hall is a space in which they  look for sensory input and where they can move around freely. They  can be clumsy sometimes, and bump into classmates and PE equipment.  Bumping into people and things can also occur because its nice to get  more sensory input, just like when they are running or walking on their  toes active. The underresponsive student who is less easily engaged  in the lesson may be sitting or standing a bit slouched and may not be  absorbing all the instructions passive. Activating in PE

Have the student do an activity that wakes up their body before doing  complex exercises or giving them longer instructions to process. For  example:

sprinting

jumping jacks

swinging on the ropes or  gymnastic rings

climbing

jumping on a small trampoline.

Even while waiting for their turn, the student could occasionally do  jumping jacks or sprints. Come to clear agreements about this, so it  doesnt disturb the game or exercise.

Have the student listen to instructions while standing up instead of  sitting down make sure they stay in the same place by indicating that 

Strategies outside the Classroom 141 place, for example on a floor line or with a cross, dot or a mat. They  can rock from their toes to their heels.

Let the student help with the preparation, shifting or distribution of  materials.

Use a powerful voice and varying rhythm when giving individual instructions or encouragement. Behaviour  For the overresponsive student, the PE hall is a turbulent place, full of  relative chaos during games, with lots of sounds, movement and physical  contact with classmates. For this student, movement has a calming effect,  it gives them an opportunity to get rid of the tension that has accumulated because of overresponsivity. They will defend their personal space  through clear instructions and signals to others, verbally and physically  active. They might also start grumbling and get angry or start crying  because they are scared passive. Calming in PE

Give the student space:

let them sit or stand on the sidelines

let them go first or last discuss this with the student so they know  why they are always the first or last

with the busier games you can see if there is a task for the student on  the sidelines of the game. Refereeing, counting exercises or keeping  time are just a few suggestions. This way, they can participate, but  without getting completely overstimulated. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 142

Respect that the overresponsive student may be anxious to have their  feet off the floor and can be fearful when climbing.

Use a calm voice when giving individual instructions or encouragement.  Enthusiastic encouragement can be far too much in terms of sensory  input, causing the student to become overwhelmed.

Running laps can help eliminate the frustration and irritation of  overresponsivity.

If necessary, have the overresponsive student relax in a quiet corner. In the playground Situation The playground is a space with a lot of freedom. There is less direct  supervision than in the classroom and students can choose their own  activities. There is a lot of noise and movement; the chances of being  touched by fellow students are high. Similarly to in the PE hall, the underresponsive student can come into  their own in the playground, because there are many opportunities to get  extra input. They are moving enthusiastically, sometimes being clumsy  again and bumping into others active. The underresponsive student  who is not very active hangs around at the edge of the playground or isnt  aware of all the rules of a game, possibly leading to them getting into a  fight with fellow students passive. Activating in the playground

If the student cant come up with ideas themselves, discuss with them  what they can do:

build an insect house

write their name with twigs and leaves

use chalk to create a big drawing on the ground or on a wall when  making large drawings, the student moves more, which is activating

participate in a game.

Make sure the student spends enough time on the playground equipment, because movement will activate them.

Use the playground outside of breaks as well:

allow the student to run a lap for example, before doing a test

have the student sweep the playground, along with other classmates  who can use some exercise too.

Strategies outside the Classroom 143

Consult with the clumsy student who often bumps into classmates, who  then get angry as a result.

Decide on a signal classmates can give when there is a collision. This  way there wont be an argument and the student becomes more aware  of their behaviour.

Give the student an active role so they get more movement input. For  example, they always go to retrieve the ball when it rolls off the field.  Moving keeps them sharp.

Make sure that the student keeps moving, even when they have to  wait for a while or during quieter games such as marbles. Let them do  jumping jacks, for example. Behaviour  The overresponsive student wont be quick to get involved in the bustle,  but will do their own thing. For example, they can hang around at the  edge of the playground and chat with friends or walk around on their  own. If they engage in play, they want it done their way active. The  overresponsive student can quickly become irritated during play due to  the large amount of input. They forgot how much input there is during  a game. So they join, but then stop after four minutes, dead tired from  the sensory overload passive. Keep in mind that, for a seriously overresponsive student, playtime  can be a moment to unwind as well. Overresponsive children can enjoy  moments alone. Calming in the playground

Provide a space in the playground where there are no balls and where  people do not run: for example, create a quiet place to sit in the  playground.

Offer materials for calmer andor more individual play:

playing marbles provides an opportunity to play together without  physical contact and bumping into each other 

passing a ball around provides the same opportunity

skipping rope offers the possibility of blowing off steam. This can be  done alone or together. If more than one student participates, the  overresponsive student can turn the rope

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 144

playing hopscotch can help with blowing off steam as well. Once  again, this can be done alone or together, without physical contact

bouncing a tennis ball off the wall can be done on your own, but  also with others.

Have the student wear a hearing protector or earbuds for listening to  music. 

Allow the student to withdraw. Have the student relax in a quiet place  during break. And perhaps more often than just during the scheduled  breaks. During gatherings Situation  During gatherings  such as the Christmas celebration, a concert or a  play  many children are together in a limited space. The students usually  sit side by side on benches or close together on the floor. There is noise  and excitement. Before the speech, play, choir or concert starts, students  may be yelling and teachers are giving directions. Gatherings are pleasant sources of input for the underresponsive  student. They go along with the excitement, call out, point and laugh  and may become a bit hyper. During the performance, especially if it  takes a long time, they may have difficulty keeping their attention on  the performance and start looking around and chatting with classmates  active. It may also be that the underresponsive student will just passively  experience the happening: they are sitting a bit slouched and arent absorbing all information passive. Activating during gatherings

Take care that the student has a clear task to focus on; have them keep  an eye on the time, for example.

Give the student activating in your chair strategies see Chapter 5. 

Strategies outside the Classroom 145

Pair the student with a buddy who can point out to them when singing  and clapping are allowed.

Seat the student in a somewhat busier spot: next to the aisle or at  the front. During the gathering there may be extra sensory input here,  because people are still walking back and forth.

At Christmas dinner or other food-based events, such as a joint  breakfast:

put them next to an enthusiastic, chatting classmate 

give the student the task of handing out things and arrange a route  where they cannot easily knock something over

offer them crispy and strong-tasting food, so they have to chew a  lot and can taste everything more intensely. Behaviour  For the overresponsive student, gatherings are a waterfall of sensory input  that can cause a lot of stress. They will look for the quietest place active.  If this does not work and the student ends up in the middle of the bustle,  it can lead to a quarrel, because the stress can make the student more  irritable passive. Calming during gatherings

In drama, when the student does not want to be the centre of attention  on the stage, a supporting task may be possible. For example, doing  something with music, scenery or lighting. This way, the student can  make their contribution without being overresponsive.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 146

Discuss with the student what the best place in the audience is:

next to a trusted classmate

next to the teacher

next to the aisle or right in the middle so no students have to pass  in front of them

at the back, so they have a good overview.

Bring hearing protection, so the student always has the option to use it.

Have them put on clothing with a hood so they can put that up.

Bring something for the student to fiddle with or chew on.

If the student comes to the gathering, agree on what they can do when  it gets too much for them:

Who do they tell whenif they leave?

Where will they go? For example, to the classroom, to the janitor, to  the library? Make sure the people in those places know about this.

What will they do instead?

At Christmas dinner or other food-based events, such as a joint  breakfast:

Together with this student, find the quietest place, away from  walking routes.

Sit them next to a quiet classmate.

Let them be the first or last to pick out their food at a buffet. Or,  if they really prefer to stay in their seat, ask an underresponsive  classmate to bring the food.

Have hearing protection at the ready.

Offer them food with a soft or smooth texture that is mild or sweet  in taste, so they dont get too much sensory input in their mouth  and taste more accessible flavours. School parties Situation There are many people at a school party, a lot of movement, loud noises  and flashing or bright lights.  This is a great environment for the underresponsive student. They get  activated and can enjoy the spectacle from the sidelines or plunge themselves into the crowd on the dance floor. They can be a bit awkward when  dancing, be too wild and bump into people active. The underresponsive  student can hang out at the side and not engage in the festivities passive.

Strategies outside the Classroom 147 Activating during school parties

Encourage the student to participate in the festivities such as dancing  and chatting. Behaviour  The overresponsive student experiences the school party as a place full  of noise and movement. They can probably be found somewhere at  the back, away from the speakers. Maybe they are standing near the  cloakroom, where they hang around and chat with others active. The  overresponsive student who is in the middle of a crowd may not be so  open to having a conversation; they are mainly busy surviving among all  the intense input passive. Calming during school parties

Bring hearing protection.

Have the student dance among friends; they can make sure fellow  students wont bump into them.

Let them walk around outside every now and then, or retreat to a quiet  place.

Bring fidget toys that fit in their pocket.

Make sure they arrive early, when its not that busy yet. This way, the  amount of sensory input builds up gradually. This means they wont  suddenly be overcome by a lot of input, as can happen at the height  of the party.

Give them something to do on the sidelines during the party: picking  the music, helping out in the cloakroom, pouring drinks. On the street Situation When outside, you can be confronted with many different situations:  quiet neighbourhoods or busy junctions, lots of traffic or not so much  traffic, sunny weather, wind and rain. The students are walking two  by two or in small groups. There is less direct supervision and a lot of  distraction. The street is a place full of extra input for the underresponsive student.  For example, they might jump or run. This makes them more alert, but 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 148 less able to pay attention to traffic active. If they are not sufficiently  alert, because not all input is processed, their behaviour is also not safe for  traffic. For example, they do not see that the traffic light is red passive. Activating on the street

Put the student somewhere in the middle of the group.

Connect the student to an active classmate, who has a good overview  of what needs to be done.

Have the student  possibly together with a number of classmates   jump as high as they can a couple of times.

Ask this student to sing songs with a few others at times when thats  possible in regards to road safety.

Have the student take giant steps or little gnome steps.

Have the student skip or walk on tiptoe. Behaviour  When in traffic, the overresponsive student is more concerned with avoiding crowds and noises than with paying attention active. They can also  behave in an unsafe way, because they are flooded with sensory input  and therefore lose sight of what is happening. They are so preoccupied  with bothersome input that they stall at the pedestrian crossing or, the  opposite, cross the road while a car is coming towards them. They no  longer make well-considered decisions, because there is too much information passive. Calming on the street

Have the student walk next to a trusted classmate.

Give the student something to carry helps them keep a grip literally  and figuratively.

Have the student be the last in line with a chaperone behind them.

Give the student the freedom to change places in the line for example,  when commotion occurs near to them.

Respect that the student may not want to talk. They are busy processing  enough input as it is.

Make sure the student has something with them to fiddle with or  chew on.

Strategies outside the Classroom 149 Transport parents, public transport, coach Situation  When students are transported by coach or private car, there is often  organized chaos with a lot of noise, hustle and bustle, arranging whos  to sit with whom, and excited or tired students, chaperones and teachers. When you travel on public transport, there is a lot of input as well.  Especially on metro and train platforms, and at tram and bus stops; so  much happens at the same time:

There are many people.

There are many  sometimes loud and unexpected  sounds.

There is a lot of movement of people, vehicles and other  objects, such as traffic lights changing colour.

There is time pressure.

People are looking for information on catching the right  connection.

People are looking for information on the correct departure  times and places. Behaviour  Activating the underresponsive student will be especially necessary when  the student approaches the means of transport or has to leave it. The  underresponsive student will not have a hard time keeping up to speed  and paying attention; they have plenty of room to walk, run and bump  into peoplethings active. This student can be found in their seat in all  kinds of positions, except sitting active. The student can also  after  sitting still on a seat for a while  become drowsy from riding the bus,  car, tram or metro passive. Once they are in their chair, activation is  less important. If they are on the road, they do not have to pay attention  unless instructions are given. Activating during transport

Give the student an active role:

let them count the students

give them things to hand out

give them the responsibility for material that must be brought along.

Look at Activating on the street, above.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 150

Have the student look for certain landmarks look out for a specific exit  on the motorway or let them count white cars for a while. The overresponsive student lacks overview during this activity. They  experience unexpected and new input as threatening. They will, where  possible, look for relatively quiet corners active. The student can freeze  in very busy, unfamiliar situations. Or they might get into a quarrel with  classmates whom they think are too wild and are making too much noise  passive. Calming during transport

Discuss with the student which spot is pleasant. For example, a window  seat, next to a quiet student or a chaperone. They might want to be at  the front of the bus for a good view of the road and route. Or perhaps  all the way at the back, so they can oversee all movement in the bus.

Tell the chaperone which input can be a problem for an overresponsive  child, and that there can sometimes be strong reactions to, for example,  an unexpected loud noise.

Have the student in public transport, together with a chaperone be  the first to get in and out.

Make sure the student has one contact person.

Make sure the student knows what is going to happen and when, so  that they have a sense of control.

Pair the student with a trusted classmate.

Prepare the student for metro and train platforms, tram and bus stops,  and discuss possible strategies:

link the student to someone who can keep an overview and who  can make sure the student ends up in the right means of transport  on time and gets out again

have the student stand or sit against a wall or billboard

let them put on their hoody

make sure the student stands a little further away from the track.

Have the student wear a hearing protector or earbuds that allow them  to listen to music to mask other sounds. This is only possible when the  student does not have to pay attention to the traffic and listen to the  traffic noises.

Strategies outside the Classroom 151 On a school tripexcursion Situation Many new, unexpected, exciting, fun and interesting things happen  during school trips and excursions. But there are also times when you  have to wait a long time. The underresponsive student looks forward to the new, interesting  and exciting input that comes their way during an outing. They watch  and participate. Until theres a long wait. Then they might start to mess  around, talk or play to get more input active. Or they might become  sleepy and not realize the waiting time is over and the group is moving  on. Because there is no routine, the student may have difficulty giving  the correct responses passive. Activating on a school tripexcursion

Many unusual things happen on a school tripexcursion, and you are  completely out of your routine. This alone is probably enough to activate the underresponsive student.

Sometimes, its necessary to wait a long time during a school trip. The  underresponsive student isnt bothered by this. Should you want to  activate them, give them a leading role in a game or song meant to  make the waiting easier.

Take fidget and chewing aids with you, in case activation is needed, for  example while listening to a story during a tour. Behaviour  The overresponsive student experiences this new, interesting and exciting  input as unsafe. Again, they will search for quiet places active or they  can be moody and stubborn passive. Calming on a school tripexcursion

Discuss unfamiliar events in advance. Make an overview together concerning what, where, how, when, with whom, what to bring with you  and why. For instance, a museum visit:

what: we are going to an exhibition about musical instruments,  there we will get a tour by a museum employee and then we will  be making music together

where: in the museum of indigenous cultures

how: we will walk through the park

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 152

when: we leave on Friday at 09:30 and will walk back to school at 12:30

with whom: Years 2 and 3, two teachers and six parents

what you should bring: your chewing necklace and your flute

why: the outing is in the context of Mister Hermans music project  in Years 2 and 3.

Discuss what is familiar:

their own teacher will come along

the student will be going with their own class

their best friend is in their group

meals will be at the same time.

Bring familiar things such as: their own lunch  if possible, a stuffed animal or their own  pillow.

Give the student something they can hold  during the outing. Discuss with the student  what qualifies. This can be a stuffed animal for  the younger student. With an older student it  can be a keychain or something with which  they can fiddle andor chew on.

Make sure there is a quiet space on the way  there and back.

Schedule alone-time or time to rest. 

Do not ask the student to talk if they arent  doing this on their own. Processing all this  new input already takes enough energy; having to communicate simultaneously will be too much.

Make sure that, when there is a long period of waiting, the student has  a quiet place where they can go to relax.

Have the student use earbuds to listen to music of their choice. Do not expect students to be able to process any other information if  you have just told them that they are going on a school trip. Processing  the excitement, or shock, requires all the attention of the brain. Dont  even expect your answer to a question from the student  about the  school trip  to be remembered. The excitement first has to abate and a  feeling of security must return. Only then can the information you give  them be processed in the right way, so it can be remembered. This process  may need to be repeated several times, so dont be surprised if children  ask about the same thing again and again.
7  More about Strategies  and Tools Whats this chapter about? In this chapter, we explain how certain strategies work and we discuss  tools you can use when executing them. At the end, we discuss scientific  studies. These show that several strategies we mention have a positive  effect on learning. How do certain strategies work? In previous chapters, several strategies are mentioned which are further  explained below. We explain why the strategies work the way they do  and what makes them successful. We do this as follows:

We provide specific information about how the strategy or tool  works.

We indicate whether a strategyaid is particularly suitable for  underresponsive or overresponsive students, or for both.

You read what the best time span is: how long do you use a  strategy or tool for?

You get tips to choose the right tool.

You receive advice on what to look for when purchasing aids. Strategy: Chewing Chewing, sucking and sippingnibbling help you regulate when you are  feeling tense, but also when you are feeling sluggish. It is a widely used  strategy. Everyone uses their mouths to regulate tension, for example by 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 154 squeezing their lips together, chewing a pen, biting their nails or nibbling  on a piece of liquorice. When you are underresponsive, chewing helps,  because you use your muscles, which has an activating effect. When you  are overresponsive, chewing acts as a kind of outlet; it reduces tension.  By chewing, you can blow off steam and calm down. Although chewing gum is often strictly forbidden in the classroom, it  can be useful. Fortunately, there are many alternatives to chewing gum  these days. Chewing aids exist in the form of necklaces, bracelets or key  rings, or materials that can be put on the back of a pencil or thin pen  which you can then chew or nibble on.  How long can you chew on something? It is difficult to indicate how long it is beneficial for a student to chew on something. If the  material is not harmful to the teeth, a student  can use chewing aids all day long. If in doubt  whether the child is chewing too much, the  parent can consult with their dentist. The  student who is using chewing materials for  the first time must build up the chewing time,  otherwise their jaw muscles will become sore.  The student who is used to chewing on something will no longer be bothered by this. How do you choose the right chewing aids?

The various aids that are available often state whether they are  suitable for light, medium or heavy chewing needs. This has to  do with the robustness of the material. A younger student can  use the softer materials. The older and stronger the student is  and the greater the need for chewing, the firmer the material  must be.

The student can see for themselves which tool they like. There  are very attractive things available, in all sorts of colours and  shapes, for all gender identifications and for different ages.  Note: the nicer the material looks, the softer it often is. For  these aids, a different raw material is used, which is easier to  shape and pour.

There are different options for storing the chewing aid. Some 

More about Strategies and Tools 155 tools fit in your pocket, others can be hooked onto a loop and  used as a key ring, some can be tied on a string, and then there  are some that can be worn around your wrist or neck. Strategy: Deep pressure and movement input This strategy is relatively unknown, and we will therefore explain it in  more detail. The brain distinguishes two types of sensory input through  the skin:

Input which the brain classifies as external. With light pressure  or light touch  for example, with tickling, very light friction  or by touching little hairs  only the upper dermis is touched.  Insects, spiders or scratchy twigs also cause light touch. This  input triggers an alarm signal. External input can be harmful  and, to the brain, resembles danger. That is why, with light  touches, the alarm goes off relatively quickly and a defence  response will follow.

Input which the brain concludes comes from within. When you  are touched calmly and very firmly, this input is detected in the  deeper layers of the skin; that is why we call this deep pressure.  This input is also partially detected by receptors in the muscles  and joints. The brain therefore believes that this input comes  from within the body. Deep pressure feels the same as movement input and that  input is generally safe. Deep pressure feels the same as movement input and that input is generally safe. Deep pressure is therefore usually considered to be pleasant.  You experience it when you feel a heavy weight on you or someone  touches you firmly, when something is wrapped tightly around your body  or when you get a massage. Heavy work, which requires the use of a lot  of muscles, such as carrying something, pushing or pulling or exercising,  also provides deep pressure. Calmly applied deep pressure has a calming and positive effect on  the brains stress mechanism. In stressful situations, the input filter is  wide open for all sensory input, which means that its easier for you to  be overresponsive. Deep pressure ensures this mechanism is weakened. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 156 When deep pressure is applied quickly, irregularly and unexpectedly, it  has an activating effect. How long can you apply deep pressure for? If the deep pressure input remains the same, the body gets used to the  input and it loses its calming effect. Constant deep pressure input, for  instance by not moving when using a weighted blanket, pressure vest  provides pressure by inflating the vest or a weighted vest provides  pressure because it has little weights in it, will therefore stop working  after about half an hour. So, wait at least an hour before reapplying the  deep pressure and then again for only about half an hour. When the deep  pressure input varies in pace, pressure and speed, it will continue to have  an activating or calming effect, for example with firm rubbing, pushing or  pulling and while exercising. Therefore, there is no time limit to this. As  long as the student needs the calming effect of the deep pressure input,  you can continue providing it. How do you choose the right tool for deep pressure? You dont do this yourself. These types of aids are fairly specific and are  almost always selected with the help of a therapist who specializes in  sensory processing. Make sure that you are advised by an occupational or  physical therapist or speech therapist while trying out these tools. They  will tell you about slowly increasing the use of the tool, how much weight  to use, how long you can use the tool and what to expect. For example,  in the classroom a weighted stuffed animal, weighted cushion, pressure  vest or weighted vest can be used. Strategy: Carry something during a change in activities By letting the student carry something in their hands, you literally and  figuratively help them get a grip during a change in activities. This helps  the underresponsive student focus  they have to stay focused or they  will drop something. This focus has an activating effect, which increases  their alertness. A stack of books or a box or crate with gym items has a  calming effect, due to the weight, which is pleasant for the overresponsive  student. This student could also carry a backpack with extra weight; this  provides deep pressure, which is calming.

More about Strategies and Tools 157 How long can you carry something for? You can carry something for as long as it takes to change activities and  you dont need your hands for anything else. You can wear a weighted  backpack for as long as it is pleasant and convenient to do so. The strategy  works as long as youre carrying something. Because you are moving, the  body doesnt get used to the extra input of the weight and the strategy  will be effective. It isnt always safe to carry something in your hands. The teacher  can therefore place a backpack in the classroom to use during a change  of activities. This can be used to transport books or other materials, so  that the students hands are free to open doors or safely walk up and  down stairs. Strategy: Fiddling Fiddling feels good. Everyone does it sometimes, for example during a  meeting, while watching TV or during a telephone conversation. People  also like holding something during a discussion. It is nice to move your  fingers and to have a grip on something in a certain way by holding onto  something or by drawing. This way you can keep your head in the game  activating or relieve tension calming. Fiddling is mentioned with both activating and calming strategies.  When you are underresponsive, fiddling provides your body with extra input, which has an activating effect. The student who needs this  extra input will often pull and push the fiddling tool harder to receive  input. The student who is overresponsive can use fiddling to divert their  attention away from disturbing input or to relieve tension. This is how  fiddling helps them calm down. How long can you fiddle for? You can hold something in your hands to fiddle with during a change  of activities, when listening is needed for a long time and while reading.  Really, any time the hands are free, and the student needs an activating or  calming strategy. Because you constantly move your fingers in a different  way, the body does not get used to this input and it remains effective.  Therefore, there is no maximum amount of time for this strategy; fiddling can be done any time and anywhere.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 158 How do you choose the right fiddling tool? Use tools that make little noise and arent too interesting, so that they  dont distract the student and others. Look at what the student is already using themselves as well. Pretty much everyone carries fiddling  material with them. After all, you can fiddle with your hair, your face,  your clothing, your jewellery, your glasses and so on. But you can also  use other tools. To use them in the classroom, it is best if the tools dont  make any noise and do not distract other students. Due to hygiene, you  will only want to use washable materials for multiple people. When a  student wears out a lot of tools, you can explain to parents what the  purpose of the tools is and ask them if they can have their child bring  specific things to school. Possibilities include: 

Pieces of string or shoelaces. You  can fiddle with these endlessly  and you can tie little knots in  them, which you can then also  fiddle with.

Velcro. You can stick the soft side  on a drawer or on the bottom of  your desk. The student can rub  this with their fingers.

Rubber band, thin or thick. You  can endlessly wrap this around  your fingers and take it off again. Hair ties are nice, because  they have a protective layer, so they are less likely to cut off  circulation. Perhaps the rule will be needed that launching  them at something or someone isnt allowed

Kneaded eraser. Good for squeezing, rolling and making all kinds  of shapes.

Putty. A kind of kneaded eraser, but much larger, that can be  shaped indefinitely, available in different levels of resistance. 

Rubber stress balls. These come in all sizes and shapes. 

Jewellery. Necklaces, bracelets and earrings are great for fiddling  with. However, it is nice when this can be done soundlessly.

Cords. The cords of a hoody, cardigan or other clothing are fine  for fiddling with.

Massage ball. A rubber ball with soft spikes. Pleasant to roll back  and forth in your hands and to squeeze. 

More about Strategies and Tools 159

Koosh ball. A ball with rubber hairs, to feel, to pull and to  wiggle back and forth.

Paper clip. You can bend it, feel it and thread them together.

Tangle fidget toy. You can keep twisting a Tangle; it consists of  a number of parts that are connected to each other and that  can move relative to each other. Tangles are available in various  sizes, colours and textures, such as smooth, ribbed, rubbery and  with round studs.  Strategy: Work standing up You can perform writing and reading tasks while standing up, at a standing desk or high table, cupboard, wide windowsill or shelf at elbow  height. Standing requires more muscle activity, which is activating, so a  student can stay focused. This allows them to perform their schoolwork  listening, reading, writing properly. 

A student with a limp, slouchy  sitting posture often shows better  handwriting when they write  standing up. Because they are  standing up, more muscles are at  work in their trunk. This results in  a good basis for shoulder and arm  mobility.

If a student has difficulty focusing  on reading a book for a long time,  they can keep it up longer when  they are standing up.

When the student needs to listen  for a long time, they will drift off  less quickly when they can stand  occasionally while listening.

When standing up, its easier for a student to use their  breath when reading out loud. It is easier to keep your trunk  straight when standing up, which results in more space for  your lungs. When you have multiple tasks to perform standing up, you can have the  student stand on a carpet tile or something similar, to define their spot. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 160 The carpet tile indicates that moving around isnt the intention; this  stops the student from wandering around. If they require even more  activating input, they can rock from their toes to their heels or from  one leg to the other. How long can you work while standing? How long they want to and can work standing up will be different for  every student. It is nice to be able to alternate. When you choose to  purchase a standing desk with a high chair, the student always has the  choice between working while standing or sitting. When they have their  own desk where both positions are possible  sitting and standing  the  student can stay in the same place in the room if they want to change  position. This ensures that standing up doesnt become ineffective. Because you are changing position, the input varies and so the brain doesnt  adjust to it and continues to focus. How do you choose the right standing desk?  Consider the following:

Is the desk adjustable in height so you can use it for different  students in successive years?

Can the height be adjusted quickly? If so, you can use it for  different students. This is convenient when there is a limited  number of standing spaces in your classroom and multiple  students want to use it.

Is there sufficient storage space for school supplies? This  is important if the student will always be working at the  standing desk. Strategy: Wobble cushion It can be difficult for an underresponsive  student to sit still. They need activating,  new input and they get this by moving, for  example by rocking their chair. However,  rocking a chair can be disruptive, which  is why you might use a wobble cushion.  A wobble cushion is a cushion you put on 

More about Strategies and Tools 161 the seat of a chair. Thanks to the cushion, the student needs to create  less movement in order to feel comfortable and stay focused. The students muscles are constantly active due to the wobble cushion. This  way, the body constantly receives new input and it must continuously  adapt to a new situation. There is extra alertness and therefore better  concentration.  How long can you sit on a wobble cushion? Use the wobble cushion for tasks where the student has to sit still for  a relatively long time, which they arent very good at. The cushion has  the most effect when you use it for periods of around 30 minutes. When  the student sits on the wobble cushion for longer, their body gets used  to the extra movement input and it no longer helps with concentration.  The student might even start to move more vigorously to still get that  extra input. How do you choose the right wobble cushion?

There are thinner and thicker  cushions, smooth cushions  and cushions with soft spikes  which provide extra sensory  input. In any case, ensure that  the student can reach the floor  with their feet while sitting on  the cushion. If necessary, use a  lower chair or a footstool for this. 

Consider a cushion for which the level of inflation can be  altered, as it can then be adjusted to the preference of the  student. The more air, the more stable the cushion becomes. Strategy: Balance board A balance board is a board you stand and balance on. It is an activating strategy that can be  used as a movement snack, but also during  rote learning, such as multiplication tables. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 162 How long should you stand on a balance board? As long as it takes to do the activity for which you want to be extra alert,  such as answering questions or rote learning. This usually means that  you will stand on the wobble board for two to five minutes. It can also be  longer, if there is time. The student does not get used to the input from  the balance board, because they are constantly moving. What should you look for when choosing a balance board?

Make sure the balance board wont damage the floor. Place it  on a piece of carpet if the bottom of the balance board might  scratch the floor.

Make sure the student is close to a wall or table, so they can put  their hand against it or on it when they feel they are about to  lose their balance. Strategy: Drinking in the classroom In many classes it is already permitted to drink water when you need  it. Simply drinking a sip of water works very well to regulate alertness.  Drinking cold water is activating, as is drinking water with lime, lemon  andor mint. Drinking water that is about room temperature has a calming effect, just like sucking through a straw. How often should you drink water? You can drink water whenever you need to be activated or calmed down.  Every student can bring their own water bottle, which they place on their  desk. This way, they will always have water at hand. The student who  feels the need to take a little walk can go to refill the bottle, which means  they will also have cooler water, directly from the tap. A few sips should  be sufficient to have an effect. What should you look for regarding water bottles? The following points are good to consider:

For the student who needs calming, the best option is to choose  a water bottle with a straw or a sipper bottle.

More about Strategies and Tools 163

Make sure the bottles are easy to clean. The student who needs  activation can be given the task of washing all bottles regularly. Strategy: Hearing protection Hearing protection has a calming effect on an overresponsive student.  A hearing protector suppresses noise, which means you are less bothered  by environmental noise. Use hearing protection, for example, during independent work, while  the teacher gives instructions to others or is talking to other students.  Hearing protection can also be useful at meetings, in the playground  or during excursions. A student may find it scary to put on a hearing  protector because they do not feel safe when they cannot hear all the  sounds. A solution for this is that the student sits down in a spot where  they have a good overview of the space. This way they can see if something unsafe is happening.  How long can you wear hearing protection? Hearing protection must be used very purposefully. You have to be careful not to overuse it. When you wear hearing protection throughout  the day, your brain will increase sound sensitivity to compensate for  the lack of information. Your brain tries to listen even better, in order  to get information through the ears. This is counterproductive, because  it makes the overresponsivity even worse. If a student often wants to  shield themselves from ambient sounds, it will be better to use music,  through earbuds, as we explain in the following strategy. Do not use 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 164 hearing protection more than twice a day for a maximum of half an  hour at a time. It is possible to use a tool too much. How do you choose the right hearing protection? There are many different hearing protectors on the market:

earmuffs for adults and for children, with and without a filter

earplugs made of foam, silicone or acrylic

universal and custom-made earplugs. The advantage of the large hearing protector, with earmuffs, is that it  also provides deep pressure to the head, which can have a calming effect.  When a student benefits from hearing protection a lot, but would rather  not have anything on their head, you can discuss with the parent if they  can buy customized hearing protection. This is a good alternative to  a hearing protector with earmuffs, but more expensive. This is partly  because it has to be refitted when the student grows. It is practical to have a number of hearing protectors with earmuffs in  the classroom, to be used by different students. Hearing protectors that  are worn in the ears cannot be exchanged for hygiene reasons.  Strategy: Music carriers iPod, MP3 player or smartphone To be less bothered by ambient noises other students talking, construction work, noise in the room next door and the like, you can have the  student use a music carrier. The student will use this to play music they  like. It must be music that is well known to them and that is not distracting. This has a calming effect. For the student who needs extra input,  listening to music while working independently can help. This can give  the extra input they need to be activated.

More about Strategies and Tools 165 How long can you listen to music? As long as the activity lasts and as long as the music supports the student  in doing their work. How do you choose the right music? The teacher doesnt have to do this. As long as it is music that isnt distracting. The student chooses their music themselves, so they have control over the type of sound they receive the strongest. They cant control  ambient sounds, which means those sounds are more likely to distract  them. Ambient sounds will more quickly receive the interesting stamp.  You can filter out your own chosen sounds more easily, which means you  can focus on a different task. Therefore, the student must choose music  that is so familiar that it will not distract them. When they are in a busy  environment  for example, on the road during an excursion  and the  goal is to isolate themselves from the crowds, they can choose music that  is indeed distracting them. It should be music they really like, so their  brain enjoys listening to this exciting input. The volume should not be  too high; listening to anything above 80 dB decibels for an extended  period causes hearing damage. Its about masking the ambient noise; you  dont have to top their volume. Strategy: Tennis balls or chair glides on the chair legs Some chairs can cause annoying, scraping sounds. If there are students  who are so bothered by this that they are startled every time and get a  little stressed out by it, its good to get rid of this. The overresponsive 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 166 student will be grateful for this calming strategy. You can use tennis  balls or chair glides to prevent the scraping sound. Its better not to use  stick-on felt chair glides; they come off easily. What should you pay attention to when purchasing chair glides? Make sure that they not only prevent noise,  but also dont leave marks on the floor. At  a tennis club or through the internet you  might be able to get a batch of rejected  tennis balls for free or very little money, especially when you explain the good purpose  they will serve! Cut an opening in the tennis  balls with a knife and then stick the balls to  the chair legs. You can also purchase chair  glides, which are available in many shapes  and sizes.  Strategy: Privacy shields If a student is easily distracted by what  they can see and hear around them, you  can block the view from their workplace.  There are different ways to apply this calming strategy. You can create a space behind  a cupboard, in the corridor or in a corner of  the room where there is little walking and  fuss. If the student should stay in their own  spot, you can work with screens or privacy  shields. Or you can create a special silence  spot in the room using these screens and dividers. You can also do this  with the help of a curtain. A cheap option is to screw the corner of a  shower rail to the ceiling or the wall. Hang a curtain on this and you  have a perfectly fine room separator.  How long do you use a privacy shield? As long as the work lasts for which the student needs to be shielded from  sensory input.

More about Strategies and Tools 167 How do you choose the right privacy shield? Privacy shields come in the form of large partitions to put on the floor  and portable screens that are foldable. You can also make something  yourself, using sturdy cardboard. Consider whether you want to create  permanent places where the partitions can stay. Use a portable version  when the screen has to stand on the students desk. Points of focus are:

Pay attention to the weight. There are lightweight screens, for  example made from recycled jeans or sustainable plastic, and  there are also wooden screens, which are slightly heavier.

Pay attention to the thickness of the screen when its folded.  Does that thickness fit in the space you want to use to store the  screen?

Some screens have a built-in work surface; if this is the case,  you must empty the desk before you can place the screen on it.

Other screens only have three walls; you can put this type on  the desk without having to clear it first. Strategies and science The strategies discussed in this book are tried and tested and have been  shown to have a positive effect on students ability to focus on their work.  In this section, we discuss some of the research that has been done which  demonstrates their effectiveness. Science about chewing  Although chewing gum is often strictly forbidden in the classroom, it  could be very useful in maintaining alertness when students have to  concentrate on a task for a long time Morgan, Johnson and Miles, 2014. Allen, Jacob and Smith 2014 also discovered that chewing gum  increases alertness. They observed this effect during and immediately  after chewing. Science about movement and learning A study conducted by the University of Groningen Mullender-Wijnsma  et al., 2016 showed that children learn better when they move. The students who participated in the Fit and Vaardig lessons during which  they were physically active while learning achieved a learning gain of 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 168 four months for maths and spelling within two years, compared with  the control group. The importance of recess was investigated at a school where they normally did not set aside time for playing. Forty-four children were allowed  to have recess once a week. Their behaviour that day was compared with  their behaviour on the days without recess. Specific attention was paid to  work, mobilityrestlessness and lethargy. A clear difference was observed,  with 60 percent of the children on recess days being more task-oriented  and less restlessmobile. There was no difference in effect between boys  and girls Jarrett et al., 1998. A research group of eightto 11-year-olds was judged on their posture  while receiving instructions. First, the students working posture was  observed without them having done activating exercises. This was compared with their working posture after they had done activating exercises.  The research group was compared with a control group which did not receive activating exercises, to assess whether there was a difference in the  amount of physical activity. Work attitude improved significantly in the  research group this means that a difference of more than 5 percent was  perceived. On average, the improvement in work attitude was 8 percent  and the group of children who previously scored the worst work attitude  showed an improvement of 20 percent. An improvement in work attitude  meant that the students were more focused on the instructions, rather  than being busy with other things, unrelated to the instructions Mahar  et al., 2006. Doing short, moderately intensive exercises in the classroom during  the school day seems to be effective in increasing alertness and thereby  learning efficiency Drolette et al., 2014. In a meta-study, 59 studies were analysed, about the effects of physical  activity of children on their school performance. The results of the analysis  showed a significant and positive effect. This study focused on general  physical activities, not specifically in the classroom Fedewa and Ahn, 2011. In another study, 44 studies were analysed, about the effects of childrens physical activity on their school performance. Here, too, the result  was that physical activity improves cognitive development in children  Sibley and Etnier, 2003. Playing a video game involving active physical movement, as opposed  to a video game not involving physical moment, improved the response  time and accuracy in children in an activity that was performed immediately afterwards Best, 2012.

More about Strategies and Tools 169 Science about fiddling In a study where people had to listen to a monotonously recorded telephone message, it became clear that people who had been sketching drawing while listening had retained 29 percent more of the content of  the message Andrade, 2010. Behaviour such as scratching, biting your lip and touching your face  is also considered fiddling and has been studied to see how it helps to  deal with feelings of stress. This study showed that this kind of behaviour  helps regulate stress Mohiyeddini and Semple, 2013. In another study, fiddling was associated with alertness. Fiddling  turned out to be a very good indicator that people in a lecture needed a  break or a change of pace because they could no longer focus sufficiently.  In addition, fiddling contributed significantly to remembering information Farley, Evan and Kingstone, 2013. Science about working standing up in school There has not been much research into the use of standing desks in  schools. Working while standing up on a large scale in school is a relatively new phenomenon. The reason for using standing desks lies in  improving health by sitting less and exercising more. More research has  been conducted with adults at work. Here, too, particular attention was  paid to ergonomics and the effects on muscles and joints. A study on active workplaces looked at 32 studies, ten of which were  among schoolchildren. A positive result was observed for the health and  activity of the students. Regarding cognitive development and productivity, more research is needed Torbeyns et al., 2014. A small study looked at the impact on schoolchildren of working  at a standing desk with a high stool. The children and teachers were  enthusiastic about working while standing up, because of the flexibility  it provides. The cautious conclusion of this study is that standing desks  can be used well in a classroom and that their use reduces the number  of hours in which children choose to sit Hinckson et al., 2013. In another small study, two classes from different schools were compared. In one school, children sat in their chairs 97 percent of the time, a  third of the time sitting bent over at an angle of over 45. In the Moving  School, sitting was alternated with dynamic sitting 53 percent, standing  31 percent and walking around 10 percent. These children almost never  sat bent over at a 45 angle or more. In this school, much more movement 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 170 was applied during lessons. The conclusion was that sitting behaviours  in the second school were more favourable. This group spent much less  time sitting in the same position. The children in this group also twisted  their backs and necks less frequently, and they were much more mobile  Cardon et al., 2004.
Part III  WHAT ELSE CAN  YOU DO? LAYOUT,  ORGANIZATION  AND DIDACTICS In Part II you have seen how simple most strategies are which you can use  to remedy disrupted sensory processing. But there are many more possibilities for paying attention to sensory processing within the learning  environment. In this part, we would like to show you how you can take  into account the influence of the senses on attention and focus, and how  you can integrate sensory processing in all lessons and coach the students  in this, all within your teaching routine. So, really learning with all eight  senses. We think this starts when you enter the classroom and it ends  with taking a test. Therefore, that is precisely how this part is structured.
8  Layout of the Classroom Whats this chapter about? We start this chapter with an exercise in which you will view the classroom through SPI-Glasses. We then explain how the layout influences  sensory processing. Again we make a distinction between activating and  calming aspects. Involving the students in classroom set-up is discussed  and we look at good positions for the underand overresponsive student.  The corridor is also discussed as a possibility. In addition, we pay attention to the place of the teacher in the classroom and to the organization  of materials. TO DO: THE CLASSROOM  Take a look at the room through SPI-Glasses. The layout of the room has a big  effect on the senses. How bright is the light, how hot or cold is it, what view  does a student have? To feel the effect of the layout, you can enter the answers  to the questions in the following form. Sit in a students spot do this at different spots. How does the room feel from this place?

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 174 Do you feel comfortable and safe? Why is this?

What can and cant you see well from this spot?

Would you like to sit in this spot? Why or why not?

Stand in the doorway to get a good view of the room. What impression would the room give someone who comes here for the first  time?

Would this person like to cross the threshold to look around? Why or why not?

Layout of the Classroom 175 Would this person consider the room activating or calming? Why?

The influence of layout The layout of a room has a certain effect on people. One layout is more  activating while another is more calming. This applies to all spaces, your  classroom included. To make you more aware of this, we provide examples of the effect of layout below. We list the things that are respectively  more activating and more calming.  The list of activating design aspects shows input which gets the stamp  very interesting and VIP. As a result, the underresponsive student becomes more alert and absorbs more information. The overresponsive  student is already activated enough and can become hyper-alert in an  activating environment.  The list of calming design aspects shows input which is generally considered boring. For the underresponsive student, this layout means they  do not receive the extra information they need. For the overresponsive  student, this layout is pleasant; it doesnt distract them. In general, its best to create a quiet environment. In this list we show which aspects contribute to an activating or calming  layout. Naturally, the classroom will not have a completely activating  or calming layout. In reality, it is usually a mix of both. Of course, it is  difficult to find exactly the right balance. You will always have a group of  students who function better in an environment with little input and a  group that benefits from a lot of input and strong input. That is why you  must choose between activating and calming aspects. Where do you leave  empty space and where do you place extra input? Because the design is  ultimately a combination, you also have to be able to add or remove input  for the individual student. For example, you give a student a kneaded  eraser, a hearing protector or a workplace outside the classroom. You are generally better off creating a quiet environment, because it 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 176 is easier to add activating input. For example, it is easier to let students  do moving exercises or to add sound than it is to adjust a busy wall or a  brightly coloured curtain. The layout of the room, activating

Bright sunlight or bright artificial lighting. 

Bright, intense colours and many fluorescent  colours.

Curtains with busy prints.

Open cupboards with multi-coloured content.

Lots of decorations and crafts on the walls, windows and the  ceiling.

Interactive whiteboard with quickly moving images, a dancing  screensaver.

Many loose things in the room: on the cupboards, on the  windowsills, on the floor, on the tables.

Extra air circulation through open windows and doors or by  using a fan.

Sound from the ventilation system.

Open doors with a view of people passing by.

Semi-open doors, so everyone can walk in and out freely.

Windows onto the corridor, so you can see everything that  happens there.

Hard, smooth floor and other smooth surfaces that reflect sound.

Low temperature: cool temperatures have an activating 

Layout of the Classroom 177 effect. However, when it is too cold, so much energy goes into  warming up the body that there is none left for learning.  The layout of the room, calming

Soft andor natural lighting. 

Pastel colours, light colours.

Plain curtains or curtains with a calm print.

Plain curtains in front of bookshelves and shelves  with toys.

Closed cabinets.

Few wall decorations and moving items.

Crafts are on display in a cabinet.

The interactive whiteboard is only visible when in use.

A calming image on the interactive whiteboard, such as a  fireplace, sea, cloudy sky or aquarium.

A tidy room where everything has a clear, assigned place.

Few things on the tables.

Closed doors. 

A reversible sign on the door, with welcome on one side and  do not disturb on the other, to clarify when walk-ins are really  unwanted.

Foil on the windows to limit views of busy places the  auditorium, a busy junction.

Background noise muted by:

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 178

rugs, floor coverings, curtains, acoustic panels and tiles that  reduce sound reflection

hard foam or soft rubber under the computer to reduce the  sounds of vibration

fanair conditioning off when silence is desired

fanair conditioning on for white noise, to mask other  disruptive noises

turning down the volume of the school bell or putting foam  over the speaker 

tennis balls or chair glides on the bottom of chair legs to  dampen the scraping sound.

Neutral temperature, not too hot and not too cold. When you  are too hot, you get sleepy. What do the students think of the layout? Students have their own view on the room in which they spend so much  time; they experience it in their own way. Asking for their opinion can  provide very interesting information. When the students have been in the  classroom for six to eight weeks and have become somewhat used to it, you  can ask them how they experience the classroom. But only do this if you  can really do something with their ideas. Be realistic and honest with the  students; it is probably not possible to act on everything they come up with. There are different ways to get their opinion. Have the students:

draw the pleasant and unpleasant things

explain how they are being distracted

write a story about what helps them to learn better

take photos of the room and divide them into pleasant and  unpleasant

identify where they prefer to be seated and explain why. You dont have to limit this to the classroom; students certainly have an  opinion about the rest of the school and probably also ideas about how  things can be done there. Following their inventory, you can take it a step  further and ask students to:

make a wishing wall on which they depict how they could feel  even more comfortable. Have them think of all the senses and  add things about posture, movement, smelling, seeing and  hearing

Layout of the Classroom 179

make a drawing of the desired situation, with captions and an  explanation

make a liststory with tips and tricks about things in the  classroomat school:

Where do you hear everyone well?

What smells good?

Is the temperature pleasant?

Are you comfortable sitting at your desk? All this information can provide surprising insights into possibilities for  improving the layout. Claiming a good spot We might not think about it often, but students do spend hours and  hours of their lives in that particular spot in the classroom. And sitting  comfortably isnt the same for everyone. One person is comfortable with  their back to the wall and another is more comfortable facing the wall.  All the more reason to pay attention to what they choose. Look at the  location in the room where the student is sitting. If the student is underor overresponsive, consult with them when choosing a spot and take the  following into account: For the underresponsive student

Place this student at a desk: 

near the door: every time someone walks through the door,  they receive extra input

near the window: they can find extra input by looking  outside, and when the window is open they can feel the  wind

near walkways

with a view of a large part of the room, so they dont have  to turn around to look for visual input to see what is  happening in the room

close to you, so you can involve them without too much  effort

with enough space to wiggle.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 180

Put a mirror in front of the student; during independent work,  this can provide enough extra input to keep working.

Literally demarcate spaces for a student who cannot properly  recognize the personal space of others: use lines on the ground  to help them with this. For the overresponsive student

Place this student at a desk: 

with a maximum overview of what  is happening in the room, so the  student does not have to be afraid of  unexpected touch

where almost nobody has to pass  behind them

close to a wall, with their back or side facing the wall

some distance away from fellow students

next to a quiet student; perhaps another overresponsive  student, because they often have the same needs

at the outside or edge of the group

with a view of the door, so they have an overview of what is  happening

away from air ducts, loud radiators, direct sunlight.

Take light into account. Is the student bothered by bright  sunlight at any time of the day? Are proper sun blinds available?

Have the student work in a sheltered workplace without a view 

Layout of the Classroom 181 of wall decorations and moving items. This is suitable for tasks  where they must be able to properly close themselves off from  input around them. A sheltered spot can mean the student uses  a foldable concentration screen, or sits between partitions or in  a corner of the room, for example behind a cupboard. In many schools, student switch places a few times a year. This can be  a stressful event, especially for the overresponsive student. It may take  a while before they are used to the new spot. For the underresponsive  student, changing places means they are going to experience new input,  which is pleasant for them. However, the underresponsive student can  learn how to keep themselves active in a spot in the classroom where  they receive less input. Guide the student and discuss how they experience the new spot and  which adjustments can help them feel at home. Leaving them in their familiar spot may seem better, but isnt our  preference. Helping students cope is better than avoiding. It is a good  thing to not always create separate places or make exceptions, but to use  simple adjustments to ensure all students come into their own right in  new situations. This way, the students learn what they can do themselves  to feel comfortable in different situations. After all, later in life, they will  often encounter situations in which it is not possible to find a separate  or suitable place. And if they know from experience that they can apply  solutions themselves, they will be able to face such new situations in a  more relaxed manner. Sitting ergonomically  Naturally, the ergonomics of sitting also requires  attention. Make sure the student has a chair and  desk of the correct height. On a regular chair, they  must be able to put their feet flat on the floor while  their thighs are horizontal. There are also chairs  which support an active sitting position  the  thighs point diagonally downwards, for a better  upright sitting position. In both cases, the elbows  must be able to rest on the table without the student having to bend over and without pushing the shoulders up.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 182 Working on a tablet More and more students work on a tablet in class. It can be difficult to  hold the tablet and concentrate on the assignment at the same time.  There are various options for supporting the tablet. The student will then  have their hands free to operate the tablet. When the student adopts a  bad posture while working with a tablet, a tablet support can provide a  solution. There are different solutions for working with a tablet support:

On the desk: a stand, a cover or a flexible bracket that can be  attached to the desk.

Working standing up: a wall bracket or a flexible stand placed  on the floor.

On your lap: a support that rests on your legs. The latter is an  ergonomically less desirable solution. The hallway is not for punishment In the past, students were put in the hallway for punishment. We also  like to send them to the hallway, but not for punishment; the hallway is  in fact perfectly suited to movement possibilities or a quiet workplace. Activating in the hallway

As an extra movement possibility, have the student do odd jobs  which require them to get out of the classroom for a bit, for  example getting a book from the library.

Place a tennis ball on a broomstick: have the student polish the  black stripes off the linoleum. 

Have the student walk back and forth in the corridor with giant  steps.

Have the student use a toilet that is further away. Calming down in the hallway

If it is a bit too noisy in the classroom, the student can work in  the hallway, provided that it is quiet there at that time.

Have the overresponsive student who shows an emotional  reaction calm down in the hallway, for example by letting them  walk up and down the stairs until they feel calm again.

Layout of the Classroom 183

Have them relax in a quiet corner in the hallway, where they  can listen to music, for example, or do a puzzle. Put on the SPI-Glasses for yourself and look around the room.  Where do you want to sit comfortably? And how comfortable are you? It seems so logical that you, the teacher are in front of the class. But the  most important thing is that you sit somewhere where you feel comfortable. Through the tests and theory from Part I you now also know  approximately what type you are. Put on the SPI-Glasses for yourself and  look around the room. Where do you want to sit comfortably? Please note the following when choosing:

The location of your desk says nothing about the spot from  which you teach. You can sit or stand anywhere to make contact  with the students. A roller seat can be useful here.

Try different spots in the classroom. A certain spot may seem  good, initially, but you might sit even better in the other corner.

Take the seasons into account. A spot that is nice for you in  winter can be annoying in summer or vice versa. So, go ahead  and completely reorganize the room.

For you, as well, ask the question: do you have a good seat  height? Cushions and footboards can make a world of difference  for your back.

Your desk has various functions, such as helpdesk, discussion  spot and quiet place. You can indicate with a flag or a symbol  which function your desk has at a certain moment.

Perhaps you enjoy having a few personal items in the room and  you choose to buy them or bring them yourself. Its important  to make your classroom somewhere you enjoy spending time. Organizing materials in the classroom By now, the tables and chairs are all placed in good spots. But there are  still a lot of other things and materials in the room: the rubbish bin,  books, workbooks, notebooks, sheets of paper, coloured pencils, erasers,  pencils, plants and much more  stuff on tables, in cupboards, drawers 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 184 and on shelves. Think about this: what effect do all these things have  on the students sensory processing and on your own peace of mind?  Below, we provide tips for organizing loose materials for the underand  overresponsive student. Organizing materials for the underresponsive student It is difficult for the underresponsive student to keep an overview and to  organize their things themselves.

Have another student help them organize workdrawers homework. An overresponsive student can help them with this,  because they can do this very well.

Teach the student to put everything away in fixed places.

Label drawers or put pictures on them, so it is clear what is in  them: workbooks, reading book, books, pencil and eraser, etc.

Use a pencil case or tray for the small items in the drawers.

Place a pencil case with pencils, a ruler and eraser on the table  when there is no space in the drawers, or when they get lost  among the other items.

Take the time to tidy and organize the drawers every week. This  will go faster every time and save time for the rest of the week.

Use laminated cards as a guide, which have the required  materials for different assignments written on them:

Maths: workbook, notebook, pencil, ruler, eraser, chewing  material

Reading: reading book, reading ruler, wobble cushion

Worksheet: worksheet, coloured pencils, pencil, eraser.

Place the notebook or book with which you should work on  a contrasting surface coloured cardboard, for example. The  contrast directs the students attention to their work. Organizing materials for the overresponsive student The overresponsive student is very good at organizing their tasks  themselves. This gives them a sense of safety and reduces the chance of  encountering unknown input.

Make sure the student has storage materials. Boxes with labels,  pencil cases, folders and the like. This way, they can organize  everything in a structured manner.

Layout of the Classroom 185

Have the student only put those materials on their desk which  they are currently working with.

Make sure that tools are within reach chewing chain, hearing  protection, fidget material.

Provide spare materials, so the student doesnt panic if  something runs out or breaks.

To provide structure, use laminated cards that state what is  needed for different assignments:

Maths: workbook, notebook, pencil, ruler, eraser, chewing  material

Reading: reading book, reading ruler, concentration screen

Worksheet: worksheet, coloured pencils, pencil, eraser,  work standing at the cupboard. To organize the loose items in the room, you can use crates and boxes  on which you write the contents with a marker. You can buy hanging  shoe organizers in which you can store a lot of small things. Some shoe  boxes have a small window in the front, so you can see whats inside. And  a magazine rack is also a great place for storing papers. To organize all the papers and things on your own desk, you can use  coloured folders, boxes and crates. For example, yellow is for student  affairs, green is for class administration and purple is for school subjects.  This makes it a clear system for everyone.
9  Organize the Classroom Whats this chapter about? In this chapter, we provide tips to organize your class in a way which  improves sensory processing. We start this chapter with the desk arrangement. We explain why it is worthwhile to spend time on this. We give  tips on how you can help the underand overresponsive student better  organize their work. We explain how you can provide instructions in an  activating and calming way and show how you can use fixed rituals to  get and hold the attention of the students. We also provide tips on how  to keep your students involved when they have to listen for a long time. The desk arrangement matters All kinds of clever minds reflect on the different work methods during  class. For example, you start with a learning conversation and then switch  to group work. This then requires a different layout of the room. Unfortunately, this does not always happen. Because, lets be honest, do you  change the arrangement of the furniture along with the work method? LITERATURE ABOUT REORGANIZING THE CLASSROOM Teachers estimate the duration of changing the set-up is twice as long  as it actually is. Experience from many teachers shows that an entire  classroom can be converted without too much noise within one to  two minutes Ebbens and Ettekoven, 2013. We regularly see classrooms where students sit with their backs to the  teacher and the interactive whiteboard. Or students who have to do 

Organize the Classroom 187 group work sitting in a row. If this is the case, the work method is much  less successful. In fact, it causes confusion. This happens because the  desk arrangement sends a mixed message. For example, if students are  sitting with their backs to the board, the message is:

I am now going to explain something that is so complicated  that I have to use the whiteboard.

It is not that important for you to follow my explanation,  because I think its alright if some students cannot see this. Quite difficult for the student to understand Fortunately, the reverse  is also true: the following message is very positive:

I am now going to explain something that is so complicated  that I have to use the whiteboard.

It is so important that everyone can follow my explanation that  I want to reorganize the entire room to achieve this. Moving furniture offers a great opportunity to move around. It is extra strenuous for sensory  processing when the bodys  posture doesnt match the work  method. It is complicated to be  looking over your shoulder or  having to bend or turn your head  to get information. This makes  it more difficult for the brain to  pay attention to the lesson. It is  already working hard to keep the  body balanced or to catch words  clearly.  So, it really is very important for the arrangement of the tables and  chairs and the work method to match. Below, you can see illustrations  of possible set-ups. Our strategy is: make a virtue of necessity! Moving furniture offers a  great opportunity to move around. It also fluently indicates the transition  from, for example, working with the whole class to independent working  time. And it offers time for the memory to process the learned material. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 188

From Ebbens and Ettekoven, 2013 How can you drag and push practically?

Have the students make a number of floor plans according to  your instruction, so you can indicate the desired layout of the  desks and chairs. 

Coloured stickers on the wall or on the floor, which align with  the various arrangements, help get the desks in the right place.

Put the underresponsive student to work and have them drag  and push furniture.

Organize the Classroom 189

The overresponsive student may quietly stand aside or leave the  classroom for a while. Or give them a task which doesnt require  them to be in the middle of the action, such as getting the  books and notebooks for the next lesson.

Practise moving everything around several times at the  beginning of the school year and time the process. Timing this  is a great task for an overresponsive student. How long does it  take until everyone is sitting in the right place quietly and not  moving?

Moving the furniture is easy to do in three steps: a.	 Put loose items from the desk in the drawer. b.	 Bring the desk to the new spot in the room. c.	 Bring the chair to the new spot in the room.

You can also give students certain tasks: one group handles the  desks; another handles the chairs. Or one group does the right  front of the room and another group does the right back, and  so on. Quartets, trios and uha twosome? So, you had it all figured out: from now on, drawing will be done in  groups of four. It looked so beautiful in your head. However, you hadnt  taken into consideration the number of desks, so it just didnt work out.  It might go the same way with other work methods and rearrangement  plans. So, by all means, use trial and error working together with the  students. A few focus points:

Groups of desks must be placed with enough space left over to  walk between them.

For you as a teacher it is useful to use an office chair or roller  seat. You can easily move around on these, so that you can  quickly move to a student and help them out.

It is nice to keep a small area free around the whole set-up, so  you can walk or stand there to have an overview.

Desks arent necessary for everything. Students can also write or  draw for a little while on their lap, on a flat surface a book.

The teachers desk can also be in the centre or at the back of  the room.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 190 A reorganized room, a new start Perhaps this class has had a bit of a rough time and shuffling everything  around helps clean the slate for a fresh start. From a social point of view,  shuffling things around can be instrumental to help influence group  dynamics. If students know they will not be sitting next to their friend  forever, it might cause other social behaviour. This requires a little more  adjustment from the overresponsive student than from the underresponsive student. But practice makes perfect and the student learns how  to deal with change with your support. A matter of organizing Throughout the entire day, switching between activities and therefore  switching materials takes place. First, only a notebook is needed, then  the desk needs to be empty, and next, a textbook, workbook and pencil  are required. This means the student must organize their materials while  doing their work. This area also leaves room for tips for both the underand overresponsive student. For the underresponsive student

Write down instructions or use pictures or icons, so the student  can always look back to check what the assignment was. 

Divide the assignment into smaller tasks to help the student  keep an overview.

After a certain number of assignments, ask the student to show  their work. This can be to the teacher, but also to a classmate. 

Organize the Classroom 191 This gives an opportunity to move and talk and ensures that the  student stays the right kind of busy.

Have the student draw as many boxes on a piece of paper as  there are assignments. After each assignment they can colour  in a box. Or they can string paperclips together, adding a new  one for every assignment, or move coins from one container  to another. They will have as many paperclipscoins as  assignments.

Use laminated cards they can refer to when they no longer  know what to do. For example, they might say: a.	 Do I know what to do? Otherwise, I will ask. b.	 What do I need? Pencil, eraser, notebook, chewing  material. c.	 Clean up the desk. d.	 Do five push-ups in my seat. e.	 Start the assignment. f.	 Do two push-ups in my chair every five minutes.

Use different lists for fixed routines to ensure they get used to  the routine, so at some point the list can be thrown out after a  little goodbye party, of course.

Have the student make a habit of checking with others whether  everything is correct: whether they are doing the right task,  have written down the right information, have grabbed  everything they need.

Have the student think about solutions to properly organize  their materials. Initiative and involvement are motivating and  increase alertness. For the overresponsive student

Have them work alone.

Use a timer for difficult tasks. The student is better able to  persist in their task when they know how long they will have to  go on for.

Split the assignment up into smaller tasks to help the student  keep an overview.

Have the student cross off tasks on a list. This suits the  overresponsive students need for structure. Do not use paper 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 192 clips or coins here; they provide more input and the desk can  soon become too cluttered.

Write down instructions or use pictures or icons to give a good  overview.

Use laminated cards that the student can refer to. For example,  they might say:  a.	 Do I know what to do? b.	 What do I need for the assignment? Pencil, eraser,  notebook, hearing protector. c.	 Clean up the desk. d.	 Lay out the hearing protector. e.	 Start the assignment. f.	 If I need it, put on a hearing protector. g.	 When Im done, I can read or do a puzzle.

Make sure the student can anticipate what is coming.

Tell the student in advance if a fire drill with a loud alarm is  coming up and lay out a hearing protector.

Explain in advance how an unknown activity will happen:  when will it be over? What are we going to do next something  familiar? Guys, wake up! When receiving instructions, it is very important that the student is  focused. Their attention shouldnt dwindle. Because if you miss part of  the instructions, you wont know what to do later in the lesson. The  teacher can help by giving instructions in a sensory-friendly manner. Below, we provide tips for adjusting the instructions to activate students. You do this when the student needs some extra sensory input, for  example because they watched an introductory film, during which they  had to passively sit still. The tips can be applied both for the whole class  and individually. You give instructions in an activating manner by:

making quick movements

using sharp contrasts in materials or on the interactive  whiteboard. Use instruction materials and interactive  whiteboard images in black and white or with bright colours,  instead of greys and soft colours

Organize the Classroom 193

varying volume, tone and rhythm of voice or audio

introducing unpredictable, unexpected and new things, for  example suddenly giving instructions while singing

using light touch

letting touch come as a surprise of course, not with the  overresponsive student, but you probably dont have to activate  them as often. Guys, calm down please! Below, we provide tips for adjusting the instructions to calm down  students. There are times when peace and quiet are required in the  classroom, for example when something funny took place outside and  caused a commotion. Everyone will have to calm down before you can  start teaching again. The tips can be applied both for the whole class  and individually. You give instructions in a calming manner by:

using repetition

allowing moments of silence

moving slowly

using a soft, monotonous voice with consistent volume

speaking at a slow pace, in a low tone

being predictable performing actions in a fixed order ensures  the student knows what is going to happen

indicating how long an activity will take

taking more time for certain activities

talking for a shorter period

not letting touch come as a surprise: approach the student  slowly and in their field of vision

using firm touch

being at the students eye level. Fixed rituals in class Teachers often have small rituals to get their students undivided attention. These small rituals are used at many different times:

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 194

as an announcement for fixed times of the day We will clean  up in five minutes

to explain something during a task You can skip question 6,  well do that later

to restore order It is getting a bit rowdy, everyone quiet again,  please!. An addition to the last point: a tool to use to restore order is a noise  meter. You can easily make this yourself by drawing a graph or a coloured  rectangle and hang it on the whiteboard or wall, with a line that rises to  a noise limit. When that limit is reached, you can remind the students  to be quiet. So, you draw this yourself and make the line longer when  the noise increases. A good ritual can help restore disrupted sensory processing. A good  ritual offers a moment to reset. The underresponsive student receives a  new impulse and knows that certain input is coming. The overresponsive  student knows from the ritual that something familiar will follow.  A good ritual offers a moment to reset. A good ritual must meet a few requirements:

It must be striking; the ritual must cause a special reaction.  If you use clapping your hands to request all the following  actions:

silence

work

attention

listening

speaking it is unclear to the students what they should do.

It must be repeatable. Using a sound on your smartphone is  inconvenient if you regularly forget your phone.

It must be in harmony with the response. So, shouting loudly  when asking for silence gives a contradictory message. There are many opportunities to get students focused on the lesson,  which you can apply at different moments:

Turn the lights off and on again, to signal that everyone must  return to their desks.

Organize the Classroom 195

Showing a cartoon on the whiteboard that asks for silence.

Gently clapping your hands to make everyone look to the front.

Counting backwards together, in a whisper, from ten to one.  Gradually all students will start counting with you.

Tapping the whiteboard to make everyone look at the  whiteboard.

Waving your arms to draw attention to yourself.

Clapping your hands to signal that discussion time is over.

Raise your hand when you want attention. Any student who  sees this must then also raise their hand and is no longer  allowed to talk. When you lower your hand, the students will  do the same. 

A bell or a special sound, possibly installed on your smartphone.

Holding up a piece of cardboard with text on it this could also  be a task for a student.

Gently shaking maracas.

Standing at a certain fixed location in the room.

Opening or closing the door very emphatically and mentioning  it while youre doing it. For example, you close the door at the  beginning of the lesson and say, Well, the door is closing, were  going to get started now.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 196 Listening for a looooong time Sometimes it can be difficult to keep all your students involved in circle  time, an evaluation or an educational conversation. Students are easily  distracted when they have not had a turn to speak for a while and have  only had to passively listen to and watch others. Activating strategies  help you in these situations. Are you noticing an increase in unrest or  boredom in the group? If so, apply one of the tips below. Keeping students interested when they  have to listen for a long time

Have the students move around a lot; take every opportunity  to do this. Are you singing a song? Sing standing up and make  movements that go with the song.

Have the students stand up occasionally, for example when they  are telling a story or giving an answer.

Are the students sitting in chairs? Halfway through the activity,  turn the seats around and have everyone sit on them astride.

Sit down on the floor for a change. Give everyone their own  piece of carpet to sit on and to define their own space.

Are you sitting on the floor? Then also try:

lying on your stomach, resting on your elbows

sitting on your knees

sitting with your arms around your knees.

In-between, have everyone stamp their feet this can be done  while sitting or standing.

Stand up for a moment and have everyone make themselves as  tall as possible or shake their bodies.

Have everyone repeat the answer out loud.

Is one student finished telling their story? Have all other  students applaud; this will wake them up again as well. This  could also be an applause using only the fingertips.

For the fidgeters, tie a shoelace to their chair, so they always  have something on hand.

Have the student stand behind their chair as they listen to you.  Direct them to hold the shoelace tied to their chair. This way,  you can be certain they will stay in their spot.

Organize the Classroom 197

Dont forget the overresponsive student. This student mainly  needs space and shouldnt sit next to a restless student. The  outside of the semicircle is a good spot, or next to the teacher  or a quieter student.
10  Tips for Teaching Methods Whats this chapter about? In this chapter, we provide didactic tips, so you can make lessons sensoryfriendly in an easy way. We start this chapter with a discussion about  focus and show how you can take sensory input into account for different  work methods. We give suggestions to keep the focus optimized and tell  you how you can utilize all the senses in your lessons and assignments.  We talk about goal-oriented learning and tests and exams. In conclusion,  you will read about the use of humour in the classroom. TO DO: SIT STILL AND PAY ATTENTION! It may not stand out that much, but a student actually spends a large part of  their day sitting still in their chair. Consider, therefore, how long a student is  sitting still during a full lesson. Write down the number of minutes: 

Looking backretrieving prior knowledge minutes

Overview lesson goals minutes

Introducing new material minutes

Supervised practising minutes

Individual processing of information minutes

Joint review minutes

Discussing the process minutes Total minutes How many minutes does that make? Quite a lot, we think!

Tips for Teaching Methods 199 You really are busy as a bee! The result of the exercise may come as a surprise, because you as a teacher  actually move around a lot.

You walk back and forth in front of the digital whiteboard.

You write, you swipe.

You point to a student who may answer your question.

You walk to a desk.

You squat down.

You pull up a chair.

You open a window.

You pick up a pen from the floor.

And so forth. This means that, as a teacher, you have many opportunities for selfregulation through movement. If your focus drops, you can easily go and  do something. Therefore, you might not notice that the student spends  a lot of time sitting still at their desk during the day. All this time, they  are expected to be quite focused, but they have far fewer opportunities  to use movement to become more alert. You, the teacher, are actually moving around quite a lot. The 10-15-20 minute limit? The above exercise gives you an idea of how long we expect a student to  be able to concentrate during an entire lesson. But is this expectation realistic? Childrens concentration span is often overestimated. Researchers  do not entirely agree on how long children and adults are able to focus  on one task; however, it is shorter than most people think. Nevertheless, scientists do agree that people can concentrate longer  as they age and as they find their tasks more interesting. They can also  concentrate longer when they renew their focus on a task after a short  distraction. This is how it works: during a distraction you kind of zoom  out, like you can do with a camera. The lens refocuses on the complete  picture, your brain relaxes and allows other input to enter. You allow  your brain a break, after which you can focus on the subject again. Having  a small break after 15 minutes and then continuing your task will result  in higher learning efficiency than going on for half an hour at once. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 200 Use activating and calming strategies from Chapter 5, In the classroom  during these interruptions.  SCIENCE AND CONCENTRATION SPAN Dukette and Cornish 2009 found that the average time someone  can concentrate without getting distracted varies from three to five  minutes for young children and up to 20 minutes for adults. This  applies to tasks that are interesting and motivating to that person.  They also write that adults can concentrate much longer, for example on a two-hour film, because they have reset their concentration  through a short distraction. In a literature review, the widespread assumption that children  can concentrate in class for ten to 15 minutes at a time is disproved.  The review shows that the studies on which this assumption is based  were often not or only indirectly related to concentration span. Also,  many cited sources could be traced back to personal observations  instead of scientific studies Wilson and Korn, 2007. In another study, a decrease in concentration was observed during  a lecture after 30 seconds, after four-and-a-half to five-and-a-half  minutes, after seven to nine minutes and after nine to ten minutes.  Most of the decreases in concentration lasted about one minute and  became more frequent the longer the lecture lasted. At the end of  the lecture, the short decreases in concentration occurred approximately every two minutes. This study showed that the decrease in  concentration was much less at times and immediately after when  active learning strategies were used, such as during and after demonstrations and asking questions Bunce, Flens and Neiles, 2010.  Matters of the heart A student can only learn fully if, for example, they are not chock-full  of food, do not urgently need to visit the toilet or feel cold. Although  the ability to learn and engage in social behaviour is to some extent  related to being able to properly interpret interoceptive stimuli, relatively  little attention is paid to this in childrens education. You can teach your  students a valuable lesson by talking about this topic. Ask what physical  sensations they feel when they are tired, or in love, or hungry. Becoming  familiar with the signals of interoception, being able to recognize them 

Tips for Teaching Methods 201 and act accordingly, will certainly promote learning efficiency and the  social climate in the classroom! Tell your students how strong their organs are. Your heart is able to  beat very fast; thats okay, its not something to be afraid of. You can tell  them about walking and running, and how your heart can handle both  really well. Also, a full bladder may give you a very uncomfortable feeling  in your belly, but although you bladder can feel like bursting, it very  likely will not burst any time soon if you dont go to the toilet quickly  enough. And if youre healthy, you really wont pass out any time soon  with hunger. This information may reassure students and help them  identify their interoceptive signals. Learning with your legs It has been scientifically proven that exercising during a learning activity  has a beneficial effect on learning. We explained this in Chapter 7, under  Strategies and science. Sitting still and listening for a long time  which  students have to do a lot of in class  is therefore not very good for the  learning process. It is better to embed a strategy into different moments  in your lesson so that students will be activated again. And its even better  to move while learning. When moving, chemicals are released which  activate the brain, so more sensory input is passed along in the brain.  This allows you to better absorb information and learn. Below are some  suggestions. Sitting still and listening for a long time isnt very good for  the learning process. 1. Reviewingretrieving prior knowledge

Everyone stand with your back to the digital whiteboard for a  moment, so we can momentarily look into the past. What did  we learn last time, about?

To retrieve the information you learned last time, walk your  fingers from your neck over the crown of your head to your  forehead. First with your left hand, then with the right and  finally with both your hands at the same time.

We are going to look back, to see what we already know about  this topic. Bend over and look back through the gap between 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 202 your legs. Move back up again. Now we will take a good look  once more.

Stand in pairs:

Use keywords to tell each other what you already know  about

With your finger, write keywords on each others back which  you remember from the lesson about

Act out what you know about The person acting out is not  allowed to talk. 2. Overview of the learning goals that are on the board

Lets all stretch towards the learning goals.

Turn to your neighbour and tell them the learning objective:  At the end of the lesson I can Take turns and repeat twice.

Lets all repeat the learning objectives out loud, all at once! You  can do this in the following ways:

happy

angry

sad 

surprised 

whispering 

rapping

? 3. Introduce new material with suitable exercises

When we start reading, we are going to wake up our eyes by  tapping the lids very gently with our fingertips or by rubbing  them.

When we start maths, well wake our fingers by tapping each  finger with our other hand.

For world orientation, today we will be talking about rivers.  Lets all make swimming movements with our arms or pretend  were jumping into the water. 4. Supervised practising

Applaud the student who gave the correct answer.

Tips for Teaching Methods 203

Give yourself a hug because you knew the right answer.

Give yourself a pat on the shoulder because you engaged in the  thinking process.

Shake your neighbours hand congratulate them if they know  the right answer.

The student who will be giving the answer sits down and the  rest of the students stand up. 5. Independent or group work

Use a strategy of your choice to stay alert. For example, you  can stand up and continue reading, or do chair push-ups.  Everything should be done in silence and only when you feel  you need it.

Im just going to do some finger gymnastics and stretch. 6. Joint review

At the start of the review, we will all look through binoculars.  Make two circles with your hands and put them in front of your  eyes. Take a good look around the room.

Were going to look back while standing up.

Turn your chair around, the back now facing forward, and sit  astride it. 7. Discussing the process

Before we look at how the lesson went, we will walk around the  room.

Circle around on the spot, first to the left and then to the right.

Were going to touch all parts of ourselves that contributed to  this lesson, such as feet, knees, buttocks, abdomen, chest, arms,  hands, mouth, ears, nose, eyes and head. Proximity and distance senses We can divide the eight senses into proximity and distance senses. This  may sound strange, because after all they are all located in our body.  The difference lies in the way the input enters. With distance senses, the 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 204 input comes from outside your body. The distance senses are hearing,  sight and smell. Input from light, sounds or smells comes from outside  and hits your body through light waves, sound waves or tiny molecules  floating in the air. With proximity senses, the input comes from within or on your body.  The proximity senses are touch, balance, movement, taste and interoception. Your skin gets touched, movement comes from your body and  food enters through your mouth. By using proximity senses as well, you provide stronger input.  This way you have a better chance the message will arrive. You can use this knowledge on proximity and distance senses to communicate with your student in the classroom and influence their alertness.  Because when we want to transfer information, we usually do so by  talking and showing things  through the distance senses. This information is not always properly received by the underresponsive student.  The input disappears again as soon as the image is gone, or the spoken  instruction is over. This makes the information fleeting and difficult to  retrieve when the images, smells and sounds are no longer there. By using proximity senses in communication, you provide stronger  input, so you have a better chance the message will arrive. When youre  giving one-on-one instructions, you can start with your hand resting  calmly but firmly on the students arm or shoulder. This way, youre giving activating input and you increase the chance that the student focuses  their attention all on you. You can also activate the student by having  them move a little before you give instructions. This stimulates proximity  senses such as balance and movement. This increases alertness, which  means information can be registered and processed more effectively. Learning with your nose In general, the focus during a lesson is on watching, listening and writing. Therefore, learning with the eyes, ears and fingers. This is quite  one-sided. With most forms of instruction, you mainly appeal to the  distance senses hearing and sight. This input isnt strong enough to  be considered VIP or very interesting. The input disappears as soon as  the image is gone, or the spoken instruction is over. This makes the  information fleeting and difficult to retrieve when the images and sounds 

Tips for Teaching Methods 205 are no longer there. If, on the other hand, during the instruction you  provide information through proximity senses such as touch, balance  and movement, the instruction is better registered. This sensory input  has an activating effect which persists after the input has ended.  Take a critical look at the extent to which your lessons appeal  to all eight senses. Therefore, take a critical look at the lessons, and assess to what extent  they appeal to all eight different senses. How can you adjust this? Here  are some examples:

You can use touch during language lessons, by feeling and  grasping letters. When the students are still learning the letters,  you could have them sculpt all the letters out of clay, or cut  them out of paper or fabric. The same applies to numbers  during maths.

During maths lessons you can use movement by: 

counting steps

reciting the multiplication tables while marching on the  spot

seeing how wide the room is in literal feet

having the students form a triangle or circle.

During geography lessons you can use taste and smell by tasting  food from different countries. During history lessons you can  taste and smell food from the past. In biology lessons you can  use, for instance, mushrooms and edible flowers.

During history lessons you can use balance by posing as  living statues, depicting historical figures. During maths,  multiplication tables can be recited while standing on one leg.

During nature lessons you can use smell by having students  smell different flowers, plants or sea water. During history  lessons you can smell a scent from the past, for example  charcoal.

During biology lessons you can have children eat fruit during a  lesson on the digestive system and have them feel the difference  before and after eating. Or drink three glasses of water and see  who will be the last to use the toilet.  Solutions can also be found for lessons where appealing to a different 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 206 sense is less obvious. For example, let students eat a raisin during such  lessons, or have them smell their own knees. Feeling your project It is a fun challenge for students to involve their senses in all kinds of  assignments. A fixed part of the assignment can be, for example, to have  the student or audience use at least three senses. Ears and eyes will almost always be a part of this, but now the other senses will also be used  alternately. In this way, students become aware of the different sensory  inputs that exist and how they can cause those themselves. This can be  done during many different assignments:

Paperpresentation: offer something to smell, taste, feel, have  everyone move along.

Project: add something that can be touched, describe how  something smells or tastes.

Visual artworkcraft project: touch different materials, carry  them around, create something that moves and imitate it with  your own body.

Film: move along with the main character, have people smell  scents that occur in the film.

Musicdrama: use smell or taste in the theatre too; tap your feet  to the beat. Yay, a learning goal! Learning is fun. Soon, you can do something, or you know something  that you couldnt do or didnt know before. If students are aware of this,  they enjoy having such a goal. A learning goal provides students with  a positive challenge Hattie, 2013. It must be a clear learning objective  though, and this isnt always the case: sometimes lesson goals and learning goals are confused. A lesson goal is usually a means to achieve a learning goal. For example, students concentrate on completing task 4, drawing your mouth  lesson goal, which helps them learn how their own digestive system  works learning goal. Therefore, always start off telling students why  they are going to read a story, watch a video or go on an excursion. What 

Tips for Teaching Methods 207 will they eventually learn? And how does this activity help? To clarify the  learning goal, you can discuss the answers to these questions in advance: 

What are you going to learn? You can make this question clearer  and more interesting by being very explicit:

What will you know or understand soon?

What can you do from now on?

What ideas will you have on the topic?

Why are you learning this?

With whom will you learn this?

When will you learn this?

How are you going to learn this? You can ask the underand  overresponsive student for tips: Which strategies can you use to  achieve this learning goal? This way, students learn to be more involved in their learning process  and to enjoy it more. They experience a feeling of success when they  have achieved the learning goal. The underor overresponsive student  in particular can learn, assisted by you, how to use suitable strategies. Assessments and tests Being assessed or tested is an exciting event for many students. Of  course, this also applies to the underor overresponsive student. Together, try to think in advance about  which strategies could help them  to cope and come to an agreement  about this. For suitable strategies,  see Chapter 5, In your chair. Before the test, you can help the  students. Prepare a range of tools  so students know there is plenty to fiddle and wiggle with. A student  can then place items of choice on their desk. Place extra items in a special  spot in the classroom, such as hearing protection and sunglasses. The  student can then point something out if they need a tool.  If the student knows supportive tools are available, it is reassuring to  them. Sometimes so much so, that they dont even need them. Knowing  that the possibility is there is enough.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 208 It also feels good to approach the assessment or test as a team,  consisting of teacher and student. As a teacher, you signal that youre  doing everything you can to ensure that the student performs as well as  possible. This can make the student feel supported. You could even turn  it into a game, including a plan of attack and tactical discussions. Discuss  with the student: How are we going to approach this? What plan can  we make for this? Guidelines provide direction Help the student who needs more support to be able to continue to  work independently by visualizing the assignment. Put icons or pictures  with information on the wall or on the board so students can see them  or put them on their own table. Create icons or images for:

noise level silent, whispering or talking normally

working independentlyworking in pairsgroup work

personal planning or booknotebook planned by the teacher

page numbers written with a whiteboard marker

assignment numbers

clock fill in what time the activity will finish

whom or how you can ask for help raise your handconsult  with classmate

how it will be marked teacher checkscheck it yourself classmate checkscheck with the whole class

what you can do if you finish early. This makes working easier for both the underand overresponsive student; both benefit from clarity. Humour in the classroom When you use humour, students remember information better  and longer. Laughter is healthy for the body. But this isnt all there is to it: by using humour, students also remember information better and longer Jonas, 2009.  Laughter is therefore truly an important tool for learning. Laughing can  help the overresponsive student discharge and calm down. It activates the 

Tips for Teaching Methods 209 underresponsive student. By using humour, you can greatly increase the  acceptance of each others sensory preferences. You do this by joking about  your own oddities and involving the students in this. By drawing attention  to your own underor overresponsivity, you can encourage students to get  to know their own preferences for sensory input. For example, have the  class count the number of times you have lost your glasses or pen in one  day. By using humour consciously, students can get to know each others  being different in a respectful way and it becomes open for discussion. A few tips for using humour:

Find funny pictures or anecdotes before the lesson, for example  about the senses.

Exaggerate your sensory preferences until it becomes quite  ridiculous.

Ask students to depict a sense in a funny way.

Ask students to depict an underor overresponsive celebrity or  historical figure in a funny way. First, try to guess what their  preference will be: do you think Donald Duck needs more or  less input?

Do a laughing exercise: have the students laugh out loud.  Everyone will be laughing for real in no time. Make sure you  stay in control and that the laughter decreases after a while.

Make a joke jar: print jokes about the senses or write them on  a piece of paper, fold them in half and put them in a jar. As a  reward, students can take a piece of paper from the jar and read  it to the class.

Have joke minutes: have students tell jokes for a few minutes.  Of course, preferably jokes that incorporate the senses in  some way.

Recall funny moments: Do you remember when?
Part IV  THE TEACHER WITH  SPI-GLASSES In this last part of the book, we connect the theory with everyday practice.  We want you to be able to put on the SPI-Glasses  which you are now  very familiar with  in everyday situations at school. Cooperation with  parents is discussed; the SPI-Glasses also come in handy here. Sometimes  you and the parent each see the child very differently and that may have  everything to do with your sensory processing
11  Practice Makes Perfect Whats this chapter about? In this chapter, we practise using the SPI-viewing guide see Chapter 4  and choosing strategies in specific situations. We do this based on six  case studies, which take place inside and outside the classroom. First,  we practise characterizing the student: do they need a strategy? If so, is  this an activating or calming strategy? Then you choose which strategies  you could use in the situations described for each student. Characterizing the student Here, we repeat the SPI-viewing guide from Chapter 4 so its  easier for you to consult it. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 214 The SPI-viewing guide The child is displaying disruptive behaviour Step 1:  situation Step 2:  classification Step 3:  assessment Step 4:  strategy Actively Underresponsive  Wiggles and fiddles Is constantly active Impulsive  Talks, talks, talks, talks Crosses boundaries Is too enthusiastic, acts silly Needs extra input  Seeks extra input Passively Underresponsive Sleepy and relaxed No initiative for action Isnt quickly bothered by  things Seems lazy and  uninterested Clumsy and untidy Difficult to get through to Needs extra input  Does NOT seek extra input Students own solution  works, and behaviour really  isnt disruptive Tell the student their  strategy is working Passively   Underresponsive Own solution 	 not present 	 not working 	 working, but is disruptive Offer a strategy Actively   Underresponsive

Practice makes Perfect 215 The child is displaying disruptive behaviour Step 1:  situation Step 2:  classification Step 3:  assessment Step 4:  strategy Actively Overresponsive  Not flexible, wants routine Makes decisions easily  Notices every little change  Is easily annoyed  Refuses, often doesnt want  to come or play along  Wants to determine how  things go Is bothered by input  Avoids input Passively Overresponsive Responds to everything in  their environment Easily angered, grumbles,  cries Impressions last for a long  time Likes to be on their own Things often suddenly  become too much Becomes fearful easily Is bothered by input  Does NOT avoid input Students own solution  works, and behaviour really  isnt disruptive Tell the student their  strategy is working Passively   Overresponsive Own solution 	 not present 	 not working  	 works, but is disruptive Offer a strategy Actively   Overresponsive

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 216 TO DO: CLASSIFYING THE STUDENT  THROUGH THE SPI-VIEWING GUIDE First of all, we will practise classifying the student. How can the students behaviour tell you what is going on with them? We have written out six situations for  you below. First, read about the situation and see which behaviour takes place.  Then, look at the SPI-viewing guide and ask yourself the following questions: 1.	 Is the student underresponsive or overresponsive? 2.	 Why did you come to the classification of being underor overresponsive? 3.	 Does the student show self-regulation? 4.	 Does this self-regulation work sufficiently? 5.	 Is the self-regulation disruptive? 6.	 What is needed now? No strategy but feedback to the student that  what they are doing is working well for them, or an activating or calming strategy? Now look at which classification suits the student and explain why. Of course,  you can also do this exercise with colleagues and compare results. Our answers can be found at the end of the chapter. We will classify the  student and their needs. We will add an explanation every time. 1. Saadia: Working together in groups Situation The students are working in the classroom, creating a maths game. The students are discussing the division of tasks; the teacher is walking around.  The students are working in groups of four; Saadia is working with three  other students. Behaviour Saadia:

tells the others what to do

gives herself the task of looking things up

makes sure others will do the gluing and painting

isnt very open to negotiation

has very clear and well-defined ideas

has a good overview of what needs to be done

asks other groups to be more quiet.

Practice makes Perfect 217 Classification

Explanation

2. Bart: Working independently in the classroom Situation All students are working independently in the classroom. Some text must be  read, and questions must be answered. It is quiet in the room. The teacher has  checked whether everyone understands the assignment. Most students have  already written something in their notebook, but Bart has not written down  anything at all yet. Behaviour Bart:

looks in his book, stares out the window, looks around the room

bites his pencil

looks at his book again, seems to be reading

fiddles with the zipper of his hoody

shifts in his seat

gets up and starts sharpening his pencil

asks if he can go to the toilet. Classification

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 218 Explanation

3. Lynn: Instructions to the entire class Situation In the classroom, the teacher is giving instructions, which requires everyone  to listen and look at the digital whiteboard. The teacher points at things on  the board and provides examples. The students have a book and notebook in  front of them, which they occasionally look at. The teacher is the only one who  talks and moves. Behaviour Lynn:

sits at her table and looks sleepily from the whiteboard to her book

draws something in her notebook

accidentally pushes her book off the desk

sees her pencil also roll off the desk

briefly engages with the teacher, when the teacher attempts to make  contact, but is almost immediately distracted again. Classification

Explanation

Practice makes Perfect 219 4. Lidy: Going home Situation It is the end of the day and everyone is in the corridor. All students must put  on their coats, pack their things and walk down the stairs to the door leading  outside. They will be picked up outside. Lidy is standing at the door of the  classroom. Behaviour Lidy:

delays when she leaves the classroom, because she does not want to  get stuck in the bustle

doesnt want to wait when shes stuck in the bustle, she wants to go  down the corridor quickly

takes her coat, but forgets the other things she must take with her

is quick to start a row

grumbles

does not want to shake the teachers hand

does not talk to the teacher at the door. Classification

Explanation

5. Jamal: Playing football in the playground Situation Jamal participates in a game of football in the playground. He plays very roughly.  He pushes a fellow student, who then falls and has a bleeding knee. A fight  starts. The fellow student cries; he and Jamal must report to the teacher.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 220 Behaviour Jamal:

has no idea that he is too rough in his play

always plays roughly, according to the fellow student

regularly comes too close to others; he has no idea of personal space

is sad, but above all indignant and really thinks he did nothing wrong. Classification

Explanation

6. Arthur: In the dressing room Situation Arthur is in the dressing room with his classmates, where they are getting  changed for PE. Behaviour Arthur:

chooses a place in the empty half of the dressing room, where the next  class will soon be changing clothes

does not respond to comments from his classmates

changes clothes in silence

is done quickly and then walks towards the almost empty PE hall

sits down on a bench at the side. Classification

Practice makes Perfect 221 Explanation

TO DO: CHOOSE STRATEGIES  Now that you have determined the classification, you can practise offering the  right strategy. We have once more written down the situations below, but now  with the classification included. Read through this information again and write  in each box which strategies you think are suitable. Consider which strategies  you could use in advance and which during the activity. For strategies in the  classroom, check Chapter 5. You can consult Chapter 6 for strategies outside  the classroom. Our answers can be found at the end of this section. There are  several correct answers, as long as they match the classification. You choose  activating strategies for the underresponsive student and calming strategies  for the overresponsive student. 1. Saadia: Working together in groups Situation The students are working in the classroom, creating a maths game. The  students are discussing the division of tasks; the teacher is walking around.  The students are working in groups of four; Saadia is working with three  other students. Classification Saadia is overresponsive and active. Her self-regulation is not entirely sufficient;  Saadia could use some extra calming strategies. Strategies in advance

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 222 Strategies during

2. Bart: Working independently in the classroom Situation All students are working independently in the classroom. Some text must be  read, and questions must be answered. It is quiet in the room. The teacher has  checked whether everyone understands the assignment. Most students have  already written something in their notebook, but Bart has not written down  anything at all yet. Classification Bart is underresponsive and active. His self-regulation isnt working properly;  activating strategies are needed. Strategies in advance

Strategies during

Practice makes Perfect 223 3. Lynn: Instructions to the entire class Situation In the classroom, the teacher is giving instructions, which requires everyone  to listen and look at the digital whiteboard. The teacher points at things on  the board and provides examples. The students have a book and notebook in  front of them, which they occasionally look at. The teacher is the only one who  talks and moves. Classification  Lynn is underresponsive and passive. She needs activating strategies; Lynn isnt  self-regulating to improve her concentration.  Strategies in advance

Strategies during

4. Lidy: Going home Situation It is the end of the day and everyone is in the corridor. All students must put  on their coats, pack their things and walk down the stairs to the door leading  outside. They will be picked up outside. Lidy is standing at the door of the  classroom. Classification Lidy is overresponsive and passive. Lidy does not show self-regulation; she needs  calming strategies. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 224 Strategies in advance

Strategies during

5. Jamal: Playing football in the playground Situation Jamal participates in a game of football in the playground. He plays very roughly.  He pushes a fellow student, who then falls and has a bleeding knee. A fight  starts. The fellow student cries; he and Jamal must report to the teacher. Classification Jamal is underresponsive and active. He needs activating strategies; his selfregulation is too intense for his classmates.  Strategies in advance

Strategies during

Practice makes Perfect 225

6. Arthur: In the dressing room Situation Arthur is in the dressing room with his classmates, where they are getting  changed for PE. Classification Arthur is overresponsive and active. His self-regulatory strategies are working.  Strategies in advance

Strategies during

Answers: Classifying the students  through the SPI-viewing guide 1. Saadia Classification Saadia is overresponsive and active. Her self-regulation is not entirely  sufficient; Saadia could use some extra calming strategies. Explanation Saadia tries to control the situation as much as possible, so she can also  control her processing of sensory input. By taking charge and dividing 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 226 the tasks, Saadia ensures that she does not have to do crafts and therefore  does not have to touch fabric, glue and paint. She can do the research task  on her own, which she likes. For her, this means she has to deal with less  sensory input. Saadia tries to further control her environment by asking  other groups to be silent. The latter is of course impossible when groups  are discussing and crafting. Because of this aspect and because she does  not want to negotiate, she would benefit from support from the teacher  to come up with better strategies. 2. Bart Classification Bart is underresponsive and active. His self-regulation isnt working  properly; activating strategies are needed. Explanation Bart is sitting still and experiences very little input, because it is quiet  in the classroom and there is nothing to see. No one is moving or doing  anything interesting. Bart seeks input by looking outside, moving, chewing on his pencil and fiddling with his clothes. Occasionally, he manages  to read something, but Bart does not reach the level of alertness that  he needs to read the entire text, to understand it and answer questions  about it. He tries to get the movement he needs by walking around and  going to the toilet. 3. Lynn Classification Lynn is underresponsive and passive. She needs activating strategies;  Lynn isnt self-regulating to improve her concentration.  Explanation Lynn does not receive enough input to be alert. She shows no self-regulation in this situation and therefore remains a bit sleepy. Lynn looks at  the digital whiteboard, the teacher and her book, but is not completely  involved in what is being said. Occasionally, she responds to questions  from the teacher, but she does not hold her attention for long. Lynn  seems uninterested. It is difficult to get her involved in the lesson through  the distance senses hearing and sight. She also shows that she is a bit  absent-minded by being clumsy. She knocks her book off the table and 

Practice makes Perfect 227 the pencil follows when she attempts to stop the book from falling. Too  little is going on for Lynn; there is too little sensory input to keep her  alert. She is only allowed to sit still and be quiet while the teacher talks,  shows things and is the only one who moves. 4. Lidy Classification Lidy is overresponsive and passive. Lidy does not show self-regulation;  she needs calming strategies.  Explanation Lidy wants to be the last one out of the classroom, so as not to get stuck  in the bustle near the coat racks. When she gets there, she quickly takes  some things, but does not take the time to see what else she must take  with her. Lidy just wants to get out of the bustle as quickly as possible.  She grumbles and argues because she is tired. The sensory input has  accumulated during the day. When someone touches Lidy  which is  likely to happen in the corridor, at the end of the day  she responds in  an irritated manner. Also having to talk to someone requires too much  of her energy, so she avoids contact with the teacher at the door. She  needs all her energy for the waterfall of input. Once at the door, Lidy  wants to go outside quickly, where there is more room. The need to go  outside is stronger than wanting to comply with the rule to shake hands  before you leave. 5. Jamal Classification Jamal is underresponsive and active. He needs activating strategies; his  self-regulation is too intense for his classmates.  Explanation Jamal seeks input through movement. Only when he is moving a lot and  fiercely, does he feel his body well. For Jamal, much and somewhat rough  contact with his environment, including people, is pleasant. He does not  feel the need for personal space and does not realize that others do. Jamal  does not notice that he is bumping into others too roughly and that his  classmates find his rough play bothersome. It is not his intention to be  like that and he does not understand that others think he is being mean. 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 228 He truly hadnt noticed at all that he had knocked someone over during  football. Jamal therefore does not understand why he is being called to  the teacher and the accusations are coming out of the blue for him. 6. Arthur Classification Arthur is overresponsive and active. His self-regulatory strategies are  working.  Explanation Arthur is overwhelmed by all sounds, movements and the chance of  bodily contact that arises in a busy space. He takes care of himself by  distancing himself and not responding to the stories and comments of  his classmates, because this costs too much energy. Arthur needs that  energy to stay afloat in the busy changing room. By making sure hes done  quickly, he does not have to stay in this, for him, bothersome situation  for too long. Once in the PE hall, Arthur sits down in a quiet place away  from classmates who are coming in and will be running around and  climbing on the already installed PE equipment. Answers: Choose strategies 1. Saadia Strategies in advance 

Have Saadias group work in a quiet place in the hallway or in  the library when the classroom is too hectic.

Make reminder cards with rules of cooperation on them for  example: listen to each other, let each other finish speaking,  compromise, be tolerant and give one to each group. Strategies during

Offer Saadia hearing protection during tasks that do not require  group discussion.

Offer her chewing material during discussions.

Use the timer to show how much time there is for discussions  before Saadia can start doing an individual task.

Practice makes Perfect 229 2. Bart Strategies in advance

Have Bart hand out the books and notebooks.

Have Bart sharpen coloured pencils.

Ask Bart to pick up his laminated card for that assignment  and to ensure that he has everything that he needs for that  assignment. Strategies during

Have Bart listen to music on a music carrier.

Ask him to do chair push-ups before every new assignment.

Ask him to stretch after every page.

Have Bart hand in work to you after every four assignments. 3. Lynn Strategies in advance

Have Lynn make the copies that are needed during the  instruction.

Ask Lynn to run up and down the stairs that she passes on her  way to the copier.

Perform jumping jacks with all students before starting the  instruction.

Make sure Lynn lays out or uses her chewable material. Strategies during

Offer Lynn chewing material.

Explain to her that she can sit down with one leg under her  buttocks.

Ask Lynn to stand up when she has to give an answer. 

Have her turn her chair around halfway through the  instructions and sit astride it. Give her a sign when she should  do this.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 230 4. Lidy Strategies in advance

Agree in advance that Lidy will be the last to leave the  classroom.

Have Lidy shake hands in the classroom instead of in the  doorway or in the hallway.

Make sure her coat hangs in an accessible place.

Hang a card with the jacket: Do I have my bag and jacket? Did I  bring any extra things with me today? Strategies during

Have Lidy wait in a quiet place if her parentguardian is not  there yet.  5. Jamal Strategies in advance

Explain  together with Jamal  to classmates that his playing  roughly is not intentional.

Come up with a signal together, which classmates can give to  Jamal when he is playing too roughly. Strategies during

Ask classmates to give Jamal a sign when he is playing too  roughly.

Provide extra movement possibilities for example, running  after the ball when it rolls away from the field. 6. Arthur Arthur is overresponsive and active. His self-regulatory strategies are  working. You dont need strategies here. It is good to acknowledge what  Arthur is doing and that it is working, so he realizes he is taking good care  of himself. This will inspire him to look for solutions in other situations  as well.
12  He Never Does That  When Hes with Me Whats this chapter about? In this chapter we explain how your impression of a student can differ  from that of a parent or colleague. We show that this may have to do with  sensory processing, and especially with the sensory processing of adults  interacting with the student. To help you think in the right direction,  we describe the extremes of four different types of sensory processing.  We use tables to show how these different types react to each other.  At the end of this chapter we provide tips which you can use to reduce  misunderstandings about the different impressions. Its like theyre a different child 

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 232 Sometimes, during a parentteacher conference, a parent does not recognize their child in the teachers description or vice versa. For example, you  are talking about a student who is difficult to connect with and motivate,  who does not respond when you call them and regularly does not hear  the instructions. You wonder if they are getting enough sleep because  they are always so listless. But the parent is talking about a child who is  always active at home, jumps on the trampoline or plays with their three  dogs. This student is underresponsive and does not get enough input at  school to build up sufficient alertness. At home, the trampoline and the  pets provide enough input to keep them active. Another possibility is that you talk about the student being cooperative and the parent talks about conflicts, irritations and a very inflexible  child. This student is overresponsive and is functioning well at school  because of its regime. They know where they stand and what is expected.  At home, they are extremely overresponsive, because of a parent who is  always enthusiastically looking for extra input. The TV is on all day and  a lot of visitors stop by, who sometimes stay for dinner and sleep over, so  little peace and planning are offered. The student is regularly frustrated  by this and expresses their annoyances at home. The difference in behaviour exhibited by the student also has to do  with the sensory processing of the adult. The teacher or parent often  decides for the child how the environment is set up, or which activities  take place. Whether the adult is underor overresponsive plays a role in  this as well. You probably wont find a trampoline and three dogs at an  overresponsive parents home. Open dialogue These different experiences can cause misunderstandings and may result  in a difficult conversation. Despite this, you all have the best intentions  for the child, and it benefits the student greatly when their parent and  teacher get along. This is why it is important to understand each others  view. Therefore, in this chapter, we explain to you that you are all talking  about the same child. But, as we just mentioned, the childs reaction also  has to do with the adults sensory processing. The different impressions  may depend on the type of adult the child is dealing with. Being aware  of this can help you start a different conversation about the student.

He Never Does That When Hes with Me 233 How do you get to know each other? First, you must know what type the student is. If all has gone well, you  now have enough knowledge to classify them. To find out what type  of adult the student is dealing with, in this chapter we will first take a  look at the home situation. Well show you that there are four types of  parent. If you have no idea what the home situation is like, you can find  out by asking the parent three questions. You can then use a table to look  up how the parent and the child match up. Then, we will look at your  type; you can look up your match with the student in the last table. To  complete the picture, we put all parties in this table: the student, the  parent and the teacher. You can now see all combinations in one glance. We are aware that looking at what type of sensory-seeker you are for  the first time can be complicated or confrontational. This is especially  true for parents who do not have your prior knowledge. That is why we  want to emphasize that all the types we outline are exaggerated. This way,  you get to know the extremes, and with this knowledge and practice you  can start to recognize nuances. We hope that this information helps you  get more insight and work together more easily. The home situation If you do not have the same picture of a student as the parent, you can  investigate whether the parent is mainly underor overresponsive and  whether the parent is actively trying to influence the environmental input or not. This is often clearly visible when wearing your SPI-Glasses. We  will further elaborate on this below for several aspects of the household.  Wearing our SPI-Glasses, we provide examples of what a household can  look like with one dominant form of sensory processing. We assume  that one type predominates: that the person who takes care of the child  and does the housekeeping most of the time will predominate in terms  of what kind of household there is. The points we describe, such as  housekeeping, visitors and sounds, have been chosen because of their  impact on the child.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 234 Characteristics of the four types of parent Underresponsive and active  Characteristics: lively, spontaneous, boisterouschaotic, asks for a lot of  attention, goes on and on and on  This parent is mostly underresponsive and seeks extra sensory input. THE HOUSEHOLD IS FLEXIBLE; THE PARENT: 	 Likes spontaneous actions: We were supposed to go to the cinema, but the  weather is so nice  well go cycling! 	 Does laundry sometimes on Saturday, sometimes on Thursday evening or not  for a whole week, and dinner time changes constantly. 	 Goes grocery shopping at different times and without a list. 	 Keeps things less organized, so objects are not always in the same place. 	 Can be flexible with rules, for example as a general rule, eight oclock is  bedtime, but it can also be half past eight. VISITORS; THE PARENT: 	 Loves to have many visitors, the more the merrier. 	 Enjoys it when a guest stays for dinner at the last minute and everyone is  welcome to stay overnight. SOUNDS; THE PARENT: 	 Likes to allow sounds, for example from the TV or radio. 	 Doesnt find hearing musical instrument practice a problem. MORNING ROUTINE; THE PARENT: 	 Pays attention to the clothes the children are wearing and intervenes if  something isnt right, like if the combination of items doesnt look good. 	 Is preparing breakfast following the latest food trends, while the radio plays.  One week, its a goji berry smoothie, the next week, oatmeal porridge. WHAT IS TRICKY? THE PARENT: 	 Finds it difficult to align routines with the childs needs. The parent is more  likely to expect the opposite; the child must adapt to the routine of the parent. 	 Gets irritated faster when its quiet. Becomes cranky and impatient. 

He Never Does That When Hes with Me 235 Underresponsive and passive Characteristics: flexible and sluggish, isnt easily disturbed, misses information, hard to reach This parent is mostly underresponsive and doesnt seek extra sensory  input. THE HOUSEHOLD IS CALM; THE PARENT: 	 Must be regularly reminded of household chores. 	 Does laundry when there are no more clean clothes. Removes clothing from  the drying rack to put on immediately. 	 Does groceries when the fridge is empty, without a list. 	 Does not tidy much; it is a bit messy and things are not where they should be. 	 Has no clear rules. The child goes to bed when they are tired. VISITORS; THE PARENT: 	 Doesnt plan for many visitors themselves, but people are always welcome. 	 Finds it no problem if a guest joins dinner last minute. SOUNDS; THE PARENT: 	 Allows more sounds, for example from TV or radio; does not always turn these  on themselves. 	 Doesnt find hearing musical instrument practice a problem. MORNING ROUTINE; THE PARENT: 	 Has no fixed routine. 	 Forgets things regularly, even when those things were prepared to be ready to  take along. WHAT IS TRICKY? THE PARENT: 	 Isnt bothered by others, therefore has less need to oversee or arrange their  activities and therefore doesnt notice the needs of others. 	 Retreats if too much is asked, if they cannot meet all demands. Avoids contact  when this happens.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 236 Overresponsive and active  Characteristics: structured and decisive, eye for detail, gets tense easily,  wants to be in control  This parent is predominantly overresponsive and actively tries to  influence sensory input. HOUSEHOLD IS STRUCTURED; THE PARENT: 	 Tries to maintain a structured and controlled household. Because the parent is  not alone, this doesnt always work. 	 Has a fixed place for everything, knows where everything is. 	 Does the laundry at a fixed time and in a fixed order. Colours on Tuesday,  whites on Friday. Irons everything and makes neat stacks in the wardrobe. 	 Keeps a shopping list. Ensures that it is written down in the order in which the  items are found in the store. 	 Has clear rules and tasks. There is no deviation from the set bedtime. VISITORS; THE PARENT: 	 Is happy when visitors come by on appointment, with clear intentions: we are  going to drink coffee, or youre coming over for a nice barbecue. 	 Prefers a limited number of visitors at a time. SOUNDS; THE PARENT: 	 Can handle sounds, but preferably not mixed up and not when they are trying  to focus on something. 	 Doesnt mind musical instrument practice at fixed, agreed to times, behind a  closed door. Toys with sound are played with behind a closed door too. MORNING ROUTINE; THE PARENT: 	 Follows a fixed routine. Everyone receives directions about what needs to be  done and where everything can be found. 	 Doesnt ever forget anything; some things have already been lying in a visible  place for a few days. WHAT IS TRICKY? THE PARENT: 	 Is quickly bothered by others, therefore has a need to oversee or arrange their  activities. 	 Is quickly irritated by unexpected events, will complain and accuse.

He Never Does That When Hes with Me 237 Overresponsive and passive  Characteristics: sensitive, perceptive, likes quiet, nervous, can suddenly get  upset  This parent is predominantly overresponsive and tries to exert little  influence on sensory input.  THE HOUSEHOLD IS CALM; THE PARENT: 	 Prefers to do household chores alone; this means consultation or explanation  how to do everything exactly will not be necessary.  	 Has their own system in which everything has a fixed place, but if someone  else moves it, it wont be put back in that place. 	 Makes a basic shopping list but is quickly distracted by offers and new products  when shopping. 	 Does laundry in stages. For example, washing and hanging it to dry one time,  folding and ironing the next. 	 Doesnt have clear rules and tasks. The child sometimes goes to bed early,  because the parent needs some peace and quiet. VISITORS; THE PARENT: 	 Is happy when visitors come by on appointment, but preferably not every day. 	 Feels more comfortable with one-on-one visits than at parties. SOUNDS; THE PARENT: 	 Grumbles about sounds loud talking, laughter, musical instruments, toys. 	 Does not turn on the radio or TV as background noise. MORNING ROUTINE; THE PARENT: 	 Has a routine in mind, but is not clear about it to the other family members. 	 Realizes at night that the things for the school trip arent ready yet and gets up  to organize this. WHAT IS TRICKY? THE PARENT: 	 Is quickly bothered by others, grumbles about that. 	 Sets strict sometimes too strict rules when something goes wrong which  causes them to be overresponsive. Three questions Perhaps bells have started ringing while reading the descriptions above  and you now have an idea about which type a certain parent is predominantly. If this isnt the case, we will take you another step with a number  of questions for you to ask the parent. The parents answers provide information about their sensory preferences and as such about the parents sensory processing.

Parent is actively  underresponsive Parent is passively  underresponsive  Parent is actively  overresponsive  Parent is passively  overresponsive  How do you  prefer breakfast on  weekends? We usually bake croissants  or something else and we  all sit at the table together.  Often with guests. Then, we  discuss what we will be doing  that day. It doesnt really matter;  sometimes at 10:00,  sometimes not until 11:00.  Its different every weekend.  Sometimes we have breakfast  together, sometimes separately. Sometimes at home,  sometimes in a caf. At 10:00, the table is already  set. Everyone has their own  role in preparing breakfast.  I take care of the sandwich  toppings. Everyone gets a  tasty egg. I always boil eggs  for five minutes, so theyre  not overcooked, yet also not  too runny. Everyone is doing their own  thing at the breakfast table. I  usually read the paper. How do you  celebrate your  childs birthday? Everyone is invited, we all  play adventurous games and  we have a different theme  every year. He usually brings it up  himself, tells us whom he  wants to invite and what we  could do or where we could  go. And thats fine by me. He is allowed to invite eight  friends and we usually have  the party somewhere where  everything is arranged for  us. This way, I dont have  the mess at home. I do bring  earplugs. He comes up with all kinds  of ideas and then we arrange  something. I appreciate it  when other parents help, and  I always hope that not too  many children show up. Can you describe  your childs room? Cosy, with lots of toys, a bed  that can be used to build  forts and on which you can  jump. His room is fine, but I dont  go there that often. I think  he cleans it up a bit himself. I got those handy storage  bins so he can see exactly  where his toys need to go.  But I really have to push him  to get him to actually tidy up. Sometimes its a mess and  I cant find anything, but I  dont go there that often.  Twice a week to put away  clean laundry. 

He Never Does That When Hes with Me 239 The effects of different types of parent on the child Just like the student, the parent can predominantly be a certain type:  underor overresponsive, active or passive. An overresponsive parent  and an overresponsive child often go well together because they have  the same needs: little sensory input and regular moments of peace and  quiet. But an overresponsive student who has an underresponsive parent,  a parent who in this case seeks extra sensory input, will have a harder  time at home. The overresponsive child is looking for peace and quiet  at home. But home is often a bit tumultuous, because that is what the  parent prefers. Now that you have a good impression of the predominant types for  the student and parent, you can look them up in the table below and see  how they match. This allows you to better understand why the parent  describes their child in a certain way. At the top of the table, you will find  the student type, and on the left, the parent type.

Student   Parent  Actively underresponsive  Passively underresponsive  Actively overresponsive Passively overresponsive Actively  underresponsive   Parent and child are  sensory seekers; their needs  and actions correspond.  The child happily participates in seeking sensory  input. The parent responds  positively to the childs ideas.  The parent is a sensory  seeker. In the process, they  make noise, unexpected  things happen, and there is  a lot of activity. The child  benefits from this; they are  sufficiently activated.  The parent is a sensory  seeker, which can make  the home situation quite  hectic. After a day of sensory  overload in school, this child  might collapse when they get  home, because there is not  much peace and quiet to be  found there either.   The child is bothered by  the parent.  The parent offers  insufficient planning and  peace and quiet. The child,  needing this, must look for it  themselves.  The parent is a sensory  seeker, which can make the  home situation quite hectic.  The extra sensory input at  home can quickly become  too much for this child.   The parent is too hectic  for the child. The child is  bothered by this, but doesnt  avoid sensory input and or look for peace and quiet  themselves.

Passively  underresponsive  The child is a sensory  seeker. This fits perfectly; the  extra sensory input added by  the child is pleasant for the  parent as well. The parent  is activated by the childs  behaviour.  Parent and child fit well  together; they have the same  needs.  The parent generates  little extra sensory input.  The child cant function  independently well, because  they dont build up sufficient  alertness to be able to focus  properly. They have to be  reminded of what they are  supposed to do many times.  In general, the child doesnt  reach the level of alertness  necessary to function  properly.   Parent and child fit well  together. The parent does  not generate extra sensory  input, which is pleasant for  the child.   The childs need for less  sensory input is not noticed  by the parent.  Parent and child fit well  together. The parent does  not generate extra sensory  input, which is pleasant for  the child.   The childs need for less  sensory input is not noticed  by the parent. Actively  overresponsive  The parent tries to  limit sensory input and  tries to create peace and  quiet, while the child seeks  extra sensory input and can  create commotion in doing  so. This will particularly  bother the parent, the child  not so much. The parent  experiences the child as very  hectic and will try to calm  them down. Meanwhile, the  child needs this activity to  function.  The parent limits the  amount of sensory input,  so the child doesnt build  up sufficient alertness. The  inactivity does not stand  out; the parent benefits from  a quiet child. The child is  insufficiently activated.  Parent and child understand each others need to  control the amount of sensory input. Both try to create  a planned environment.   The childs strategies  are accepted because the  parent will recognize them as  calming.  Parent and child both  suffer from too much  sensory input and may  both be irritated, which can  aggravate the situation.   Planning and peace  and quiet prevail: a good  situation for the child who  does not regulate sensory  input themselves. The parent  does this for them. The child  is in an environment that  works well for them. cont.

Student   Parent  Actively underresponsive  Passively underresponsive  Actively overresponsive Passively overresponsive Passively  overresponsive  The parent is sensitive  to sensory input and the  child generates a lot of  sensory input. The parent  can experience the child as  being too hectic, and this can  bother them. This may result  in irritation and frustration  from the parent.  The parent benefits from  the inactivity  and thus the  relative peace and quiet  of  the child. The child does not  take sufficient action.  The parent understands  the childs request for a  planned environment. The  parent needs this too and  understands the childs  avoidant strategies as well.   Parent and child have  the same needs. Both are  quickly bothered by their  environment, so the parent  understands the child. 

He Never Does That When Hes with Me 243 Matching teacher and student You too, with your way of processing sensory input, have a certain influence on the student. For example, if you yourself are underresponsive  and are therefore adding a lot of sensory input, this is fine for the underresponsive student who does not look for sensory input themselves.  You both love choosing the drums for the music lesson. We have put on the SPI-Glasses and looked at the types of teachers, based on a number of lesson situations. We have chosen aspects of  teaching that have clear consequences for the student. Again: extremes  are described here  none of the described types really exist. Where do  you fit best? Characteristics of the four types of teacher Underresponsive and active  Lively, spontaneous, boisterouschaotic, asks for a lot of attention, goes  on and on and on  This teacher is mostly underresponsive and looking for sensory input. 	 Way of presenting 	 Is enthusiastic, intense, louder than average, with a lot of energy. 	 Does unexpected things. 	 Rules, order and planning 	 Is spontaneous, often looking for new ideas. 	 Cares less about routine and rules  sometimes follows them, sometimes  doesnt.  	 Believes enthusiasm is more important than order. 	 Regularly deviates from the planning. 	 Personal attention for and participation of students 	 Notices the needs of students less. 	 Has many ideas of their own; there is little room for participation.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 244 Underresponsive and passive  Flexible and sluggish, isnt easily disturbed, misses information, hard to  reach This teacher is mostly underresponsive and does not seek extra sensory  input.  	 Way of presenting 	 Is calm, monotonous, consistent in tone and energy. 	 Follows the existing lesson plans. 	 Rules, order and planning 	 Is flexible. 	 Cares less about routine and rules, but does usually follow them. 	 Isnt quickly bothered by things; the classroom can be a bit noisier. 	 Does not have a good grip on long-term planning. 	 Personal attention for and participation of students  	 Isnt quick to notice things; may therefore miss signals from students. 	 Gives students a lot of freedom to be themselves; there is a high level of  student involvement in decision making. Overresponsive and active  Structured and decisive, eye for detail, gets tense easily, wants to be in  control This teacher is predominantly overresponsive and actively tries to  influence sensory input.  	 Way of presenting 	 Stays away from emotions to keep calm.  	 Gives a lot of clues about what is important to watch out for. 	 Rules, order and planning 	 Likes rules, is inflexible. 	 Likes routine and creates a fixed planning. Loves repeating the same  activities. 	 Wants order in their class. 	 Strictly follows the long-term planning.  	 Personal attention for and participation of students  	 Notices everything, is quick to comprehend, quickly connects things. 	 Assumes they already know the students needs; there is little room for  participation.

He Never Does That When Hes with Me 245 Overresponsive and passive  Sensitive, perceptive, likes quiet, nervous, can suddenly get upset This teacher is predominantly overresponsive and tries to exert little  influence on sensory input.  	 Way of presenting 	 Responds to all that is happening in class; can therefore be somewhat  chaotic. 	 Gives short, intense presentations. 	 Rules, order and planning 	 Is flexible but does not oversee the consequences. 	 Responds to the needs of the students; regularly adjusts rules and routines  accordingly. 	 Loves order, peace and structure; doesnt put this into action as much  themselves. 	 Regularly forgets to follow the planning because of the issues of the day. 	 Personal attention for and participation of students  	 Notices everything; can tell how the student is feeling from a single gesture  or facial expression. 	 Follows the needs of students; there is a lot of room for student involvement in decision-making. The effects of different types of parent  and teacher on the student Now, you can use your knowledge about the student, the parent and  yourself, to look at the following table and see what the consequences are  for the student in different situations at school and at home. Here, the  teacher type has been incorporated in the table as well. This gives you a  quick overview of the school and home situation and whether they differ  in terms of types of adult. This allows you to discover why you may have  a very different image of a student than their parent does.

Student    Actively underresponsive Passively underresponsive Actively overresponsive Passively overresponsive Parent Actively  underresponsive   Parent and child are  sensory seekers; their needs  and actions correspond.  The child happily partici pates in seeking sensory  input. The parent responds  positively to the childs ideas.  The parent is a sensory  seeker. In the process, they  make noise, unexpected  things happen and there is  a lot of activity. The child  benefits from this; they are  sufficiently activated.  The parent is a sensory  seeker, which can make  the home situation quite  hectic. After a day of sensory  overload in school, this child  might collapse when they get  home, because there is not  much peace and quiet to be  found there either.   The child is bothered by  the parent.  The parent offers  insufficient planning and  peace and quiet. The child,  needing this, must look for it  themselves.  The parent is a sensory  seeker, which can make the  home situation quite hectic.  The extra sensory input at  home can quickly become  too much for this child.   The parent is too hectic  for the child. The child is  bothered by this, but doesnt  avoid sensory input and or look for peace and quiet  themselves.

Teacher   Actively   underresponsive   Teacher and student are  sensory seekers; their needs  and actions correspond.  The student happily  participates in seeking  sensory input. The teacher  responds positively to the  students ideas.  The teacher is a sensory  seeker. In the process, they  make noise, unexpected  things happen, and there is  a lot of activity. The student  benefits from this; they are  sufficiently activated.  The teacher is a sensory  seeker, so the classroom can  be hectic. There may not be  enough peace and quiet in  this class for the student.  The student is bothered by  this teacher.  The teacher offers  insufficient planning and  peace and quiet. The student  needing this, must look for it  themselves.  The teacher is a sensory  seeker, so the classroom can  be hectic. The extra sensory  input in the classroom can  quickly become too much for  this student.   The teacher is too hectic  for the student. The student  is bothered by this, but  doesnt avoid sensory input  andor look for peace and  quiet themselves. Parent Passively  underresponsive  The child is a sensory  seeker. This fits perfectly; the  extra sensory input added by  the child is pleasant for the  parent as well. The parent  is activated by the childs  behaviour.  Parent and child fit well  together; they have the same  needs.  The parent generates  little extra sensory input.  The child cant function  independently well, because  they dont build up sufficient  alertness to be able to focus  properly. They have to be  reminded of what they are  supposed to do many times.  In general, the child doesnt  reach the level of alertness  necessary to function  properly.   Parent and child fit well  together. The parent does  not generate extra sensory  input, which is pleasant for  the child.   The childs need for less  sensory input is not noticed  by the parent.  Parent and child fit well  together. The parent does  not generate extra sensory  input, which is pleasant for  the child.   The childs need for less  sensory input is not noticed  by the parent. cont.

Student    Actively underresponsive Passively underresponsive Actively overresponsive Passively overresponsive Teacher  Passively  underresponsive   The student is a sensory  seeker. This fits perfectly; the  extra sensory input added  by the student is pleasant  for the teacher as well. The  teacher is activated by the  students behaviour.  Teacher and student fit  well together; they have the  same needs.  The teacher generates  little extra sensory input.  The student cant function  independently well, because  they dont build up sufficient  alertness to be able to focus  properly. They have to be  reminded of what they are  supposed to do many times.  In general, the student  doesnt reach the level of  alertness needed to function  properly.  Teacher and student fit  well together. The teacher  does not generate extra sensory input, which is pleasant  for the student.   The students need for less  sensory input is not noticed  by the teacher.  Teacher and student fit  well together. The teacher  does not generate extra sensory input, which is pleasant  for the student.   The students need for less  sensory input is not noticed  by the teacher. Parent Actively  overresponsive  The parent tries to  limit sensory input and  tries to create peace and  quiet, while the child seeks  extra sensory input and can  create commotion in doing  so. This will particularly  bother the parent, the child  not so much. The parent  experiences the child as very  hectic and will try to calm  them down. Meanwhile, the  child needs this activity to  function.  The parent limits the  amount of sensory input,  so the child doesnt build  up sufficient alertness. The  inactivity does not stand  out; the parent benefits from  a quiet child. The child is  insufficiently activated.  Parent and child understand each others need to  control the amount of sensory input. Both try to create  a planned environment.   The childs strategies  are accepted because the  parent will recognize them as  calming.  Parent and child both  suffer from too much  sensory input and may  both be irritated, which can  aggravate the situation.   Planning and peace  and quiet prevail: a good  situation for the child who  does not regulate sensory  input themselves. The parent  does this for them. The child  is in an environment that  works well for them.

Teacher   Actively  overresponsive  This teacher tries to limit  sensory input and tries to  create peace and quiet, while  the student seeks extra  sensory input and can create  commotion in doing so. This  will particularly bother the  teacher, the student not so  much. The teacher experiences the student as very  hectic and will try to calm  them down. Meanwhile, the  student needs this activity to  function.  The teacher limits the  amount of sensory input,  so the student doesnt build  up sufficient alertness. The  inactivity does not stand out;  the teacher benefits from a  calm student. The student is  insufficiently activated.  Teacher and student  understand each others  need to control the amount  of sensory input. Both  try to create a planned  environment.   The students strategies  are accepted because the  teacher will recognize them  as calming.  Teacher and student  both suffer from too much  sensory input and may  both be irritated, which can  aggravate the situation.  Planning and peace  and quiet prevail: a good  situation for the student  who does not regulate  sensory input themselves.  The teacher does that for  them. The student is in an  environment that works well  for them. Parent  Passively  overresponsive  The parent is sensitive  to sensory input and the  child generates a lot of  sensory input. The parent  can experience the child as  being too hectic, and this can  bother them. This may result  in irritation and frustration  from the parent.  The parent benefits from  the inactivity  and thus the  relative peace and quiet  of  the child. The child does not  take sufficient action.  The parent understands  the childs request for a  planned environment. The  parent needs this too and  understands the childs  avoidant strategies as well.   Parent and child have  the same needs. Both are  quickly bothered by their  environment, so the parent  understands the child.  cont.

Student    Actively underresponsive Passively underresponsive Actively overresponsive Passively overresponsive Teacher Passively  overresponsive  The teacher is sensitive  to sensory input and the  student generates a lot of  sensory input. The teacher  may experience the student  as being too hectic and  this can bother them. This  may result in irritation and  frustration from the teacher.  The teacher benefits from  the inactivity  and thus the  relative peace and quiet  of  the student. The student  does not take sufficient  action.  The teacher understands  the students request for a  planned environment. The  teacher needs this too and  understands the students  avoidant strategies as well.   Teacher and student have  the same needs. Both are  quickly bothered by their  environment, so the teacher  understands the student. 

He Never Does That When Hes with Me 251 Tips to reduce lack of understanding When you notice that you and the parent see the student very differently,  you can discuss this with the help of the information above. Explain what  your impression is based on, and emphasize what the student themselves  is already doing about their behaviour and how this shows skill on their  part. Although the types of parent are extremes and do not exist in real  life, looking at the table with them can be a sensitive issue. 

Tell the parent about the student:

what you have noticed in class

whether you are thinking of underor overresponsivity in  the student and why

which strategies the student is displaying themselves

which strategies you offer in addition

which strategies you use with the entire class.

Introduce the Fan-model and explain what the student thinks  their sensory need is in the classroom.

Consider, together with the parent, whether the student could  also do this at home.

Show some strategies that the student uses in the classroom.  There are probably some strategies among these which can also  be used at home, such as:

dining room chair push-ups

chewing material while watching TV or during transitions

fidgeting while visiting the supermarket.

Provide tips to use when out and about as well, which can be  found in Chapter 6.
Bibliography Allen, A.P., Jacob, T.J.C.  Smith, A.P. 2014 Effects and after-effects of chewing gum on vigilance, heart rate, EEG and mood. Physiology  Behavior 133, 22, 244251. Andrade, J. 2010 What does doodling do? Applied Cognitive Psychology 24, 1, 100106.  Anthes, E. 2010 Its SO LOUD, I cant hear my budget! Psychology Today. Accessed  on 08 April 2015 at https:www.psychologytoday.comarticles201010outsidein-its-so-loud-i-cant-hear-my-budget. Arnold, A.J., Winkielman, P.  Dobkins, K. 2019 Interoception and Social Connection. Frontiers  in Psychology. Accessed on 06 July 2021 at  https:www.frontiersin.orgarticles10.3389 fpsyg.2019.02589full. Bailer, D.S.  Miller, L.J. 2011 No Longer a Secret: Unique Common Sense Strategies for Children  with Sensory Motor Challenges. Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. Barrett, L.F., Quigley, K.S., Bliss-Moreau, E.  Aronson, K.R. 2004 Interoceptive sensitivity  and self-reports of emotional experience. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 875,  684697.  Best, J.R. 2012 Exergaming immediately enhances childrens executive function. Developmental  Psychology 48, 5, 15011510. Bird, G.  Cook, R. 2013 Mixed emotions: The contribution of alexithymia to the emotional  symptoms of autism. Transl. Psychiatry 3, e285. Brewer, R., Cook, R.  Bird, G. 2016 Alexithymia: A general deficit of interoception. R. Soc.  open sci 3, 150664.  Bunce, D.M., Flens, E.A.  Neiles, K.Y. 2010 How long can students pay attention in class?  A study of student attention decline using clickers. Journal of Chemical Education 87,  14381443. Cain, W.S.  Johnson, F. Jr. 1978 Lability of odor pleasantness: Influence of mere exposure.  Perception 7, 459465. Cardon, G., Clercq, D. de, Bourdeaudhuij, I.  Breithecker, D. 2004 Sitting habits in elementary  schoolchildren: A traditional versus a Moving School. Patient Education and Counseling  54, 2, 133142. Cowley, S. 2010 Lesgeven voor Dummies. Teaching Skills for Dummies. Amsterdam: Pearson  Education Benelux. Craig, A.D. 2002 How do you feel? Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of  the body. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 3, 8, 655666.  Craig, A.D. 2003 Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of the body. Current  Opinion in Neurobiology 13, 4, 500505.  Dalgliesh, C. 2014 Overprikkeld: praktische strategien om de wereld van je prikkelgevoelige kind  te structureren. The Sensory Child Gets Organized. Amsterdam: Hogrefe Uitgevers.  Drolette, E.S., Scuddle, M.R., Raine, L.B., Davis Moore, R., Saliba, B.J., Pontifex, M.B.  Hillman,  C.H. 2014 Acute exercise facilitates brain function and cognition in children who need it  most: An ERP study of individual differences in inhibitory control capacity. Developmental  Cognitive Neuroscience 7, 5364.

Bibliography 253 Dukette, D.  Cornish, D. 2009 The Essential 20: Twenty Components of an Excellent Health  Care Team. Pittsburgh, PA: Dorrance Publishing. Dunn, W. 2013 Living Sensationally: Understanding Your Senses. London: Jessica Kingsley  Publishers. Ebbens, S.  Ettekoven, S. 2013 Samenwerkend leren. Co-operative Learning. Groningen:  Noordhoff Uitgevers. Farley, J., Evan, F.R.  Kingstone, A. 2013 Everyday attention and lecture retention: The effect  of time, fidgeting and mind wandering. Frontiers in Psychology 4, 619. Fedewa, A.L.  Ahn, S. 2011 The effects of physical activity and physical fitness on childrens  achievement and cognitive outcomes: A meta-analysis. Research Quarterly for Exercise and  Sport 82, 3, 521535. Feldman Barret, L. 2017 How Emotions Are Made: The Secret Life of the Brain. London: Pan  Books. Fisher, V., Godwin, K.E.  Seltman, H. 2014 Visual environment, attention allocation, and  learning in young children: When too much of a good thing may be bad. Psychological  Science 25, 7, 13621370.  Frank, D.A., Klass, P.E., Earls, F.  Eisenberg, L. 1996 Infants and young children in orphanages:  One view from pediatrics and child psychiatry. Pediatrics 97, 569578. Golden, R.N., Gaynes, B.N., Ekstrom, R.D., Hamer, R.M., Jacobsen, F.M., Suppes, T., Wisner, K.L.   Nemeroff, C.B. 2005 The efficacy of light therapy in the treatment of mood disorders:  A review and meta-analysis of the evidence. American Journal of Psychiatry 162, 4, 656662. Hannaford, C. 2005 Smart Moves: Why Learning Is Not All in Your Head. Salt Lake City, UT:  Great River Books. Hattie, J. 2013 Visible Learning: A Synthesis of over 800 Meta-Analyses Relating to Achievement.  London: Routledge.  Heijden, I. van der, Hoog, R. de  Stultiens-Houben, S. 2012 Prikkels in de Groep: Samenwerken  aan een sensorisch waardevolle omgeving voor kinderen en jongeren met een verstandelijke  beperking. Sensations in the Group: Working Together on a Sensory Valuable Environment for  Mentally Impaired Children and Adolescents. Apeldoorn: Uitgeverij Garant.  Hinckson, E.A., Aminian, S., Ikeda, E., Stewart, T., Oliver, M., Duncan, S.  Schofield, G. 2013  Acceptability of standing workstations in elementary schools: A pilot study. Preventive  Medicine 56, 1, 8285.  Hoogeveen, P.  Winkels, J. 2001 Het Didactische Werkvormenboek. Variatie en differentiatie in  de praktijk. The Book on Didactic Teaching Methods. Variation and Differentiation in Practice.  Assen: Koninklijke van Gorcum.  Horeweg, A. 2018 De Traumasensitieve School. Anders kijken naar gedrag. The Traumasensitive  School: A Different View on Problem Behaviour in the Classroom. Tielt: Uitgeverij Lannoo. Hupperets, M.D.W., Verhagen, E.A.L.M.  van Mechelen, W. 2009 Effect on unsupervised  home based proprioceptive training on recurrences of ankle sprain: Randomised controlled  trial. British Medical Journal 339, b2684. Jarrett, O.S., Maxwell, D.M., Dickerson, C., Hoge, P., Davies, G.  Yetley, A. 1998 Impact of  recess on classroom behavior: Group effects and individual differences. The Journal of  Educational Research 92, 2, 121126. Jonas, P.M. 2009 Laughing and Learning: An Alternative to Shut Up and Listen. Lanham, MD:  Rowman and Littlefield Education. Kandasamy, N., Garfinkel, S.N., Page, L., Hardy, B., Critchley, H.D., Gurnell, M.  Coates, J.M.  2016 Interoceptive ability predicts survival on a London trading floor. Scientific Report  6, art. nr. 32986. Accessed on 23 March 2021 at www.ncbi.nlm.nih.govpmcarticles PMC5027524. Karnath, H.O.  Broetz, D. 2003 Understanding and treating Pusher Syndrome. Physical  Therapy 83, 12, 11191125. Kranowitz, C. 2007 The Out-of-Sync Child: Recognizing  Coping with Sensory Processing Disorder. Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. Kurihara, K. 2009 Glutamate: From discovery as a food flavor to role as a basic taste umami.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 90, 3, 719S722S. Langelaan, T.  Plomp, W. 2004 De Excellente Leerkracht. De fundamenten van zijn succes. The  Excellent Teacher: Fundamentals of Their Success. Amsterdam: Uitgeverij Nelissen.

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 254 Mahar, M.T., Murphy, S.K., Rowe, D.A., Golden, J., Shields, A.T.  Raedeke, T.D. 2006 Effects  of a classroom-based program on physical activity and on-task behavior. Medicine  Science  in Sports  Exercise 38, 12, 20862094. Mahler, K.J. 2017 Interoception: The Eighth Sensory System. Practical Solutions for Improving  Self-Regulation, Self-Awareness and Social Understanding. Buchanan, MI: AAPC.  Miller, L.J. 2006 Sensational Kids: Hope and Help for Children with Sensory Processing Disorder  SPD. New York: Perigee.  Mohiyeddini, C.  Semple, S. 2013 Displacement behaviour regulates the experience of stress  in men. Stress 16, 2, 163171. Moncrieff, R.W. 1966 Odour Preferences. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley  Sons. Morgan, K., Johnson, A.J.  Miles, C. 2014 Chewing gum moderates the vigilance decrement.  British Journal of Psychology 105, 2, 214225. Moyer, C.A., Rounds, J.  Hannum, J.W. 2004 A meta-analysis of massage therapy research.  Psychological Bulletin 130, 1, 318. Mullender-Wijnsma, M.J., Hartman, E., Greef, J.W. de, Doolaard, S., Bosker, R.J.  Visscher,  C. 2016 Physically active math and language lessons improve academic achievement: A  cluster randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics 137, 19. Parker, C.B. 2015 Embracing stress is more important than reducing stress, Stanford psychologist says.  Accessed on 13 March 2021 at https:news.stanford.edu20150507 stress-embrace-mcgonigal-050715. Pedersen, P.M., Wandel, A., Jrgensen, H.S., Nakavama, H., Raaschou, H.O.  Olson, T.S. 1996  Ipsilateral pushing in stroke: Incidence, relation to neuropsychological symptoms, and  impact on rehabilitation  the Copenhagen Stroke Study. Archives of Physical Medicine and  Rehabilitation 77, 2528. Porges, S.W. 2008 The polyvagal perspective. Biological Psychology 74, 2, 116143.  Porges, S.W. 2011 The Polyvagal Theory: Neuro-Physiological Foundations of Emotions, Attachment, Communication, Self-Regulation. New York: W.W. Norton. Saarikallio, S. 2011 Music as emotional self-regulation throughout adulthood. Psychology of  Music 39, 3, 307327. Schilling, D.L., Washington, K., Billingsley, F.F.  Deitz, J. 2003 Classroom seating for children  with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: Therapy balls versus chairs. American Journal  of Occupational Therapy 57, 534541. Sibley, B.A.  Etnier, J.L. 2003 The relationship between physical activity and cognition in  children: A meta-analysis. Pediatric Exercise Science 15, 243256. Siegel, D.J. 1999 The Developing Mind: Toward a Neurobiology of Interpersonal Experience. New  York: Guilford Press. Thoonsen, M.  van der Gaag, M. 2021  Wiebelen en friemelen voor mensen met een verstandelijke beperking. Over de invloed van zintuiglijke prikkelverwerking op beleven.  Sensory solutions for mentally disabled people. About the influence of sensory processing  on experiencing life. Huizen: Uitgeverij Pica.  Torbeyns, T., Bailey, S., Bos, I.  Meeusen, R. 2014 Active workstations to fight sedentary  behavior. Sports Medicine 44, 9, 12611273. Umeda, S., Tochizawa, S., Shibata, M.  Terasawa, Y. 2016 Prospective memory mediated by  interoceptive accuracy: A psychophysiological approach. Philosophical Transactions of the  Royal Society, B 371, 20160005. Veiligheid.nl n.d. Enkelblessures door sport. Ankle injuries caused by sports. Accessed on  01 July 2021 at www.veiligheid.nlcijfersenkelblessures-door-sport. de Vos, T. 2010 Smaakontwikkeling bij zeer jonge kinderen. Taste development in very young  children. Accessed on 08 April 2015 at www.opvoedadvies.nlsmaakontwikkeling.htm. de Vree, J. n.d. Trap. Accessed on 01 July 2021 at www.joostdevree.nlshtmlstrap.shtml. de Waard, H.  King, D. 2000 Tips voor Lesgevers. Suggesties voor meer werkplezier. Tips for  Teachers: Suggestions for Having More Fun at Work. Apeldoorn: Garant.  Wedekind, C., Seebeck, T., Bettens, F.  Paepke, J. 1995 MHC-dependent mate preferences in  humans. Biological Sciences 260, 1359, 245249. Wilson, K.  Korn, J.H. 2007 Attention during lectures: Beyond ten minutes. Teaching of  Psychology 34, 2, 8589.
Appendix 1: Further Research Investigating sensory processing It may be the case that the teacher, supervisor andor parent thinks that  sensory processing causes a lot of problems for a student and that there  are so many difficulties, that the student is not able to cope well at school  and at home. Further investigating and testing is advisable to see whether  this behaviour is partly the result of problematic sensory processing.  This evaluation must be done by a specialist who has followed training  for sensory processing and is certified in this subject. This is usually an  occupational, physical or speech therapist.  SPD therapists conduct evaluations through conversations with the  child, parents and teachers and through observation of the child. The  therapists can use a standardized questionnaire, for instance the Sensory  Profile or the School Companion. The Sensory Profile is for people of different ages and is aimed at the home situation. The School Companion, for  children aged three to 12, is entirely focused on the situation at school. The  results of the evaluation show which problems there may be with sensory  processing. This makes it clear what effect sensory processing has on daily  functioning. The aforementioned questionnaires are not intended to make  a diagnosis. It is, however, a good, complementary tool for formulating  practical advice. Based on all the information gathered about sensory processing,  the child, the parent and the teacher discuss with the therapist which  strategies can help. These strategies fit within the daily routine of the  child and are given as a kind of homework. These strategies can be tried  out at home, at school and in other places. After all, the child has to learn  how to deal with their sensory input in daily life, because that is where  adjustments have to be made. The therapist guides this process.
Appendix 2: Additional  Information Our services On our website www.DutchSensorySolutions.com you will find extensive  information about sensory processing, videos, downloads and links. We offer face-to-face and online training and would love to hear from  you if you have any questions on sensory processing or this book or  maybe would like to discuss one of your students. 
Index Please note: SP refers to sensory processing acoustics in schools 778 activating strategies 113, 119 breathing exercises 115 chair-based exercises 11924 in changing rooms 139 for classroom layouts 1767 during gatherings 1445 during school parties 147 in hallways 182 movement exercises 1279, 1313 outside school 148 in PE halls 1401 in playgrounds 1423 pressing palms together 115 for school trips 151 on transport 14950 whilst changing locations 137 active overresponsiveness 545, 589 characteristics of 601, 136 SPI-viewing guide for disruptive  behaviours 99 tests for 657 active underresponsiveness 545, 556 characteristics of 601, 136 SPI-viewing guide for disruptive  behaviours 98 tests for 657 ADHD, use of therapy balls 85 Ahn, S. 168 alexithymia 92 Allen, A.P. 167 Andrade, J. 169 Anthes, E. 77 arm exercises 122, 126 Arnold, A.J. 92 assessments and tests  schoolwork 2078 assessments using SPI-viewing guide how to do 100 step-1 identifying  behaviours 98100 step-2 classification of  behaviours 1015 step-3 assessment for  strategies 1056 step-4 strategy choice 1069 assignments schoolwork 1902 attention span 199201 attentiveness regulation 30 Autism Spectrum Conditions,  and alexithymia 92 autonomic nervous system 3843 engage and recovery  parasympathetic system 389 stress sympathetic system 39 emergency parasympathetic  system 3940 balance 846 balance boards 1612 Barrett, L.F. 92 bedtime rituals 501, 656 behavioural patterns for underand overresponsivity 5560, 61 in changing rooms 139

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 258 behavioural patterns cont. and hyperactivity 612 identifying impact of  disruptions 623 manipulative and stubborn 62 moving between classes 137 in PE halls 141 in playgrounds 143 Best, J.R. 168 Bird, G. 92 boring sensory input 2930 bouncer sensory filter 2836 door policies 326 location 301 underand overresponsivity 523 breathing exercises 115, 121, 126 Brewer, R. 92 Broetz, D. 85 Bunce, D.M. 200 Cain, W.S. 88 calming strategies 113, 119 breathing exercises 115 chair-based exercises 1247 in changing rooms 13940 for classroom layouts 1778 during gatherings 1456 during school parties 147 in hallways 1823 movement exercises 1301 outside school 148 in PE halls 1412 in playgrounds 1434 pressing palms together 116 and school chores 1334 for school trips 1512 on transport 150 whilst changing locations 138 Cardon, G. 170 carrying objects 1567 celebrations and gatherings 1446 cerebral cortex 20, 2830 chair-based exercises activating 1204 calming 1247 noise reduction 1656 changing room activities 13840 chewing aids 1535, 167 class rituals 1935 classroom layouts 17385 activating environments 1767 calming environments 1778 decoration 79 deskworkstation placements  17980, 1801, 18690 importance of 1758 organization of materials 1835 sitting ergonomically 181 student perceptions of 1789 teachers desk and space  organization 183 use of hallways 1823 use of tabletsiPads 182 see also classroom organization;  school environments  and SP impairment classroom organization 18697 desks and workstations  17981, 18690 educational materials  and tools 1902 facilitating listening 1967 instruction giving 1923 role of rituals and schedules 1935 classroom strategies 11834 by-the-chair movements 12731 chair-based 11924, 1247 floor-based exercises 1314 holdingcarryingfiddling  with things 1569, 169 location changing strategies 1378 moving about to aid learning 2013 standing desks 15960, 169 use of chewing aids 1535, 167 use of deep pressure 1556 use of wobble cushions and  balance boards 1602 whole class exercises 1323, 134 see also classroom layouts;  classroom organization class schedules, organization tips 1902 concentration spans 199201 conscious responses 21 Cook, R. 92 Cornish, D. 200 daily schedules, organization tips 1902 deep pressure massage 1556

Index 259 desks 98102 arrangement of 1869 relocation and changing 181 standing 15960, 16970 students 98102, 15960,  16970, 17981 teacher 183 De Vos 90 De Vree, n.d. 81 disruptive behaviours 623 using the SPI-viewing guide 989 dissociation 3940, 44 distractibility, hunger and  toileting needs 2001 Dobkins, K. 92 doodling 169 drinks in the classroom 1623 Drolette, E.S. 168 Dukette, D. 200 Ebbens, S. 1868 educational materials,  organization of 1835 emergency parasympathetic  system 3940 behavioural reactions 423 Fan-model 45 energizer activities 116 see also activating strategies;  relaxation exercises engage and recovery  parasympathetic system 389 behavioural reactions 401 Fan-model 45 ergonomic seating 181 Etnier, J.L. 168 Ettekoven, S. 1868 Evan, F.R. 168 exercise, training programmes 81 Fan-Model unconscious systems  Thoonsen and van der  Gaag 446, 1013 Farley, J. 168 Fedewa, A.L. 168 Feldman Barret, L. 93 fiddling activities 1579, 169 fight, flight or freeze responses 378, 39 behavioural examples 412 see also passive freeze mechanisms filter mechanisms the bouncer 2836 door policies 326 location 301 underand overresponsivity 523 finger exercises 120, 124 Fisher, V. 79 Flens, E.A. 200 floor-based classroom exercises 1314 formatio reticularis 30 Frank, D.A. 83 freeze responses 379, 42 and passive freeze responses 423 gatherings and celebrations 1446 Godwin, K.E. 79 Golden, R.N. 79 guidelines, classroom 208 gum chewing 1534, 167 hallways school 1823 Hannum, J.W. 83 Hattie, J. 206 head exercises 1201, 1256 headphones 1645 hearing 768 hearing protection 1634 Hinckson, E.A. 169 hobbies 63 Horeweg, A. 44 humour in the classroom 2089 hunger signals 2001 Hupperets, M.D.W. 81 hyperactive behaviour misconceptions 612 SPI-viewing guide 1034 hyper-alertness 378 hypoarousal 44 icons, use of 208 identifying sensory processing  responses 4767 ill health 356 immobilization 3940 see also freeze responses information registration 20, 24 instruction giving 190, 1923 insular cortex 31

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 260 internal organs and skin, brain  processing pathways 31 interoception 29, 913 recognizing signals 2001 iPads and tablets 182 Jacob, T.J.C. 167 Jarrett, O.S. 168 Johnson, A.J. 167 Johnson, F. 88 jokes and laughter 2089 Jonas, P.M. 208 Karnath, H.O. 85 Kingstone, A. 168 Korn, J.H. 200 Kurihara, K. 90 laughter in the classroom 2089 laziness 62 learning goals for 2067 moving about during lessons 2013 role of proximity and distance  senses 2034 role of touch, taste and smell 2046 science of 1678 leg exercises 122, 126 light 7880 light therapy 79 lip biting 169 listening in class 1967 location changes 1368 Mahar, M.T. 168 manipulative behaviours 62 massage therapy 83 Miles, C. 167 Mohiyeddini, C. 168 Moncrieff, R.W. 88 monosodium glutamate MSG 90 Morgan, K. 167 morning rituals 513, 67 movement and exercises  802, 1279, 1303 and learning abilities 2013 scientific evidence for 1678 Moyer, C.A. 83 Mullender-Wijnsma, M.J. 167 music 77, 132, 134 use of iPodssmartphones 1645 Neiles, K.Y. 200 neurohormonal system 31 neutral sensory processing 323 identification of 4750, 52 nociceptors 82 noise prevention, for chairs 1656 noises 768 non-classroom strategies 13552 between classrooms 1368 changing rooms 13840 for excursions 1512 for gatherings and parties 1447 hallways 1823 for PE halls 1402 playgrounds 1424 street-based 1478 on transport 14950 norepinephrine 31, 35 odours 878 overresponsivity bouncer filtering mechanisms 345 Fan-model for 456 general strategy guidance 113, 136,   137 hearingaudio indicators 78 and hyperactivity 104 identification of 4753, 6974 indicators for balance 86 interoception indicators 93 key characteristics 601 movement indicators 82 passive and active responses  545, 5860 response to smells 88 and self-regulation 535, 556 stress indicators 378 and students in their own world 105 taste sensitivity 90 tests for 657 touch sensitivity 84 visualsight indicators 80 workstationseating layouts 1801 parasympathetic nervous  system 389, 3940

Index 261 parents four SP types of 2347 impact of different types 23942 perceptions of the student 2313 Parker, C.B. 46 parties, school-based 1467 partitions 1667 passive freeze mechanisms 3940, 423 passive overrresponsivity 55, 5960 characteristics of 601, 136 SPI-viewing guide for disruptive  behaviours 99 tests for 657 passive underresponsivity 545, 568 characteristics of 601, 136 SPI-viewing guide for disruptive  behaviours 98 tests for 657 past experiences impact on experiencing sensations 93 and precedence policy 36 Pedersen, P.M. 85 PE halls 1402 photoreceptors 78 pigeonholing students 51 playground situations 1424 Porges, S.W. 38 posture and balance 845 exercises 123, 1267 studies on 168 precedence policy 36 predictions about SP 93 pressure applications 1556 primary school environments see  classroom layouts; school  environments and SP impairment prioritization of inputs 20, 24, 2830 privacy shields 1667 processing input 20, 24 proprioception 75, 802 prospective memories 92 Pusher syndrome 85 recess days 168 registering information brain 20, 24 relaxation exercises 116 see also calming strategies;  energizer exercises responses to input 201, 25 reticular formation RF 30 rituals morning and evening 503, 657 school 1935 room partitions 1667 Rounds, J. 83 Saarikallio, S. 77 safety feelings 367 scents 878 Schilling, D.L. 85 school coaches 14950 school environments and SP  impairment 634 balance 86 hearing 778 interoception 923 movement 812 sight 7980 smell 88 taste 90 and touch 834 see also classroom layouts;  classroom strategies school excursions 1512 school parties 1467 school tests and assignments 2078 seating arrangement of 1869 ergonomic 181 preventing noise distractions 1656 for teachers 183 self-image, negative 62 self-regulation 535, 556 Seltman, H. 79 Semple, S. 168 senses 6893 identification and recognition 704 impact of past experiences 93 individual nature of 745 balance 846 hearing 768 interoception 913 movement 802 sight 7880 smell 878 taste 8990 touch 824

SENSORY SOLUTIONS IN THE CLASSROOM 262 sensitivity 76 sensory processing SP 1946 described 1920, 235 different input experiences 6874 Fan-model of SP systems 446, 1013 filter mechanisms the  bouncer 2836 how does it work 205 identifying SP abilities 4767 see also autonomic nervous system sensory solutions see strategies  for intervention serotonin 31 shutdowns 3940, 423 Sibley, B.A. 168 Siegel, D.J. 43 sight 7880 smell 878 brain pathways 31 Smith, A.P. 167 sounds 768 SPI-Glasses Sensory Processing  of Input 228 SPI-viewing guide Sensory  Processing of Input 97100 for disruptive behaviours 989 how it works 100 see also assessments using  SPI-viewing guide sports halls 1402 sports injuries 81 stairs, climbability of 81 standing desks 15960, 16970 strategies for intervention 10517 choosing whether to intervene 1056 duration 110 general guidance of overand underresponsiveness 113, 136, 137 getting off to a good start 1069 having doubts about 11213 individual student or class  support 11011 use of chewing aids 1535 see also classroom layouts; classroom  strategies; non-classroom  strategies; teaching methods stress 39 behavioural reactions 412 benefits of 46 Fan-model 45 how threats are processed 368 window of tolerance model  Siegel 434 students homeschool differences 2312, 233 identifying sensory processing  abilities 4764 survival mechanisms 3940 prioritization of sensory input 29 sweets 8990 sympathetic nervous system,  described 38, 39 system responses unconscious see  autonomic nervous system tablets and iPads 182 taste 8990 teacherparent relations common misconceptions 2312 effects on students 24550 tips for managing 2323, 251 teachers four SP types of 2435 identifying own SP abilities 645 own desksurroundings 183 teaching methods 198209 instruction giving 190, 1923 and learning goals 2067 schedules for 1902 student concentration spans 199201 for tests and assessments 2078 use of humour 2089 using all the senses 2036 terminology 434 testing for sensory processing  responses 4767 thalamus 31 therapy balls 85 Thoonsen, M. 45, 101 threats, sensory processing of 368 tiredness 356 toilet breaks 93, 201 Torbeyns, T. 169 touch 824 transport school, strategies for 14950 Umeda, S. 92 unconscious responses 201 see also autonomic nervous system

Index 263 under-arousal 44 underresponsivity bouncer filtering mechanisms 334 common characteristics of 334 Fan-model for 456 general strategy guidance 113, 136, 137 hearingaudio indicators 77 and hyperactivity 104 identification of 4752, 6974 indicators for balance 86 interoception indicators 923 movement indicators 82 passive and active responses 548, 61 response to smells 88 self-regulation 535, 56 and students in their own world 105 tests for 657 to tastes 90 touch sensitivity 84 visualsight indicators 79 workstationseating layouts 17980 see also hypoarousal 44 van der Gaag, M. 45, 101 van Mechelen, W. 81 Veiligheid.nl, n.d. 81 Verhagen, E.A. 81 vestibular system 75, 845 video games 168 Wedekind, C. 88 Wilson, K. 200 window of tolerance model  Siegel 434 Winkielman, P. 92 wintergreen 88 withdrawn or non-engaged students,  SPI-viewing guide 1045 wobble cushions 1601 yoga 134

Other JKP books Simple Stuff to Get Kids   Self-Regulating in School Awesome and In Control Lesson Plans,  Worksheets, and Strategies for Learning Lauren Brukner and Lauren Liebstein Singer Illustrated by John Smisson 25  35  PB  216PP  ISBN 978 1 78592 761 4    eISBN 978 1 78450 623 0 Packed with photocopiable lesson plans and tried-and-tested strategies, this illustrated guide is the ideal companion for teachers and therapists wishing to help kindergarten and elementary school children to self-regulate. It contains everything you  need to integrate the successful, research-based Awesome and In Control program,  which focuses on empowering children to regulate their own emotions and senses  and helps them to develop excellent coping strategies. Explaining how the popular, universal Awesome and In Control program works,  the guide enables you to help children to keep calm and in control during everyday  tasks including reading, writing and paying attention to others. Lauren Brukner is a senior occupational therapist. She specializes in sensory integration and self-regulation strategies for children and young people, and their  implementation in home, school and community settings. Lauren Liebstein Singer is a speech-language pathologist and a licensed Teacher of  Students with Speech and Language Difficulties, currently working for the New York  City Department of Education.

Can I tell you about Sensory Processing  Difficulties? A guide for friends, family and professionals Sue Allen Illustrated by Mike Medaglia 8.99  14.95  PB  56PP  ISBN 978 1 84905 640 3   eISBN 978 1 78450 137 2 Meet Harry  a young boy with sensory processing difficulties. Harry invites readers  to learn about why he finds it hard to process sensory information effectively, and  how even simple things such as washing, dressing and coping with mealtimes can  be challenging for him. He also talks about difficulties he faces at school and why  large groups and loud noises are especially hard. He explains how other people can  have different sensory processing issues and talks about what he and those around  him can do to help. This illustrated book is ideally suited for readers aged 7 and upwards and occupational therapists, teachers, parents, family members and friends of those with sensory  processing difficulties. Sue Allen qualified as an occupational therapist from the Welsh School of Occupational Therapy and completed her MSc with the University of Ulster. She is an  experienced clinician, clinical researcher and postgraduate lecturer with a focus on  families and children dealing with sensory and motor challenges. Sue was Chairman  of the Sensory Integration Network from 2007 to 2013  a not-for-profit organization  that promotes education and research in sensory integration. She now lives and  works in Singapore.

Stay Cool and In Control with the KeepCalm Guru Wise Ways for Children to Regulate their  Emotions and Sense Lauren Brukner Illustrated by Apsley 13.99  21.95  HB  136PP  ISBN 978 1 78592 714 0   eISBN 978 1 78450 300 0 Meet the Keep-Calm Guru, our expert guide to the art of staying cool, calm and in  control in the face of overpowering feelings! This illustrated book introduces wise ways for children to recognize and cope with  anxiety, anger, frustration and other difficult emotions. Using everything from yoga  poses and pressure holds, to deep breathing and relaxing colouring activities, the  Keep-Calm Guru shows kids how to take back control and feel cool, calm and just  right. Suitable for children with sensory and emotional regulation difficulties aged approximately 714 years. Lauren Brukner is a senior occupational therapist. She specializes in sensory integration and self-regulation strategies for children and young people, and their  implementation in home, school and community settings.

Living Sensationally Understanding Your Sense Dr Winnie Dunn 13.99  22.95  PB  216PP  ISBN 978 1 84310 915 0   eISBN 978 1 84642 733 6 How do you feel when you bite into a pearwear a feather boastand in a noisy  auditoriumor look for a friend in a crowd? Living Sensationally explains how peoples individual sensory patterns affect the  way we react to everything that happens to us throughout the day. Some people  will adore the grainy texture of a pear, while others will shudder at the idea of this  texture in their mouths. Touching a feather boa will be fun and luxurious to some  and others will bristle at the idea of all those feathers brushing on their skin. Noisy,  busy environments will energize some people, and will overwhelm others. The author identifies four major sensory types: Seekers; Bystanders; Avoiders and  Sensors. Readers can use the questionnaire to find their own patterns and the  patterns of those around them, and can benefit from practical sensory ideas for  individuals, families and businesses. Dr Winnie Dunn is Professor and Chair of the Department of Occupational Therapy  Education at the University of Kansas Medical Center. She is the leading authority  and internationally recognized for her research about how people respond to sensory  experiences in their everyday lives. Dr Dunn has published widely and her work on  sensory processing includes development of a set of measures, called the Sensory  Profiles, which are used by many disciplines internationally. She lives with her husband Tim in Kansas City, Missouri.