STUDENT DISCIPLINE AND  CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT 

ABOUT THE AUTHOR  Jack Campbell is the author of Individualizing  Instruction for the Educationally Handicapped: Teaching  Strategies in Remedial and Special Education, published by  Charles C Thomas. He has published articles in such  journals as Education, Planning for Higher Education,  Educational Record, Mental Retardation, Education and  Training of the Mentally Retarded, and theJoumal for Special  Educators of the Mentally Retarded.  Since 1995 Jack Campbell has been the Class of  1964 Professor in the Education Department at Mount  Saint Mary's College in Emmitsburg, MD.  He has  served as a visiting professor at St. Andrew's College in  Scotland where he lectured, mentored, and conducted  research. During the 17 years prior to 1995 he served as  Provost and Vice President at Mount Saint Mary's  College. From 1971 to 1978 he served as a professor in  the special education program at the University of  Nevada.  Currently he teaches undergraduate and graduate  courses at Mount Saint Mary's in the areas of special  education, educational psychology, assessment, and  methods of research.  He has been married toJackie Lynn Campbell for 37  years, and is the father of four grown children and the  grandfather of eight. His hobbies are baseball, Jane  Austen novels, and traveling in Scotland. 

STUDENT DISCIPLINE  AND CLASSROOM  MANAGEMENT  Preventing and Managing Discipline  Problems in the Classroom  By  JACK CAMPBELL  Mount Saint Mary's College  Emmitsburg, Maryland  Charles C Thomas  PUB LIS HER 

LTD.  SPRINGFIELD ILLINOIS. U.S.A. 

Published and Distributed Throughout the World by  CHARLES C THOMAS' PUBLISHER, LTD.  2600 South First Street  Springfield, Illinois 62794-9265  This book is protected by copyright. No part of  it may be reproduced in any manner without  written permission from the publisher.   1999 by CHARLES C THOMAS' PUBLISHER, LTD.  ISBN 0-398-07003-2 cloth  ISBN 0-398-07004-0 paper  library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 99-37869  With THOMAS BOOKS carefol attention is given to all details of manufacturing  and design. It is the Publisher's desire to present books that are satisfactory as to their  physical qualities and artistic possibilities and appropriate for their particular use.  THOMAS BOOKS will be true to those laws of quality that assure a good name  and good will.  Printed in the United States of America  CR-R-3  Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data  Campbell, Jack, Ed. D.  Student discipline and classroom management: preventing and  managing discipline problems in the classroom I by Jack CampbelL  p.  cm.  Includes bibliographical references p.  and index .  ISBN 0-398-07003-2 cloth. -ISBN 0-398-07004-0 paper  1. School discipline. 2. Classroom management. 3. Motivation in  education. 1. Title.  LB3012.C34 1999  371.102' 4--dc21  99-37869  CIP 

This book is dedicated to Arthur F. Disque, an exemplary  teacher who seldom encountered discipline problems because  he was a master of student motivation and an exceptional  facilitator of student self-discipline. 

PREFACE  Student discipline is a major area of concern for all teachers. There is no issue about which student teachers are  more concerned than discipline and classroom management.  Beginning teachers tend to worry about whether students  will like them, but mostly they too are concerned about discipline. Similarly, teachers early in their careers indicate that  their biggest area of concern lies in discipline and classroom  management. Even experienced teachers observe that their  most troublesome issue is the issue of discipline in the classroom.  Order and safety in the classroom are necessary for learning to occur. Motivated students, those who willingly and  persistently participate in learning activities, are orderly and  tend to follow the rules and procedures that have been established. Improving the students' positive feelings and beliefs  about themselves and their ability to succeed in school tends  to increase the students' intrinsic motivation to learn.  Understanding student self-esteem and its relationship to student motivation is invaluable in developing the appropriate  plans and strategies of student discipline and classroom management. Student self-esteem must be addressed because it is  directly related to student discipline.  Building student self-esteem is considerably more than  simply making students feel good about themselves, and it is  not something that can be addressed abstractly. Self-esteem  can be improved successfully only when meaningful approbations and reinforcers are provided for legitimate success  experiences in school. Similarly, understanding what student  motivation is and its relationship to student discipline problems is critical. On the one hand, motivation can be seen as  a construct that students have in differential amounts.  vii 

viii  Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Students who have motivation do well, while unmotivated  students struggle and often create discipline problems.  Unfortunately, teachers frequently assume that there is nothing they can do about internal constructs such as motivation.  They feel that students either have it or they don't. On the  other hand, motivation can be seen as a real variable such as  a form of reinforcement which is primarily external to the  student. As student behavior improves as a result of reinforcers being provided, the students are often described as  having improved motivation. In other words, they more  willingly and persistently participate in the instructional  activities that have been prepared by the teacher.  Consequently, student motivation is arguably a judgment of  others who have observed student behavior. Nevertheless,  student motivation is unmistakenly related to student discipline.  Improving student motivation must be included in a  teacher's master plan because it is so highly correlated with  discipline problems in the classroom. Planning for the prevention and management of student discipline problems is  one of the most important activities in which teachers must  engage. A teacher's discipline strategy must be part of a total,  comprehensive  system  of classroom  management.  Classroom management is proactive and includes the establishment of appropriate classroom rules and procedures.  Discipline, on the other hand, is reactive and is a response to  a violation of an established classroom rule or procedure.  The most important objective of any system of classroom  management is the prevention of discipline problems.  Careful planning is the key to the prevention of discipline  problems, and good planning includes carefully developed  procedures and necessary and manageable classroom rules.  As teachers manage their classroom rules and procedures,  they periodically encounter various kinds of student misbehaviors. If these discipline problems have not been prevented, they must be managed when they occur. There are a variPreface  ix  ety of specific strategies, ranging from non-intrusive to very  intrusive, that teachers can employ to effectively deal with  the myriad of diScipline problems they will encounter. It is  almost as though there were a "discipline staircase" teachers  can climb. The higher up the stairs they go, the more intrusive become the discipline strategies. It is essential for teachers to correctly choose and effectively employ the appropriate strategy. It is important not to overreact to a situation  with an intervention that is too heavy-handed, and similarly,  it is necessary not to under-respond to a situation and let it  get out of hand.  Whether a teacher is using a nonintrusive strategy like  moving to the problem or more intrusive strategies like  response-cost or time-out, the most important issue for a  teacher is the issue of consistency. Whatever the rules and  procedures of the class, it is imperative that the teacher  respond to students in a totally consistent manner. In terms  of discipline, all children must be treated exactly the same all  the time. In addition to consistency, perhaps the next most  important concept in student discipline is respect. If teachers are respected by their students, they will have fewer discipline problems with which to deal and will be more effective in dealing with those that occur. The first and most  important step in earning students' respect is to respect them.  Even though student discipline problems can often be categorized into some general types, it is virtually impossible to  anticipate particular problems and to employ predetermined  strategies of intervention. Teachers need to become proficient in using a hierarchy of discipline strategies and comfortable with responding "on the spot" to a multitude of  unique and unexpected situations. In order to do this effectively, it is important, if not essential, for teachers to have  developed a sound theoretical foundation from which to  approach each unique student discipline situation.  It is very important for teachers to understand that discipline problems are a form of student behavior. Because the 

x  Student Discipline and Classroom Management  misbehaviors of students are operant behaviors, they are  amenable to the principles of operant conditioning or behavior management. Teachers who embrace a sound theoretical  underpinning, such as behaviorism, are in an ideal position  to attack the many different situations that will arise in the  name of discipline problems. It is always better to respond to  a discipline situation from a sound, well understood theoretical base, than it is to foolishly attempt to respond to such situations in some type of "cookbook" fashion.  This text is designed to provide that theoretical foundation  and to provide a hierarchy of intervention strategies that  have proven to be effective in dealing with student discipline  problems. It also highlights how a theoretical foundation  should be integrated into a teacher's plan of classroom management and how the hierarchy of discipline strategies form  an essential component of that plan. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  Genuine gratitude is expressed to Nicole Bloczynski and  Erica Czaja, who provided invaluable assistance with manuscript preparation. Sincere appreciation is also offered to the  members of the Mount Saint Mary's College Class of 1964,  whose generosity contributed significantly to the completion  of this project. Finally, I offer heartfelt thanks for unqualified  support and encouragement to my wife, Jackie; my children,  John, Colleen, Catherine, and Kristen; and  my father,  Linwood Campbell.  xi 

CONTENTS  Page  Preface  vii  Chapter  1. SELF-ESTEEM AND STUDENT  3  MOTIVATION  2. MOTIVATION  16  3. THE CONNECTION BETWEEN  32  MOTIVATION AND MISBEHAVIOR  4. PREVENTION OF PROBLEMS  43  5. DEALING WITH PROBLEMS  57  6. DISCIPLINE VIGNETTES  77  7. THEORETICAL FOUNDATION OF  98  STUDENT DISCIPLINE  Index  111  xiii 

STUDENT DISCIPLINE AND  CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT 

Chapter 1  SELF-ESTEEM AND STUDENT  MOTIVATION  Students with high self-esteem have a strong sense of personal efficacy. They feel good about themselves, and they  are comfortable with who they are. Children who feel good  about themselves tend to be motivated to succeed in school.  Motivated students tend to be well behaved and to consistently follow classroom rules and procedures. They are  happy, willing participants in the learning experience. They  are inclined to be interested or they easily become interested  in the learning activities provided by the teacher, and they  tend not to disrupt or cause problems.  Order and  safety in the  classroom  Personal comfort and self-esteem  Motivation  Figure 1.1. Self-esteemmotivation cycle.  3 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  A child's self-esteem is related to his motivation in school.  Waschull and Kemis 1996 found that the more stable a  child's self-esteem, the better they scored on measures of  curiosityinterest and the more likely they were to respond to  a school-related challenge. These findings relate to the cycle  depicted in Figure 1.1. If a student feels good about himself  and feels that he has legitimate self-worth, that student will  be motivated to fully and completely participate in the teachinglearning activities of the class. Students who feel good  about themselves, participating fully in the activities of the  classroom, help create an orderly, safe environment for all  members of the class. When students do not feel that they  can be successful on the tasks of the classroom, they will tend  to stop trying and before long are likely to disrupt the orderly process of the scheduled activity. In other words, they  become discipline problems.  The ultimate goal, of course, is for the activities that teachers plan, organize, and implement to result in student learning. The cycle of self-esteem and student motivation can be  depicted as a hierarchy which concludes with successful  learning on the part of the student Figure 1.2.  Student  self-esteem  Student  motivation  Classroom  order and  efficiency  Student  learning  Figure 1.2. Steps to effectiveness and effiCiency in the classroom. 

Self-esteem and Student Motivation  5  BUILDING STUDENT SELF-ESTEEM  The more that teachers can create and maintain the selfesteem of their students, the more successful they will be in  effectively facilitating student learning. Dembrowsky 1990  suggests five general ways educators can help develop selfesteem in children.  1. Develop positive teacherstudent relationships.  2. Maximize the child's strengths rather than focus only on  weaknesses.  3. Try to make the child's expectations more positive.  4. Help students take responsibility for their own lives.  5. Expose students to positive role models.  These are objectives with which most teachers are familiar  and agree. However, they are objectives that many have not  internalized or incorporated sufficiently into their teaching  strategies.  Developing and Maintaining Self-esteem  Addressing the development and maintenance of the selfesteem of all students, especially those who are or might be  management or discipline problems, is a primary concern of  all teachers. Not only do good teachers want to create an  environment where learning is occurring, they also want an  environment that is orderly and safe, an environment devoid  of discipline problems. An essential ingredient of such an  environment is students who feel good about themselves and  who are confident of their ability to be successful in school.  Some specific strategies that teachers can employ to foster  self-esteem in their students are:  1. Create a sense of identity for the students. Help them become  an important component of the class and school ecology.  One way to do this is to emphasize something special about  each child, something at which the child is particularly good.  A special identity for almost everyone can be found in such 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  roles as the class artist, athlete, or singer. Someone is the best  reader and someone is the best at finding insects on a field  trip. Everyone can have a positive identity.  2. Form a positive teacherstudent relationship. Create an  atmosphere of mutual respect; show the children that you  respect them and value their efforts. Make a conscious effort  to show that you care about each child in your class.  3. Practice deliberate encouragement. Take seriously the mandate to "catch them being good." It can certainly be at academic work, but it doesn't have to be. It can include lining up  for recess, eating lunch politely, watching a film quietly, or  trying really hard during math exercises. The important  thing is to find legitimate reasons to praise and reinforce their  achievements. Let them know that you appreciate and value  their accomplishments or effort.  4. Help them to become comfortable in learning from their mistakes. Emphasize that it is not only acceptable to make mistakes, but it is expected. Show them how you make mistakes  and learn from those mistakes.  5. Personalize the environment for the students. Allow students  to decorate hallways and classroom bulletin boards. Display  students' artwork and freely hang photographs of the students in prominent places. Help them develop responsibility  for their classroom and school and encourage them to feel a  sense of ownership.  6. Help them feel that they are making a contribution to the  school. Allow each student to feel that he brings something  special to the school environment and that the ambience of  the class and school would be lessened without each student's unique contributions. For example, allow them to  tutor younger students or to run errands for teachers.  7. Allow them to participate in decision making to some degree.  Students cannot decide whether or not to have a test, but  they can be asked when they would prefer it. Perhaps they  can help determine when in the day recess should be scheduled or who should read the morning announcements. Even 

Self-esteem and Student Motivation  7  minimal decision making makes them feel that they are part  of the process.  8. Help them develop the skill of self-regulation. Responsibility  is a privilege to be earned, and once it has been earned,  teachers should let students know that they consider them to  be responsible. Try to help students think their way through  problem situations. For example, give them an opportunity  to decide how much work to do each week on a long-term  project.  McCracken 1995 offers similar suggestions. Specifically,  she suggests that in the primary grades teachers should focus  on building trust in their students by   employing predictable schedules   providing authentic feedback   developing warm relationships   showing genuine interest in each child's comments  In addition, teachers should concentrate on promoting  independence in children by having them develop initial  conflict resolution skills so they can attempt to resolve their  own problems. McCracken 1995 concludes that teachers  must encourage success and promote each child's self esteem  by   Showing genuine enthusiasm for effort and accomplishment   Using materials which capture student interest   Using sincere, specific, descriptive praise   Having activities in which the students are likely to feel  that they are making a real contribution  On What Is Self-esteem Based?  A child's self-esteem is dependent, in part, on the image  that child has of himself. Wardle 1995 suggests that a child's  self image is based on the way the environment views the  child and the way the child views himself. A child who feels 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  that he legitimately belongs to a family, a community, a culture, and a school will be in a position to develop a positive,  healthy self-image. One who belongs, truly belongs, to these  groups will be actively interacting with them and will be  helping to formulate his own self-image. "Each child has a  profound impact on the creation of his own self-image: the  way he behaves and responds to the environment Is he  appropriate? fun to be around? obnoxious? and the way he  evaluates information from the environment. He is an active  agent in the development of his own self-image" Wardle,  1995, p. 44.  SELF-ESTEEM OF ATYPICAL CHILDREN  The relationship between self-esteem and motivation is  well established and clearly understood by educators. Lewis  1992 points out, "It is certainly not a new idea to suggest  that motivation and self-esteem are related to one another"  p. 333. The importance of developing and maintaining a  student's self-esteem is paramount. Stipek's 1984 study concludes that children progressively value academic achievement as they advance through school, but their beliefs about  their own academic competence and their expectations for  success gradually decline. She further suggests that by age 11  children begin to believe that ability limits the effectiveness  of effort.  This is especially true for exceptional children.  Exceptional or underachieving children frequently develop a  syndrome called learned helplessness. They often say things  like, "I'm just not smart" or "I'm too stupid to do this." They  conclude that regardless of what they do, they just will not be  successful in school. They come to believe that they are helpless in terms of achieving academic success. Dev 1996  points out that learning disabled students have a tendency to  attribute their successes or failures to external factors such as 

Self-esteem and Student Motivation  9  luck or other people. Dev goes on to conclude that teaching  learning disabled students to attribute performance outcomes to their own efforts rather than external factors can  improve their intrinsic motivation. It is easy to understand  that any kind of prolonged history of believing that they will  not be successful, will certainly affect children's self-esteem  and consequently their motivation.  Disabled Readers  Exceptional children and many children who are considered typical frequently manifest learning problems in a variety of academic areas. Reading is overwhelmingly the academic area in which teachers see the most frequent learning  problems. In discussing strategies for working with disabled  readers, Castle 1994 offers seven guidelines for teachers for  building supportive learning environments. Such supportive  learning environments will tend to facilitate the development  of student self-esteem.  1. Believe in the possibility and probability of success.  Teachers must be sure they are conveying the assumption  that children will be able to improve.  2. Try to create peer acceptance. Children often consider  peers to be significant influences in their lives. Try to foster  positive peer interactions and a climate where all are valued  as individuals.  3. Put reading success in proper perspective. The inability  to read effectively does not mean an inability to learn.  Demonstrate that the ability to read is not the only means  whereby students can gain recognition.  4. Capitalize on student interests. Build instruction around  high interest material that may well serve as a motivator for  achievement and positive attitudes.  5. Focus on how reading communicates. For example, be  careful not to damage self-perception by demanding oral  reading prior to purposeful silent reading or by insisting on 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  perfect grammar and punctuation in a writing assignment  without allowing first drafts to capture essential ideas. Also  be sure students have sufficient background information on  a topic before requiring them to read about it.  6. Expand the positive environment beyond the classroom. In trying to improve a student's self-esteem, teachers  must always include a conscious attempt to affect the home  environment. Try to include parents in the task of building  self-esteem in their children.  7. Be a role modeL Students will learn as much in terms of  attitudes and behaviors from what they see teachers doing as  from what they hear them saying. Help them understand that  reading provides information to you. Let them see that you  enjoy reading and that it makes you feel good.  Minority Students  In addressing the development of self-esteem, substantial  consideration must also be given to the unique circumstances  and characteristics of minority students. "Studies on minority children have yielded mixed results concerning relationships between components of intrinsic motivation and selfperceptions, and achievement" p. 84.  Marchant 1991 conducted a study of self-esteem and  motivation of forty-seven African American urban students.  His major findings were:   Many were reliant on the teacher for evaluations of success and failure.   General feelings of self-worth and happiness were not  related to their perceptions of their behavioral conduct or  their scholastic competence. Instead, physical appearance and athletic ability seemed to be more-important to  these students sense of self-worth.   Although pursuing challenging activities may be related  to more positive feelings about school learning, it may be  perceived as socially unacceptable. 

Self-esteem and Student Motivation  11   Students who had better perceptions of their scholastic  ability had better attendance than those who had lower  perceptions of academic competence.  Self-concept of academic ability depends in large measure  on the child's self-comparison to relevant others. Children in  lower achieving homogeneous groups assess themselves  higher than they would in more heterogeneous groups.  Teachers need to be creative in finding ways to assist minority children in making comparisons with appropriate peers.  School guidance counselors can be an invaluable resource in  such situations. "Classroom guidance activities provide an  excellent forum for promoting motivation in the classroom  on the part of all students, while also helping to advance selfesteem" Lewis, 1992, p. 337.  Although the results of Marchant's 1991 study are far  from generalizable to all black urban elementary students,  the following represent some possible practical implications  of this study:  1. Black urban elementary students may require extra  efforts to promote self-regulation in their learning. Teachers  need to help students establish their own goals and to guide  students in ways that encourage self-monitoring of success.  2. Black urban elementary students may need early  encouragement and specific examples that highlight the relevance of doing well in school. Teachers should present the  "why" of learning along with the "what" and "how."  3. Black urban elementary students may not find the pursuit of challenging work socially desirable. Teachers need to  find ways to reward motivated students in a manner which  encourages socialization.  4. Black urban elementary students who trust their own  judgments but do not perceive themselves as being scholastically competent may have more attendance problems.  Since this relationship is likely to play an increasing role in  attendance and achievement as the student matures, teachers  need to find a way to provide students with choices the students can succeed at in school. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  5. Black urban elementary students may find improving  their standard English vocabulary socially undesirable.  Teachers and communities need to find ways to encourage  and reward the practice of learning English vocabulary in  order to facilitate communication in school and outside a  restricted urban area.  6. Black urban elementary students may rely on the performance and value systems of their peers in order to evaluate their own performance and self-worth. Teachers need to  strive for academic standards and educational values that are  not dependent upon a small racial cultural reference group.  At the same time, teachers need to be aware of and respect  local belief systems.  7. Black urban elementary students must be shown that  they can succeed in school and in life. The rewards of "real"  achievement will lead to a more positive, more complete self  concept. Nothing succeeds like success Marchant, 1991, p.  98.  REALISTIC SELF-ESTEEM DEVELOPMENT  It would be fair to observe that teachers are continually  deluged with reminders about their responsibility to develop  and enhance the self-esteem of their students. McGerald and  Nidds 1996 somewhat humorously suggest that the underlying assumption is that low self-esteem is at the root of all  student problems and is the root cause of children's unhappiness, depression, weight disorders, delinquency, and learning problems. Self-esteem, happiness, and comfort of students  have  become  objectives  unto  themselves.  Considerable effort is often extended to facilitate students'  enjoyment of a learning activity. It is almost the case that we  have become more concerned with our students "liking"  reading than with their becoming "good" at reading.  Teachers are frequently pressed to help children feel generiSelf-esteem and Student Motivation  13  cally good about themselves rather than to feel good about  their successes. They are becoming increasingly reluctant to  say anything negative about students for fear of damaging  their self-esteem. This well intended, but misguided, practice  must be abandoned.  William Damon 1991 tells the story of his son in kindergarten who came home from school early in the year with a  3 x 5 index card on which was written, "I'm terrific." His son  explained that every child in the class was given a similar  card and asked to recite the words every day. When asked to  explain, his son said that he was terrific and that his friends  were terrific. The boy went on to respond that he had no  idea about why, how, or what they were terrific at. Damon  persuasively explains that such self-esteem boosting is fruitless and that self-esteem is not a virtue that can be transmitted abstractly. "We would do better to help children acquire  the skills, values, and virtues on which a positive sense of self  is properly built" Damon, 1991, p. 12. Praise and affirmation for such skills, values, and virtues would then be highly  appropriate. Affirming communications must be embedded  in concrete statements about actual personal qualities, abilities, or actions if they are to have any impact.  Generic self-esteem boosting is not valuable, nor is it the  way to effectively develop self-esteem in students. Academic  challenges and achievements in school are legitimate ways to  enhance self-worth, self-confidence, and acceptance by one's  peers Le., self-esteem. Children will develop appropriate  self-esteem as they experience success in the school-related  activities teachers provide for them. Needless to say, teachers  must assure that the activities to which they expose children  will result in success experiences for them. "With each  accomplishment, students gain self-confidence, which in turn  generates intrinsic motivation, the source of long term dedication that enables students to master complex concepts and  difficult subject matter" McGerald  Nidds, 1996, p. 55.  Teachers must build student self-esteem on the real success  experiences children have in school. The experiences cannot 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  be made to seem successful if they are not. If a student says  the capital of Nevada is Reno, no amount of finessing will  make that response correct. He can be complimented for trying, but there is nothing wrong with telling him that his  answer is wrong. Self-esteem is built on the girders of confidence, which in turn is built on the strong foundation of legitimate success experiences.  If students experience legitimate success experiences in  school, they will most assuredly increase their levels of confidence about learning activities and other school-related situations. As their confidence grows and develops, there will  inevitably be a corresponding increase in their self esteem.  Confident students with appropriate levels of self-esteem  tend to be seen as motivated students or students who have  intrinsic motivation, and they tend not to cause discipline  problems.  REFERENCES  Castle, M.: Promoting the disabled reader's self-esteem. Reading and  Writing QJtarterly: Overcoming Learning Disabilities, lrx2, 159-170, 1994.  Damon, William: Putting substance into self-esteem: A focus on academic and moral values. Educational Horizons, 701, 36-40, 1991.  Dembrowsky, C. H.: Developing self-steem and internal motivation in atrisk youth. Paper presented at National Council for Self-Esteem,  Orlando, FL, March 23, 1990, ED332130, 1990.  Lewis, A. C.: Student motivation and learning: The role of the school  counselor. The School Counselor, 395, 333-337, 1992.  Marchant, G. j.: A profIle of motivation, self-perception, and achievement in black urban elementary students. The Urban Review, 232,  83-99, 1991.  McCracken, j. B.: Image-building: Hands-on developmental process.  Child Care Information Exchange, 7, 48-55, 1995.  McGerald,j., and Nidds,j. A.: Self-esteem or self-confidence? Principal,  761, 55, 1996.  Owens, T.j., Mortimer,j. T., and Finch, M. D.: Self-determination as a  source of self-esteem in adolescence. Social Forces, 744, 1377-1404,  1996. 

Self-esteem and Student Motivation  15  Waschull, S. B., and Kemis, M. H.: Level and stability of self-esteem as  predictors of children's intrinsic motivation and reasons for anger.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 221, 4-13, 1996.  Wardle, F.: How young children build images of themselves. Child Care  Information Exchange,July 104, 44-47, 1995. 

Chapter 2  MOTIVATION  W e are relatively comfortable describing motivated students. They are happy, willing, even eager participants in the learning process. They tend to be interested, or  they easily become interested in the instructional activities  the teacher has prepared. Motivated students choose working partners according to skill and ability and not according  to popularity or friendship. Motivated students persist longer  at a task than unmotivated students, and they perform equally well with or without supervision. They choose larger,  future rewards as opposed to more immediate gratification.  Because they enthusiastically, willingly, and responsibly participate in instructional activities, motivated students tend  not to cause discipline problems.  WHAT IS MOTIVATION?  Defining motivation, however, becomes a bit more tricky.  A major theory used to define or explain motivation was  developed by Abraham Maslow, and it is often referred to as  Maslow's hierarchy of needs theory. This theory suggests that  initially, basic deficiency needs of survival, safety, belonging,  and self-esteem must be met. After these deficiency needs  have been met, the student focuses on growth needs of  knowledge, beauty, and self-actualization. Although it is  unarguable that a starving child or a child in mortal fear for  her life will not be giving priority to a science lesson, the  entire concept of needs reduction is not universally accepted.  16 

Motivation  17  Maslow's theory of motivation will be addressed further in  Chapter 3.  In fact, the entire concept of motivation is open to serious  debate. Many see motivation as a valid variable with which  they can work. Others see motivation as a hypothetical construct based on the observable behaviors children emit.  However it is approached, motivation is a term which cries  out for an operational definition. However, before we construct a workable operational definition of motivation, it will  be worthwhile to consider some practical approaches to this  concept.  APPROACHES TO MOTIVATION  Student motivation can be approached from a variety of  perspectives including the humanistic approach of Maslow.  Motivation can also be viewed from a cognitive approach, a  social learning point of view or a behavioral perspective.  What follows will be an attempt to address two pragmatic  considerations of motivation and to integrate the two in a  meaningful, practical way.  General and Specific Motivation  "  student motivation to learn can be conceptualized  either as a general trait or as a situation-specific state"  Brophy, 1987b, p. 40.  General motivation to learn or to participate in learning  activities is a broad, general disposition which is enduring in  nature. It can be seen as a student's desire to strive for knowledge and skill mastery in school-related situations. The  enduring nature of general motivation is critical because  once it is developed, general motivation persists. The broadness is also an important feature because motivation cuts  across all aspects of the school curriculum. General motiva18  Student Discipline and Classroom Management  tion is the result of a long history of experiences with teachers, classrooms, and schools. It is thought to be a construct  that resides within the learner.  On the other hand, the source of specific motivation is seen  as the topic or the teacher, and a child's specific motivation  depends in large measure on the skill and enthusiasm of the  teacher. It tends to be unstable over time and tends to fluctuate with the changing of topics and lessons.  As a general trait, motivation to learn refers to an enduring disposition to value learning as a worthwhile and satisfying activity, and  thus to strive for knowledge and mastery in learning situations .  In specific situations, a state of motivation to learn exists when task  engagement is guided by the goal or intention of acquiring the  knowledge or mastering the skill that the task is designed to teach.  Brophy, 1987a, pp. 181-182.  Specific motivation energizes students for a particular lesson  or activity. Even the most obstreperous and recalcitrant students actively participate in classroom activities that they  enjoy or find interesting. Because learning disabled students  tend not to attribute their successes and failures to their own  ability and effort, they depend more than most on the  teacher for motivation. Dev, 1996. One could easily conceive of the goal of using specific motivation to develop general motivation.  The goal, of course, is to have or develop students with  abundant amounts of general motivation. The question  becomes one of how to develop general motivation in students who apparently do not have any.  Extrinsic and Intrinsic Motivation  A behaviorally oriented person might see motivation as  reinforcement. It has been well established that reinforced  behavior occurs more frequently than behavior that is not  reinforced. Given that a student will have to engage in some 

Motivation  19  behavior in order for teachers to make a judgment about  whether the child is or is not motivated, it is possible to  manipulate the consequences of student behavior to create  motivation. This type of motivation is known as extrinsic motivation. As an example, it is easy to see how reinforcement in  the form of high test scores, improved grades, teacher compliments, or peer acceptance can be very motivating.  On the other hand, intrinsic motivation is often viewed as a  response to needs such as curiosity or persistence that exist  within the learner. Teachers often refer to such students as  having a "love of learning" or as enjoying learning "for its  own sake." They are implying that there is some internal  force or construct that some students have that drives them  to work hard, be interested, and stay on task. Intuitively most  teachers would prefer that their students be intrinsically  motivated.  In looking at the concepts of extrinsic and intrinsic motivation more closely, we can see that intrinsic motivation is  much the same thing as self-control. " . we call it self-control only when the individual seeks to increase the strength  of behavior that is considered desirable by members of his  society or to decrease the strength of behavior that is considered undesirable" Reese, 1966, p. 48. All of us who have  developed some degree of self-control have had a series of  specific behaviors consistently reinforced throughout our  lives. In other words we received some form of extrinsic  motivation i.e., encouragement, praise, money, or cookies  for behaviors over which we ultimately began to exercise  self-control i.e., studying, partying, or praying. The more an  individual is successful in developing self-control, the more it  can be said that she is developing intrinsic motivation.  Feelings of self-determination and intrinsic motivation could  well be reciprocal  " . with intrinsic motivation influencing self-esteem and self-esteem influencing intrinsic motivation, in a dynamic ongoing process" Owens et al., 1996, p.  1388. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  IMPROVING MOTIVATION  Those who hold that motivation is a real, viable variable  that is internal and something that a student has or does not  have, typically experience genuine difficulty when faced  with the task of attempting to increase a student's motivation.  Some teachers won't even try, claiming that motivation is  something you are born with and that interventions are fruitless when faced with an "unmotivated child." Others may  attempt some environmental restructuring, but feel that their  efforts will depend in large measure on the child's success in  developing an increase in the amount of "internal motivation." Some teachers, however, begin using extrinsic motivation reinforcement to establish and maintain authentic success experiences for the child. Their purpose, of course, is to  help the child develop a sense of intrinsic motivation. In  other words, they are attempting to teach motivation.  It turns out that motivation can be taught. Hilker 1993  conducted a study at the University of Virginia whose purpose was, among other things, to determine if students' motivational orientations can be changed. Initially, she administered an accepted self-report survey that employed a scale of  intrinsic vs. extrinsic orientation to two groups of sixth grade  students. The students ranked themselves along a continuum  of being intrinsically or extrinsically motivated. She then  taught a two-week social studies unit to the two groups. For  one group, she used intrinsic motivators such as helping students set resourceful goals, having students monitor and reinforce themselves, and having students choose an appropriate  final project to demonstrate learning. For the second group,  extrinsic motivators, primarily a token system, was  employed. At the end of the two-week unit the survey was readministered.  Findings indicate that a student's motivational orientations  can be changed when exposed over time to an environment  with a particular motivational orientation. She cautions, howMotivation  21  ever, against assuming that it is appropriate to work only on  the development of intrinsic motivation. "To use a motivational system which incorporates only intrinsic motivators  assumes that schools will provide students opportunities to  learn only what is interesting to them and that schools will  not demand that students learn those things which do not  interest them. This is neither reasonable nor wise . " Hilker,  1993, p. 51. The use of extrinsic motivation, or said another  way, the use of reinforcement is both proper and effective  when exposing students to lessons they do not find inherently interesting. This is indeed an appropriate strategy for the  development of specific motivation.  The more involved a student is in the activities of instruction and the learning process, the less likely that student is to  be involved in any kind of disciplinary problem. The degree  of involvement with the task or the degree to which a new  concept or new material is understandable to a student  depends, in large measure, on the depth of processing in  which she engages. The more that a student is motivated, the  more likely she is to actively engage the learning process.  According to Pintrich et al. 1993, the depth of processing is  related to motivational factors such as whether she has more  of a mastery focus on learning or a performance focus on  a grade or competition orientation. It is also related to her  level of interest and her belief about her ability to be successful. Similarly, according to Cordova and Lepper 1996  the results of their study indicate that students who were  motivated became more deeply involved in the activities,  attempted more complex operations, and consequently  learned more. They point out that student motivation can be  enhanced when teachers make an effort to personalize the  curriculum to some degree by including individualized information about the student's background and interests.  Motivation is also enhanced by providing the students a reasonable amount of choice. "Likewise, students who were  offered a modicum of choice over instructionally incidental 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  aspects of the learning contexts showed greater increases in  motivation and learning" Cordova  Lepper, 1996, p. 726.  REINFORCEMENT AS EXTRINSIC MOTIVATION  If a student will not participate in a learning activity, it is  not uncommon for a teacher to declare that the student is not  motivated. This is especially true if the student has a long history of reluctance to participate. However, if the student is  reinforced properly for approximations of the desired behavior or for executing the desired behavior, it is extremely likely that the student will participate more frequently and more  willingly. As a student participates more willingly, resulting  in a claim that she is becoming more motivated. The claim  for increased motivation becomes even stronger if the new  behavior maintains over time.  For example, if Colleen, a sixth grade student, refuses to  participate in mathematics lessons and in fact often "acts out"  during mathematics, her teacher might well declare that she  is an "unmotivated student." Colleen's lack of interest and  visible unhappiness during mathematics would only support  the claim of lack of motivation. However, if the teacher  began to reinforce her with opportunities to listen to favorite  CDs for any attempts to participate in mathematics,  Colleen's participation in mathematics would most likely  increase. The more she experienced success resulting in  appropriate external reinforcement, the happier and more  willing she would become. A shrewd teacher will naturally  stretch the schedule of reinforcement and accompany the  external or primary reinforcers with secondary reinforcers  like praise statements, pats on the back, and genuine looks of  approval. Praise is a powerful reinforcer, but it is crucial to  be sincere in delivering praise and to only deliver praise  when the student's behavior warrants it. Grey 1995 points  out that praise is often empty and does not consider the child's 

Motivation  23  reality. She maintains that empty praise doesn't tell the child  what is being affirmed or why you think it is good. Teacher  and parental praise statements should have validity and be  linked to real effort and achievement. "They . . . must  encourage children to develop specific skills and values"  Damon, 1991, p. 14.  In our previous example genuine  praise and other nonverbal affirmations should be tied  directly to Colleen's behavior. In time, the primary reinforcers would be essentially replaced with secondary reinforcers resulting in Colleen's ecology providing the same  type of reinforcement that it does to "motivated" students.  This scenario might well result in the teacher stating that  Colleen's motivation had increased.  It is easy to see why some strongly suggest that motivation  is only a hypothetical construct. Claims that Colleen's  improved behavior was the result of increased motivation  can more easily and more accurately be explained as resulting from external reinforcement. Because they come from  outside the learner, reinforcers are potential extrinsic motivators. As success experiences accumulate another type of  consequence may serve as a motivator. Colleen may want to  avoid the consequences of failing the test or not completing  the homework. "Prior school grades also enhance intrinsic  motivation at school" Owens et al., 1996, p. 1396. The  more effective the external reinforcers are, the more success  Colleen will experience. The more success she has, the more  likely that she will develop a desire to continue doing well,  that is, to experience intrinsic motivation.  There exists in the literature some criticisms of the use of  rewards and the suggestion that rewards actually decrease  intrinsic motivation Lepper et al., 1996; Ryan  Deci, 1996;  Kohn, 1996. This is actually not the case at all, and Cameron  and Pierce 1996 establish that rewards can be used effectively to enhance a student's intrinsic interest in activities.  Responding to their critics Cameron and Pierce 1996  strongly maintain that their work has documented that ver24  Student Discipline and Classroom Management  bal praise and performance feedback increase the value of an  activity. "When tangible rewards are offered contingent on  level of performance or are given unexpectedly, students  remain motivated in the subject area" p. 40. They do  acknowledge that a slight negative effect can be expected  when a teacher gives a tangible reward without regard to the  student's performance; however, good teachers wouldn't  provide reinforcement in such a manner.  If a student has a history of being reinforced properly for  effort and performance on a wide range of school tasks, it is  likely that she will develop general motivation.  DEVELOPING STUDENT MOTIVATION  Developing student motivation is a difficult task for most  teachers. Nevertheless, it is an important objective because  when successful, students will perform better academically  and will tend not to cause or contribute to discipline problems in the classroom. According to Owens et al. 1996, students with high grades come to find schoolwork more meaningful and interesting and feel they are improving their ability to think and solve problems. They further indicate that  teachers, in trying to develop student motivation, tend to  respond to student performance, and they go on to point out  that a student's intrinsic motivation for schoolwork is not  affected by the social class of the parents or the student's  innate ability.  Eggen and Kauchak 1997 provide a superb explanation  of how to develop and support student motivation. The two  major suggestions that they offer are:  1. Promote a climate of cooperation rather than competition.  2. Focus on improvement rather than ability.  According to Eggen and Kauchak 1997 three critical variables must be working in harmony in order to accomplish  these suggestions. 

Motivation  25  The first of these variables is teacher characteristics or the  teacher's personal orientation toward students, teaching, and  learning. Nothing is as important to developing student motivation as the teacher characteristics of modeling, enthusiasm,  warmth and empathy, and positive expectations.   Teacher modeling-teachers must model genuine enthusiasm and interest.   Teacher enthusiasm-teachers must consciously demonstrate both verbally and nonverbally their enthusiasm  for the activity .   Teacher warmth and empathy-teachers must demonstrate that teaching is a human activity of relating effectively with people.   Teacher expectations-teachers must communicate their  belief that students can be successful.  The second variable is classroom climate or the characteristics of the classroom that promote feelings of security,  understanding, and appropriate challenge. The steps to creating an appropriate classroom climate are:  1. Keep order and safety in the classroom.  2. Cultivate a climate of success and satisfaction.  3. Assure comprehension and understanding.  4. Maintain a level of appropriate challenge.  An important element in the total classroom climate is the  issue of competition. The question of competition and its  effect on student motivation and performance is interesting.  Almost all teachers have employed some form of competition spelling bees, contests, games, and many also have  stressed that they want their students to compete only with  themselves and not with other students. Some feel competition builds character and confidence while others feel it  makes students insecure and unwilling to participate.  Tripathi 1992 reports that direct competition with another  student and some type of controlling information provided  by the teacher lead to improved immediate performance.  However, competition against a standard and feedback  about competence results in greater intrinsic motivation. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  The third crucial variable according to Eggen and  Kauchak 1997 is instructional variables. Student motivation  and particularly specific motivation is often dependent on  the lesson and the materials used in the lesson. "In particular, the state of motivation to learn exists when students  engage in classroom tasks with the goal of understanding the  content and activate strategies for developing such understanding. Further, the trait or generalized disposition of motivation to learn exists when students routinely seek to accomplish the intended academic goals, either because they enjoy  and take satisfaction in learning or because they feel dutybound to do so" Lee  Brophy, 1996, pp. 304-305.  If students are to be successful and remain on task, it is  essential that they attend to and become involved in the lesson. After attracting a student's attention the teacher must  attempt to personalize it for her and then to involve her in  the lesson. The student should receive constant feedback on  her performance and sincere praise for her efforts and successes.  The issue of student motivation is also addressed by  Lumsden 1994 who summarizes some strategies for fostering motivation. In her comprehensive review she reports that  Brophy 1986 offers four basic types of strategies that teachers can use.  1. Maintain students' expectations of success. Emphasize persistence, mastery, and progress.  2. Supply extrinsic motivation. Use things that students value,  such as good grades, rewards, or special privileges. Be careful not to allow students to become overly reliant on them.  3. Capitalize on existing intrinsic motivation. Provide students  an opportunity to respond and to receive feedback from you  and their peers.  4. Stimulate student motivation to learn. Model interest in and  enthusiasm for learning.  She goes on to point out that Raffini 1993 suggests similar but subtly different strategies, including: 

Motivation  27   Assess student's interests, hobbies, and extracurricular  activities.   Occasionally present information and argue positions  contrary to student assumptions.   Use divergent questions and brainstorming activities.  These are but a few of the good ideas teachers have and can  use to foster motivation in their students.  The importance of specific classroom activities to develop  and support student motivation is clear. It is also clear that  the more student motivation is developed, the fewer the  number of discipline problems a teacher will have to confront. However, there is not an abundance of research in the  area of students' intrinsic motivation. Only recently are we  becoming aware of the important contribution classroom  teachers can make in helping to formulate effective and efficient strategies for fostering student motivation. Future  research in this area perhaps should focus on cooperative  efforts between researchers and classroom teachers.  "Researchers working collaboratively with teachers should  be able to develop a richer understanding of the dynamics of  student motivation and teacher action in the classroom"  Nolen  Nicholls, 1993, p. 67.  SUSTAINING MOTIVATION  Many children come to school exhibiting behavior that  most teachers would agree indicates adequate levels of motivation. Frequently, children for whom that could not be said  develop what is considered to be increased levels of motivation. For these reasons it is important to consider factors  which sustain motivation over time. Story and Sullivan  1986 indicate that the most common measure of continuing  motivation is whether students return to the same task at a  later time. In their study they provide a summary of key factors influencing a student's decision to return to a task. These  factors are: 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management   Feedback from teachers regarding success or competence.   High levels of performance on the initial task.   The students' own perception of their performance; the  better they think they performed, the more likely they  are to return to that task.   The difficulty level of the task; it cannot be too difficult.   How interesting the task was to the students.  The factors that influence continuing motivation which  were determined or substantiated in Story and Sullivan  1986 provide important implications for classroom practice. For example, when a task is too difficult for a student,  the teacher should break it down into smaller, easier component tasks for her. Similarly, teachers should provide students  ample opportunity to practice the skills they are developing  so that they build up appropriate levels of confidence.  Perhaps most importantly, teachers must make every attempt  to make their teaching activities as interesting to the students  as possible. Sometimes this can be accomplished by employing appropriate media or by creating competitive games as  part of the lesson.  The issue of sustaining motivation takes on a special  importance when the issue of more able or gifted children is  considered. The motivation of these children was highlighted in a study by Vallerand et al. 1994. In this study, 64 boys  and 71 girls were assessed on measures of extrinsicintrinsic  orientation and cognitive perceived competence. Of the 135  students average CA 10.1 used in this study, 69 were identified as gifted and 66 were enrolled in regular elementary  classes. It is important to note that the gifted students used in  this study were enrolled in homogeneous, self-contained  classes.  Vallerand et al. 1994 defined intrinsic motivation as a student's willingness to participate voluntarily in an activity in  the absence of rewards or punishment. They also point out  that intrinsic motivation is increased when students engage 

Motivation  29  in activities that are likely to provide them feelings of competence and freedom.  The results of this study revealed two very important findings:   Gifted students displayed higher levels of intrinsic motivation than students in regular classes.   Gifted students perceived themselves to be more cognitively competent than regular students.  Because the gifted students in this study were enrolled in  homogeneous classes, they had the opportunity to explore,  learn new things, and exchange ideas among students of similar intellectual skills at their own accelerated pace. In fact  . it could be hypothesized that the intrinsic motivation of gifted  students might be diminished in the context of heter-ogeneous  classes because these students would have to progress at the slower pace of the regular students. Indeed, the fact of being told  repeatedly to be quiet and give other students a chance to express  themselves might be sufficient to undermine gifted students' sense  of freedom and consequently their intrinsic motivation. Gifted students in such instances would not feel competent but rather controlled by the classroom and would not experience intrinsic motivation. Vallerand et aI., 1994, p. 174  Another important issue concerning the motivation of gifted children is its stability. This issue was examined by  Gottfried and Gottfried 1996 when they assessed 107 children with the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for ChildrenRevised WISC-R for the purpose of determining giftedness.  Those in the sample with full scale IQscores of 130 or higher were identified as gifted.  Academic intrinsic motivation of the sample was assessed  at ages 9, 10, and 13 with the Children's Academic Intrinsic  Motivation Inventory. Although there was no significant  main effect for gender, it was found that the difference in  intrinsic motivation between gifted children and the comparison group remained stable over time. "Relative to the  comparison group children, those who were identified as 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  gifted at age 8 evidenced superior academic intrinsic motivation at ages 9 through 13 years across academic subject  areas and for school in general" Gottfried  Gottfried, 1996,  p. 181.  In order to sustain the intrinsic motivation of more able or  gifted students, especially those in heterogeneous settings, it  is important that they be presented with challenging learning  environments that will allow them to test their abilities and  to develop perceptions of their competence. It is also important that they continue to receive positive feedback to support the development and maintenance of intrinsic motivation.  Motivation Defined  If motivation is not defined as some form of reinforcement, it is usually defined as some type of internal construct.  Because such internal constructs are impossible to validate,  they are usually based on the observable behavior of the student. Typically, someone observes the behavior and declares  the student to be motivated to a greater or lesser degree.  Consequently, we can define motivation as follows:  Student motivation is the perception others i.e., teachers have  concerning the willingness, enthusiasm, and persistence of a student's  on-task behavior. It includes the student's level of self-control of that  behavior and the perception of the student and others concerning the  intrinsic nature of that behavior.  REFERENCES  Brophy,.: Socializing students' motivation to learn. In M. L. Maehr and  D. A. Kleiber Eds., Advances in Motivation and Achievement Vol. 5, pp.  181-210. Greenwich, CT,jAI Press, 1987a.  Brophy,.: Synthesis of research on strategies for motivating students to  learn. Educational Leadership, 45 2, 40-48, 1987b. 

Motivation  31  Cameron,., and Pierce, W. D.: The debate about rewards and intrinsic  motivation: Protests and accusations do not alter the results. Review of  Educational Research, 661,39-51, 1996.  Cordova, D. I. and Lepper, M. R: Intrinsic motivation and the process  of learning: Beneficial effects of contextualization, personalization,  and choice. Journal of Educational Psychology, 884, 715-730, 1996.  Damon, W:. Putting substance into self-esteem: A focus on academic and  moral values. Educational Horizons, 70;1,36-40, 1991.  Dev, P. C.: Intrinsic motivation and the student with learning disabilities.  2-31, 1996.  Grey, K: Not in praise of praise. Exchange, 104, 56-59, 1995.  Gottfried, A. E., and Gottfried, A. W: A longitudinal study of academic  intrinsic motivation in intellectually gifted children: Childhood  through early adolescence. Gifted Child OJtarterly, 40;4, 179-183, 1996.  Hilker,. B.: Toward creating the intrinsically motivating classroom: Can  students motivational orientations be changed? 2-84, 1993.  Kohn, A.: By all available means: Cameron and Pierce's defense of  extrinsic motivators. Review of Educational Research, 66, 1-4, 1996.  Lee, 0., and Brophy,.: Motivational patterns observed in sixth-grade  science classrooms. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 333,  303-318, 1996.  Lepper, M. R, Keavney, M., and Drake, M.: Intrinsic motivation and  extrinsic rewards: A commentary on Cameron and Pierce's metaanalysis. Review of Educational Research, 66, 5-32, 1996.  Lumsden, L. S.: Student motivation. Research Roundup, 10;3,2-5, 1994.  Nolen, S. B., and Nicholls,. G.: A place to begin again in research on  student motivation: Teachers' beliefs. Teaching and Teacher Education,  10;1, 57-69, 1994.  Pintrich, P. R, Marx, R W., and Boyle, R A.: Beyond cold conceptual  change: The role of motivational beliefs and classroom contextual factors in the process of conceptual change. Review of Educational Research,  632, 167-199, 1993.  Ryan, R M., and Deci, E. L.: When paradigms clash: Comments on  Cameron and Pierce's claim that rewards do not undermine intrinsic  motivation. Review of Educational Research, 66, 33-38, 1996.  Story, N. 0., and Sullivan, H.: Factors that influence continuing motivation. Journal of Educational Research, 80;2, 86-92, 1986.  Tripathi, K N.: Competition and intrinsic motivation. Journal of Social  Psychology, 1326, 709-715, 1992.  Vallerand, R., Gagne, F., Senecal, C., and Pelletier, L. G.: A comparison of the school intrinsic motivation and perceived competence of  gifted and regular students. Gifted Child Quarterly, 384, 172-175, 1994. 

Chapter 3  THE CONNECfION BETWEEN  MOTIVATION AND MISBEHAVIOR  JACK CAMPBELL AND TAMARA HATCH  I t is not uncommon for teachers to talk freely about discipline problems they have encountered and to discuss such  cases openly with their colleagues. However, when asked to  define discipline problem, they frequently have some difficulty  pinning it down. Responding to this problem, an article was  published McDaniel, 1981 where students were characterized as representing various "types" of discipline problems.  They were labeled with general, descriptive terms like clown,  bully, baby, sneak, smart-aleck, cheat, and blase. These were  familiar terms to most teachers because most teachers have  had students, at one time or another, who behaved in such a  way as to be characterized as a bully or as a clown, etc., and  these students often would be identified as discipline problems.  In reality there are an extraordinary number of types of  discipline problems with which teachers have to deal. In  attempting to identify what constitutes discipline problems,  McDaniel 1981 states, " . it is probably better to think of  students' discipline problems in terms of the effect of their  behavior on their learning and social growth rather than on  your teaching and peace of mind" p. 225. In other words, a  discipline problem is a student whose behavior inhibits his  learning or the learning of other students. McDaniel goes on  to point out that most teachers would readily characterize the  bully or the smart-aleck as a discipline problem, but they  should be equally concerned about the brown-noser or the  32 

The Connection Between Motivation and Misbehavior  33  sleeper. In one way or another, they all lack self-discipline and  need to be helped to change their motivations and behavioral styles. Without a change in motivation, such children  will experience genuine difficulty in accomplishing their  learning objectives.  One of the most common complaints of teachers is that  students lack motivation. Some educators would suggest that  students always are motivated by various needs and desires,  but in many cases, the motivation results in misbehavior, not  learning behavior. Misbehavior often occurs because the student is motivated to satisfy needs more basic than learning  Maslow, 1954; Wlodkowski, 1986. For a student who feels  incompetent or rejected in school, misbehavior provides  intrinsic rewards greater than the rewards provided by ontask, learning-oriented behavior Adelman  Taylor, 1990;  Heavey et al., 1989. The key to motivating a student to  engage in positive, learning-oriented behavior is first to  examine the classroom environment and the needs and  interests of the particular student. The next step is to work  with the student in devising new activities or learning conditions that will be more intrinsically rewarding than the results  of misbehavior Adelman  Taylor, 1990; Klausmeier   Ghatala, 1971. There are many theories of motivation and  many techniques for increasing motivation, but one theme  that seems to run through all of them is that students are most  motivated to learn and behave appropriately when they feel  they have some control over the learning situation.  MASLOW'S EXPLANATION OF MOTIVATION  There are a host of theoretical constructs that examine  motivation and its effect on behavior, but one of the most  popular and helpful might be the hierarchy proposed by psychologist Abraham Maslow. Maslow 1954 theorized that  human behavior is motivated by a hierarchy of needs. The 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  most basic are physiological needs that must be at least partially fulfilled before higher needs can be met. For example,  there is the need for food. A person who is hungry will be  most motivated to obtain food, not to fulfill some higher  need. When the physiological needs are satisfied, a set of  higher needs emerges: the safety needs, such as the need for  security, stability, and law and order. When those needs are  at least partially fulfilled, there emerges the need for love and  belonging; then the need for esteem, such as the desire to feel  accepted emerges. Maslow also identified cognitive needs  for knowledge and understanding, and aesthetic needs to  appreciate life and beauty. Finally, there is the need for selfactualization, to do what best fulfills the individuaL  It is easy to see how Maslow's hierarchy might apply to the  classroom. Wlodkowski 1986 stated that students who are  busy trying to satisfy any of the lower needs will not devote  their full attention to learning and may instead engage in offtask or disruptive behavior. For example, in the physiological realm, are the students hungry? Are they too warm?  Concerning the issue of safety, do they feel threatened or  intimidated? In terms of students' self-esteem needs, are they  concentrating on becoming liked by their peers instead of  paying attention to schoolwork? Does the class structure  thwart them in their efforts to do what it is they like to do?  Problems will inevitably arise if students are primarily motivated by a desire to fulfill basic needs. "Unless the basic  needs are met, learning becomes a difficult task because the  student's energy is devoted to coping with the pain and state  of deprivation hisher body is feeling" Wlodkowski, 1986, p.  64. Wlodkowski gave many suggestions for satisfying students' needs in all of Maslow's identified areas. For example,  he noted that sleepy students can be crabby or hungry and  bored students tend to be restless. When students experience  these feelings, they are motivated to alleviate them.  "Misbehavior is more stimulating and can allow for a diversion to avoid feeling thirsty, uncomfortable, etc." 

The Connection Between Motivation and Misbehavior  35  Wlodkowski, 1986, p. 64. Wlodkowski recommended that  teachers not reprimand students for being restless or inattentive, but instead indicate that they see the students are restless and ask them what might be done about it. Students who  are hungry might need a snack; those who are restless might  need to stretch. Students who do not feel accepted by classmates might benefit from being in a classroom in which  duties and responsibilities are divided up among everyone in  the class.  In regard to Maslow's highest level, self-actualization, students who are not given the opportunity to realize their full  potential in the learning situation may become disinterested  and disruptive. Wlodkowski suggests that teachers involve  students in deciding what they will learn by, for example,  allowing them to choose from a range of learning styles and  topics that appeal to them. He also recommends that teachers encourage creativity, provide opportunities for problem  solving and academic risk-taking, and allow students, when  feasible, to figure out their own ways to do things. It is clear  that many of these strategies share a common theme: they  make a student responsible for his own learning. A key  impediment to motivation, and a major cause of misbehavior, is when students feel they do not exercise at least some  control of their situations.  PERCEIVED CONTROL AND MOTIVATION  Regardless of the particular theory of motivation, it seems  the common thread running through all the professional literature is that people are most motivated to achieve when  they believe they have some control over their own lives. In  the classroom, students who feel others are excessively controlling them often exhibit behavior problems. When junior  high schools report a high degree of diScipline problems, it  may be due to excessive control over students at a period in 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  their lives when they need more autonomy Eccles et aL,  1991. They conducted a longitudinal study of 2,300 sixthand seventh-grade students to test the hypothesis. The  researchers found that both students and teachers reported  that students had fewer decision-making opportunities in  junior high school than they did in elementary schooL The  students who reported the least amount of involvement with  classroom decision making were the students who physically  matured the earliest. The researchers were not sure whether  this was because the teachers treated them differently or  because the students perceived the environment differently,  but one thing was certain: by the end of the school year, the  most mature students reported twice as often as the lessmature students that they didn't have a say, but should have  one, in decisions about what they would learn, how they  would learn it, or what the classroom rules would be.  Students who perceived the most constraints on their  autonomy were the ones who showed the greatest decline in  intrinsic motivation toward school and, consequently, the  greatest amount of misbehavior. The researchers concluded  that the environment was mismatched to the students' developmental levels. "When they move into junior high school,  many early adolescents experience a decrease in the opportunity to participate in classroom decision-making, and this  decrease is accompanied by a decrease in intrinsic motivation and an increase in school misbehavior" Eccles et al.,  1991, p. 66. Maslow might conclude that these students were  being frustrated in their attempts to become self-actualized.  In any case, schools should attempt to be flexible enough to  find a level of control that fosters positive growth without  undermining intrinsic motivation to learn, and the level of  control must decrease as children become older and have  more desire for autonomy. The idea of giving students reasonable options in deciding what they will study and how  they will learn coincides with Wlodkowski's 1986 suggestions for techniques that help students fulfill their need for  self-actualization. 

The Connection Between Motivation and Misbehavior  37  Students sometimes misbehave in order to feel more in  control of their particular situations. In one study,  researchers polled 127 students, 54 with learning disabilities  and 73 in regular education, to determine, among other  things, how their perceived control correlated with their  level of misbehavior Heavey et aL, 1989. Overall, the students who reported the highest degree of perceived self-control over the school environment were found to exhibit more  misbehavior than students who felt they were less in control  of their lives in schooL This finding seems to contradict the  assumption that students who feel least in control will have  the most behavior problems, but the researchers postulated  that the reason the high-control students felt in control in the  first place was because they were wielding some power over  their environment by misbehaving.  Whereas perceived control describes an individual's perceptions about a certain situation, another term, locus of contro describes a person's general outlook and is an additional factor in behavior and motivation. People with an internal  locus of control believe they are responsible for their actions;  those with an external locus believe forces beyond their control are running their lives. One study indicated that certain  students who have an internal locus are better able to  improve their behavioral motivation than are other students  with an external locus Swenson  Kennedy, 1995. The  researchers examined the results of intervention strategies  used with 307 teenage males who were classified as juvenile  offenders. The study found that many students responded  better to behavioral interventions when they attributed success to their own behavior and when they were concerned  about their delinquent activities, instead of thinking nothing  was wrong. The researchers suggested that to change the  negative behaviors of these students, treatment should  emphasize the individual's control over his own environment. They urged that the students should not be blamed for  their current situations, but at the same time should be made 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  aware that they were responsible for changing their situations.  ASSESSING STUDENT MOTIVATION  It is helpful for a teacher to assess the degree of a student's  motivation to behave and to learn. Once this has been  accomplished, the teacher can probe for underlying factors  that are negatively influencing the motivation, and can subsequently design instructional or environmental modifications. Assessment of motivation can be as simple as observing a student and noting that the student pays no attention to  lessons, but instead talks to friends constantly. Or, the  teacher can make the assessment a bit more controlled and  ask the student questions or have the student complete a survey. For example, researchers in Wisconsin conducted an  experiment in which elementary students filled out a survey  about their behaviors, identified areas they would like to  improve, and then met with teachers on a regular basis to  discuss their progress Klausmeier  Ghatala, 1971. Students  rated themselves on twenty academic and behavioral factors  such as "I listen to the teacher," "I do extra schoolwork," and  "I help my classmates." The teachers also rated the students.  Using the assessment information, the teachers worked with  the students to improve the targeted behaviors, holding conferences with students at regular intervals to discuss progress.  The researchers recorded a great deal of enthusiasm among  students for the project, and by the end of the school year,  students' and teachers' ratings of student behavior had  increased across the board. In contrast to exhibiting the usual  misbehavior at the end of the year, students who participated in the project "kept up their academic work right to the  last day of school, and discipline was no problem" p. 348.  This appears to be another example of how student motivation to engage in appropriate behaviors can increase when 

The Connection Between Motivation and Misbehavior  39  students feel they have some control in the decisions about  their lives.  It is easy to see how an individual classroom teacher might  adapt the techniques of this study to fit her needs. Having  students answer questions about their motivation and their  perceptions of their behavior would be a valuable first step  in creating individualized goals for those students whose  behavior is less than acceptable. This particular study did not  ask students questions about their perceived degree of control in the classroom, but a few simple questions of that type  would help a teacher determine whether some students  might be misbehaving because they feel they have no controL The teacher could then make some changes in the classroom environment, giving students more choices and  options.  MOTIVATION AND MISBEHAVIOR  Motivation is sometimes thought of as the feelings students  get in accepting a challenge or in demonstrating a competence, even if the challenge is to do something wrong. "Some  misbehavior reflects proactive efforts to do things that will  lead to such feelings; other behavior reflects reactive efforts  to deal with threats that interfere with such feelings"  Adelman  Taylor, 1990, p. 543. For example, a student  who sets off the fire alarm is taking a proactive step, seeking  the challenge of breaking the law and looking for the feeling  of competence that will result if he does not get caught. To  prevent misbehavior, Adelman and Taylor recommended  that teachers and administrators change the student's environment so that it is more intrinsically motivating.  Misbehaving often produces more intrinsic rewards than  does participating in school, the writers acknowledged, and  therefore, to prevent misbehavior in students who are so  inclined, "alternatives must be capable of producing greater 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  feelings of self-determination, competence, and relatedness  that usually result from the youngster's deviant actions" p.  346. Unfortunately for the classroom teacher, this can be  difficult; the writers recognized this, and concluded that the  teacher sometimes must find alternatives "well beyond the  norm" p. 347 of what would typically be offered in the  classroom. In addition, Adelman  Taylor 1990 suggest  teachers must be willing to put up with a continuation of  some otherwise unacceptable behavior until the intrinsic  rewards of the new activities extinguish the misbehavior.  Example  A daily report card system worked for an eighth-grade student, "Tim," who exhibited inappropriate classroom behavior and was failing four of his six classes Fairchild, 1983.  The parents wanted a system that would revoke privileges  when Tim behaved inappropriately or did not make an effort  at school. The school developed a daily report card in which  each of Tim's teachers would rate his behavior and effort as  excellent, good, OK, or poor. If he received negative comments, Tim would have to come home immediately after  school and could not watch television, listen to the stereo, or  use the phone. Tim was told he could terminate the daily  report card system when he had ten consecutive school days  with no negative comments. Mter 75 days, Tim achieved his  goal. Before and after the intervention, teachers rated Tim.  on a scale of 1 unacceptable to 4 excellent in behavior and  effort. Before the program, he received average ratings of 1.4  in behavior and 1.8 in effort; three weeks after the report  card system ended, he received ratings of 3.8 in behavior and  4.0 in effort. His grade-point average rose from 1. 71 soon  after the program began to 2.86 at the end of the school year.  And perhaps most indicative of his increased motivation to  learn and behave, Tim requested to return to the daily report  card system for a short period when his grades began to slip  again. 

The Connection Between Motivation and Misbehavior  41  CONCLUSION  When teachers consider that misbehavior can be viewed  as a manifestation of some unfulfilled need, they can look for  ways to satisfy that need. Said another way, the teacher can  look for aspects of the child's environment that are missing  or inadequately provided. The process is not as complicated  as it sounds; oftentimes all it takes is for the teacher to talk to  the student. The teacher may have to make a few accommodations and adaptions to create a more motivating environment for the student, but the teacher will soon discover that  a student whose basic needs are fulfilled and who is given  room to pursue his growth needs is a well-behaved student.  The additional, individualized adaptations will have been  worth the effort.  REFERENCES  Adelman, H. S., and Taylor, L.: Intrinsic motivation and school misbehavior: Some intervention implications. Journal Of Learning Disabilities,  239,541-550, 1990.  Carnes, A. w., and Carns, M. R: Making behavioral contracts successful. School Counselor, 422, 155-160, 1994.  Eccles, j. S., Buchanan, C. M., Flanagan, C., Fuligni, A., Midgeley, C.,  and Yee, D.: Control verses autonomy during early adolescence.  Journal of Social Issues, 474, 53-68, 1991.  Fairchild, T. F.: Effects of a daily report card system on an eighth grader  exhibiting behavioral and motivational problems. School Counselor,  371, 83-86, 1983.  Gerardi, M. B.: Discipline is no problem with my middle school Student  of the Week. Clearing House, 54, 8, 381, 1981.  Heavey, C. L., Adelman, H. S., Nelson, P., and Smith, D. C.: Learning  problems, anger, perceived control, and misbehavior. Journal of  Learning Disabilities, 221, 46-50, 1989.  Klausmeier, H. j., and Ghatala, E.: Individually guided motivation:  Developing self direction and prosocial behaviors. Elementary School  Journa 776, 339-350, 1971.  McDaniel, T. R: Identifying discipline problems. Childhood Education,  MarchApril, 223-225, 1981. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Maslow, A. H.: Motivation and Personality. New York: Harper Collins,  15-26, 1970.  Swenson, C. C., and Kennedy, W.: Perceived control and treatment outcome with chronic adolescent offenders. Adolescence, 30119, 565-577,  1995.  Wlodkowski, R.J.: Motivation and Teaching: A Practical Guide. Washington,  National Education Association, 59-81, 1986. 

Chapter 4  PREVENTION OF PROBLEMS  I t is safe to say that it is easier and more desirable to prevent discipline problems than it is to deal with them when  they occur. If teachers are not especially careful, it is possible  for disruptive and unacceptable student behavior to slowly  but steadily appear in the classroom. "Over time, almost  imperceptibly, expectations of what constitutes acceptable  behavior get redefined. We gradually tolerate more and  more, until what once was unthinkable becomes the new  norm" American Federation of Teachers, 1995-96, p. 24.  In planning to prevent discipline problems before they  occur, it is important for teachers to reflect on some possible  reasons why a student misbehaves or breaks the established  rules. Albert 1995 claims that some students are trying to  get extra attention while others are trying to be "the boss."  Some students, she opines, are trying to get even for a real or  imagined injustice, and others are compensating for their  feelings of inadequacy or lack of confidence. Without question there are a host of reasons why students disrupt the  orderly process of the class. Some of those reasons can be  identified but many cannot. The important thing to do is to  try to prevent discipline problems before they occur, and  there are many important steps teachers can take to prevent  discipline problems from developing. McCormack 1989  identifies four qualities of effective schools that can be  applied to preventing discipline problems: 1 Teachers  should have high expectations of students, and they should  communicate those expectations regularly. 2 Teachers  should monitor student behavior consistently 3 Teachers  43 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  must share the responsibility for discipline with principals  and assistant principals, and finally, 4 teachers should foster  horneschool relations by keeping the parents informed and  involved.  There is considerable evidence to show that students sincerely want discipline and order in their classes. Winik  1996 reports on a focus group of urban and suburban high  school students who discussed the schools they attended and  the educations they were receiving. "According to these students, what their schools most lack-and what students most  want-are discipline and order" p. 12. When they were  asked to grade the personal behavior at their school, most of  the group gave their peers and, importantly, their teachers  only Cs and Ds. They point out that many teachers fail to  exert their authority in the classrooms. If teachers don't  establish control, one student observed, some of their students will walk allover them. "The relationship between discipline and education is complex. On the one hand, some  teacher authority in the service of classroom order is essential to education. The alternative is a mild Hobbesian state of  war, where competition for attention, status, power, and survival take precedence over academic learning" Kann, 1994,  p. 71.  Discipline problems can usually be prevented by establishing and maintaining an effective and efficient system of  classroom management. "A teacher who has mastered classroom management skills keeps students constructively  engaged and learning from the moment they enter the room  until the time they leave" American Federation of Teachers,  1995-96 p. 24. It is important from the very beginning to  establish that classroom management and discipline are not  the same thing. Discipline is a major part of classroom management, and it is reactive in nature. Teachers react or  respond to student behavior that disrupts the good order of  the classroom. Classroom management can be seen as proactive. It is preventative, and its goal is self-control on the part 

Prevention of Problems  45  of the students. The issue in any system of classroom management is whether the students are under self-control or  teacher control. Ideally, the self-control inherent in a good  system of classroom management is preferred.  According to Eggen and Kauchak 1997 the two major  goals of classroom management are:  1. Create the best learning environment possible.  2. Develop student responsibility and self-regulation.  Classroom management means establishing and maintaining  a routine in the classroom that allows teaching and learning  to proceed effectively.  A complete system of classroom management consists of  many components, the first of which is planning.  PLANNING  A shrewd teacher will invest a considerable amount of  time in planning the implementation of a system of classroom management. Canter 1996 establishes a new set of  basics in preparing for the possibility of discipline problems.  He indicates that it is important to model trust and respect  for the students. He urges teachers to get to know their students as individuals and to establish strong ties with the  home. He points out that students need structure and identifies behavior limits and that they should be directly taught  the behaviors which are expected of them. In other words  teachers should have and follow a discipline plan. But he  cautions, "To be successful, a discipline plan should be built  on a foundation of mutual trust and respect" Canter, 1996,  p. 12.  Planning a system of classroom management requires both  reflection and anticipation. It is important to reflect on previous experiences and to think about the possible problems  that could occur if teachers haven't prepared for them. "A  good classroom manager carefully plans everything that 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  occurs in the classroom from the seating arrangements to  instructions for children who finish planned activities early"  American Federation of Teachers, 1995-96, p. 24. In thinking about establishing a system of classroom management  and realizing that positive, well managed classrooms do not  happen automatically, a number of important questions  come to mind.  1. How can I legitimately make students feel good about  themselves and want to participate?  2. How much control of the classroom do I want to exercise?  3. How do I develop healthy, appropriate relationships  with students?  4. What are the different ways I can use to communicate  with students?  5. What do I have to do to keep the students engaged?  6. What rules should I have in my classroom?  7. Should I employ particular seating arrangements?  8. What issues should I consider in grouping students for  academic work and social activities?  9. What should I require or allow when students finish  their work before the other students?  10. How should I prepare for the many transitions that  occur each day?  Thinking about questions like these and many others that  any teacher can easily think of dramatizes the importance of  careful planning. Without a carefully constructed classroom  management plan, teachers may develop defensive reactions  to disruptive students and this will most certainly seriously  compromise their effectiveness as teachers.  FACfORS OF PLANNING TO CONSIDER  Planning for classroom management requires a teacher to  consider at least two major factors. The first factor is the 

Prevention of Problems  47  types of students who will be in the class. Are they primary,  intermediate, middle school, or high school? What are their  ages? Younger children tend to be more compliant while  older children tend to respond more to reason and rationales. Middle school children often want to test the limits  and exert their independence. Another issue regarding the  type of student is potential or ability leveL More able students work well without constant supervision, while less able  students often need to be reminded of the rules and their  responsibilities.  The second factor to consider is the ecology of the classroom. Are the children situated so they can see the chalkboard and hear the teacher? Are they sitting by an antagonist  or a friend who may coerce them into misbehavior? Are the  traffic patterns such that students have unfettered access to  workstations, the teacher's desk, and the pencil sharpener?  Two of the most important aspects of a system of classroom management that require planning are the classroom  rules and the procedures that will be employed in the classroom. Consideration of the type of children the teacher will  have and the total ecology of the classroom are necessary in  order to develop appropriate rules and procedures.  Rules  Rules can be considered the standards of acceptable  behavior in the classroom. The students should be helped to  see that the rules are necessary and fair. As a matter of fact,  they should be allowed and encouraged to participate in the  development of the classroom rules. Rich 1984 suggests  that students will likely make a serious attempt to comply  with rules they have had a hand in developing; consequently, they should help formulate the rules "to the extent that  their understanding and responsibility will promote rather  than detract from a sound learning environment" p. 111. A  wise teacher will gather the students together on the first day 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  of school for discussion and development of the list of rules  that will be used in the classroom. Similarly, she will frequently review the rules with the students, making sure they  fully understand them.  It is not enough to simply create a complete set of rules or  to have contingencies specified for the rules. Continual  review of the rules and the consequences of violating them  must occur. "In order to facilitate maximum compliance to  classroom rules and expectations, . . . the contingencies or  rules . must be well-articulated and reviewed prior to the  start of the planned instructional activities" Rosenberg,  1986, p. 246.  The manner in which classroom rules are enforced is open  to continual scrutiny; therefore, "it is important that certain  conditions be observed in handling rules if they are to be fair  and effective" Rich, 1984, p. 111. Consistency is perhaps the  most important factor in enforcing classroom rules. A violation of the rule in one case must be a violation of the rule in  another case. Similarly all students, both the academically  strong and the academically weak, must be treated in exactly the same manner. It would be a disaster if a teacher were  seen by her students as being unfair or as showing partiality  to some students over others.  The classroom rules should be consistent with the school  rules and the students should have that consistency emphasized and elaborated for them. The students should be provided rationales for the rules and enough time should be  allocated for discussion of the rationales to assure that the  students fully understand the reasons behind the rules.  The rules should be stated Positively and not as a list of "do  nots." Students should be helped to understand that the rules  are expectations of positive behavior and not prohibitions of  negative behavior. Classroom discussions about the expectation of appropriate behavior are an excellent way of facilitating student participation in the process.  The rules should be clear and precise, stated in a manner  to minimize confusion or misunderstanding. Perhaps most 

Prevention of Problems  49  importantly, the list of rules should be short. Don't clutter the  process with a list of rules so long that the students will not  be able to remember them. A short list, stated as positive  expectations will provide the students with expectations of  behavior that will be easy to understand and remember.  Procedures  Classroom procedures are the routines students will follow  in executing the full complement of their responsibilities.  There are a variety of situations for which established procedures are not only helpful but also necessary. Situations in  the classroom requiring carefully developed procedures  include:   Student arrival and acceptable activities while waiting for  the teacher to begin.   What students may do when they have completed their  seatwork.   How homework and classwork are to be turned in.   How to line up and execute a fire drill.   How to ask for help from the teacher.   What to do in transitions such as  Going to lunch.  Returning from recess.  Cleaning up at the end of the day.  Teachers who anticipate situations that will require procedures and develop procedures in advance for them, will have  those situations unfold in an orderly and nondisruptive manner. Not anticipating the procedures that will be required in  certain situations will inevitably lead to chaos. When procedures have been established, it is imperative to review and  rehearse them until they become automatic. Teachers should  strive to have students overlearn the classroom procedures  that will be employed that year.  Mter the rules have been developed and the procedures  have been established, planning a variety of instructional  variables is necessary. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Teaching and Instruction  The process of instruction or the teaching activities  designed to facilitate student learning, provides ample  opportunity for planning to prevent discipline problems. For  example, the myriad of lOgistical factors a teacher must confront require considerable forethought and planning. In most  classrooms for at least a portion of the day, the teacher is  involved with a small group while the rest of the students are  engaged in seatwork. Consideration must be given to how  the teacher will work successfully with the group and at the  same time monitor the behavior of the rest of the class. The  teacher must position herself so as to be able to work efficiently with her group and also watch the students doing  seatwork. She should also look up frequently and catch the  eye of any student in her seat who is looking up from her  work. The impression will be that the teacher is always  watching.  Another instructional issue to be anticipated is the manner  in which the teacher wants the students to verbalize in class.  Are they expected to raise their hands at all times and wait  to be acknowledged before speaking? Are there certain situations where spontaneous verbalizing may be accepted or  even encouraged? Clearly the more such factors are anticipated and planned, the more smoothly the process will go.  Self-directed seatwork poses unique problems that call for  careful planning. Are the students allowed to quietly talk  occasionally, or are they expected to remain totally silent?  What are they expected or allowed to do when they finish  their work? Do they bring their completed work to the  teacher, or do they keep it to be collected? The more students understand the expectations teachers have, the more  likely they are to comply and not create disruptions. 

Prevention of Problems  51  Logistics  The issue of the bell ringing to signal a change of classes  or the end of the day suggests the need for special planning.  What does the bell mean to the teacher? Does she consider  it a signal to her or a signal to the students? Anticipating an  issue like this and communicating expectations to students  will prevent disruptions of order and possible discipline  problems. For example, a teacher might explain to her students that the bell is a signal to her and not to the students.  She would make it clear that students are not to put their supplies away and leave their seats until she gives them permission to do so. The importance of such an established procedure is made abundantly clear the first time a teacher tries to  finish a point or draw a close to a lesson with students putting  away their books and leaving their seats.  ADother logistical issue is the decision to use special signals which call for a certain type of behavior. Some teachers  tum the classroom lights on and off when they want the students to observe absolute silence. Other teachers raise their  hand and hold it aloft until all the students stop what they are  doing and attend fully to the teacher. If signals are employed,  it is imperative that the students fully understand the behavior that is expected of them.  There are also several issues of classroom geography that  require consideration. Perhaps one of the first issues to be  planned is the seating arrangements for the students. Will the  teacher use rows of seats, semi-circular seating, or clusters of  seats. Will she assign students to their seats or allow them to  sit wherever they choose on any given day? Clearly there are  consequences to any of the possible answers to these questions, but more importantly there are consequences to not  planning for these questions. For example, not planning for  seating arrangements could have a deleterious effect on student participation in instructional activities. If a teacher is  attempting to have a debate and she has the students sitting 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  in rows, it may well be less satisfactory than if they were sitting in a circle. More importantly chaos could reign with students moving about, talking only to the teacher, or initiating  private conversations. In such unplanned situations, discipline problems are inevitable.  In order to prevent discipline problems, another major  issue requiring planning is the traffic flow of the classroom.  Think of the possible disruptions that could occur if students  have to cut between desks or through groups to hand in work  or to come to the teacher's desk. The students should be fully  aware of the teacher's expectations regarding acceptable traffic patterns to her desk, the pencil sharpener, or a particular  learning center.  A final point among the many that require planning is the  issue of teacher mobility. Is the room set up in such a way as  to allow the teacher to move freely about the room without  disturbing students who are working? The more students are  disrupted the more likely is the chance that there will be discipline problems.  Teacher Characteristics  The most important instructional variable is the teacher.  The characteristics of the teacher are important and reflection upon them virtually requires her to plan appropriately  to minimize the chances of discipline problems. For example, where does the teacher stand on the issue of firmness in  terms of dealing with students? All teachers fall somewhere  on the continuum of autocratic to democratic, and a teacher's  position on that continuum creates certain consequences in  the classroom. For example, a teacher who attempts to be too  autocratic may be causing student to confrontations, them  while being too democratic may invite anarchy.  How teachers respond to students is an issue all teachers  must confront. Who doesn't want to be liked? The mistake  many teachers, especially new teachers, make is trying to be 

Prevention of Problems  53  liked before they are respected. If a teacher first gains the students, respect, they also in time will be liked by them. There  is a great deal of truth in the old bromide that a teacher "can  be friendly with students but cannot be friends with them".  Eggen and Kauchak 1997 suggest three important  teacher skills are exceedingly helpful in preventing discipline  problems. These skills are organization, lesson flow, and  communication.  Organization  In terms of organization, it is imperative for teachers to be  prepared to teach. To be unprepared is an invitation for disorder and disruption. Teachers must have their lessons carefully planned and their teaching materials prepared and  ready to use. To be unsure about what to do next or to discover that you do not have your worksheets ready to pass out  is to create an opportunity for disruptions or diScipline problems to occur. Students who are kept involved in the teachinglearning activity do not have the opportunity to disrupt  their neighbor, laugh at an antic, or begin whispering to a  friend. It is often the case that legitimate discipline problems  occur when teachers have to confront such minor transgressions.  Another organizational skill that will help prevent discipline problems is the effective use of time. Teachers are wise  to begin the day and all lessons on time. It is also advantageous to keep the students engaged for the duration of the  activity. Students who are waiting for the teacher or have  nothing to do are more likely than engaged students to make  mischief. Even relatively innocent mischief or "kibitzing  around," when multiplied over several students or groups of  students, creates a disturbance sufficient to disrupt the learning of the students in the class. It becomes almost inevitably  a situation with which the teacher must deal. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Lesson Flow  Establishing effective and efficient routines is a skill that  typically develops with experience, and it is invaluable in  preventing disruptions or discipline problems. Handing in  homework, completing in-class assignments, taking a test,  going to music, and being dismissed are all activities made  more efficient by having established and rehearsed in  advance the routines students are to follow.  The skill and efficiency with which the teacher keeps the  lesson moving is another important consideration in preventing disturbances or disruptions. The ability to prevent  dead time and the time students are off task will also prove  to be an effective deterrent of discipline problems. Similarly,  a teacher's ability to know what is going on everywhere in  the classroom, even while she is occupied, is something that  is exceedingly helpful in nipping potential problems in the  bud. Kounin 1970 coined the now-famous term "withitness"  to describe knowing what's going on all the time and conveying to the students that she knows what is going on.  Withitness is clearly a characteristic that helps immeasurably  in preventing discipline problems.  Communication  Among the many teacher skills that can help in the prevention of discipline problems, a final consideration will be  given to the manner in which a teacher expresses herself to  her students. Experienced teachers know that tone of voice,  body posture, and facial expression are powerful tools of  communication that teachers can use strategically to prevent  problems before they blow up.  Preventing discipline problems makes life in the classroom  considerably more comfortable for the teacher than having  to deal with them when they occur. Planning is the key to  prevention and among the many areas requiring careful 

Prevention of Problems  55  teacher planning, several have been touched on here. The  most important factor in preventing discipline problems is  arguably the persona of the teacher. Those teachers who earn  their students' respect will unquestionably encounter favor  and less severe discipline problems than those who are not  respected as highly. The first and best strategy of earning student respect is to respect them. If teachers treat students fairly and courteously, they are well on their way to earning student respect. The other essential aspect of a teacher's persona that significantly contributes to the prevention of discipline problems is the teacher's consistency. If teachers are  consistent in the way they execute the classroom procedures  and enforce the classroom rules, the likelihood of the prevention of discipline problems will increase. Similarly, the  consistency manifested in treating all children exactly the  same cannot be overemphasized. These aspects of the  teacher's persona, coupled with Kounin's concept of withitness or complete awareness of what's going on in the classroom, will significantly help in the prevention of discipline  problems.  REFERENCES  Albert, L.: Discipline: Is it a dirty word? Learning, September, 43-46,  1995.  American Federation of Teachers: Elements of an effective discipline  strategy. American Educator, 194, 24-27, 1995-96.  Canter, L.: First, the rapport-then, the rules. Learning, MarchApril,  12-14, 1996.  Eggen, P., and Kauchak, D.: Educational Psychology Windows on Classrooms.  Upper Saddle River, NJ., Prentice Hall, 1997.  Kann, M. E.: DiScipline, character, and education. Teaching Education, 6  1, 7l-75, 1994.  Kounin,j.: Discipline and Group Management in the Classroom. New York,  Holt Rinehart, 1970.  McCormack, S.: Prevention-not punishment-is the key to effective discipline. Executive Educator, 111, 25-26, 1989.  Rich, J.M.: Discipline, rules, and punishment. Contemporary Education,  552, 110-112, 1984. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Rosenberg, M. S.: Maximizing the effectiveness of structured classroom  management programs: Implementing rule-review procedures with  disruptive and distractible students. Behavioral Disorders, 11, 239-249,  1986.  Winik, L. W.: Students want more discipline, disruptive classmates out.  American Educator, Fall, 12-14, 1996. 

Chapter 5  DEALING WITH PROBLEMS  T he question of what is a discipline problem, is not as simple as it may appear. "To teachers, however, discipline  should suggest a range of practices that contribute to a wellmanaged classroom in which students enjoy going about the  business of learning" Smith  Misra, 1992, p. 353. No student is perfectly behaved all the time, and student "imperfections" may range from simple inattention to engaging in a  fistfight in class. It is helpful to think of such situations as a  continuum from not really being a problem to constituting a  major problem with which the teacher needs assistance.  Something that may be annoying but not really a problem  could be a student's mind wandering or not following directions. Examples of minor problems might be seat leaving,  passing notes, or disturbing a neighbor. Major problems  would certainly include open defiance, violence, or possession of drugs. Of course, there could be an infinite number  of gradations of severity along the continuum, and the  teacher must make the ultimate call as to whether something  is or is not a discipline problem.  In Chapter 4 the importance of the teacher's personality in  preventing discipline problems was highlighted. The same is  equally true when it comes to dealing with discipline problems. All teachers at one time or another must deal with discipline problems in the classroom, in the hallways, or on the  school grounds. It is a fact that teachers who are respected by  students encounter fewer discipline problems over the  course of a week, a year, or a career than teachers who are  not respected by their students.  57 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  The problem for some teachers is associated with their attitude about student respect. Some teachers feel it is their  inalienable right as a teacher to receive unqualified student  respect. Unfortunately, as much as we want to believe that all  students should naturally respect all teachers, it simply doesn't happen that way. In reality every teacher must earn the  respect of students. Earning respect requires conscious effort;  it doesn't just happen.  The first step in earning and maintaining student respect is  to overtly respect the students. Teachers should model  respect for the students by virtue of the way they interact  with them. Teachers can show respect for students by   being polite and courteous,   never humiliating or embarrassing them,   being encouraging and expressing confidence in them,   assuring that others in the class show respect, and   dealing with their indiscretions privately whenever possible.  Far too many new teachers are overly and unnecessarily  concerned about being liked by the students. To some degree  this is an understandable concern and one that is also shared  to some degree by all teachers. It is imperative for teachers,  especially new teachers, to understand and embrace that  respect is the essential prerequisite to being liked. Teachers  must consciously address the issue of earning student  respect. If that objective is successfully accomplished, the  issue of being liked by the students will take care of itself.  Teachers are often reminded about how important it is to  develop rapport with their students. Rapport can be thought  of as the ability to interact effectively both in formal instruction and in informal interaction with students. Rapport does  not necessarily mean being liked or being popular. It is predicated on respect, and it is an invaluable asset in dealing with  the variety of disruptions and discipline problems teachers  inevitably encounter.  Another aspect of the teacher's personality worth mentioning is the perception that they are fair. Students readily 

Dealing with Problems  59  accept and, in fact, want teachers who maintain order and  discipline in the classroom. They only ask that teachers  maintain fairness. In other words, they want teachers to consistently interpret and enforce the rules and treat all students  the same. "Failing to impose a discipline plan consistently  breeds divisiveness and contempt-regardless of how right  you believe it is to make an exception 'just this once' "  Lawrence  Olvey, 1994, p. 31.  TYPES OF PROBLEMS  The types of problems teachers have to confront are  extremely varied and range from very minor infractions to  disruptions of a most serious nature. Of the myriad of problems, the ones that teachers are most concerned about  Friedberg et al., 1995; Rogers, 1995; Lawrence  Kant,  1994; Reissman, 1993; Alley et al., 1990 include:   violence   drugs and alcohol   intruding   fighting   false fire alarms   defiance and non-compliance   vandalism   insubordination   argumentativeness   stealing  There are also a host of less serious but more frequent student behaviors that teachers must deal with such as sulking,  interrupting, seat leaving, talking out, and teasing. A measure  of the seriousness of an event can be the degree to which it  jeopardizes the safety of other students and teachers, and the  degree to which it disrupts the orderly functioning of the  classroom. The teacher's response must always take into consideration safety first and then the issue of order and effective  functioning. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  RESPONDING TO PROBLEMS  The manner in which teachers respond to discipline problems depends on the type of problem exhibited. It would not  be appropriate to react to an episode of inattention in the  same way required by an act of violence. Various types of  teacher reactions to a variety of discipline problems are  depicted below in a discipline staircase Figure 5.1.  Less serious  Intercede to  stop the  ---. inappropriate  Praise  behavior  incompatible  ----. behavior  Ignore and  assure that  others ignore  and also  desired  behavior  Figure 5.1. Discipline Staircase  More serious  Call for  assistance  As important as it is for teachers to respond appropriately  to discipline problems, it is equally important not to overreact in such situations. Care must be exercised by teachers not  to browbeat and berate students unnecessarily; they typically do not want to intimidate their students, and they want to  be careful not to exclusively rely on power when relating to  students. "When teachers misuse authority, they tend to reinforce youngsters' sense of weakness, passivity, subordination, 

Dealing with Problems  61  and victimization. Often students react to this pattern of discipline in self destructive or educationally dysfunctional  ways" Kann, 1994, p. 72.  SPECIFIC STRATEGIES  Keeping in mind the discipline staircase depicted in Figure  5.1, it is appropriate to consider strategies that range from  those used for minor infractions to those needed for more  serious problems. Experience in the classroom and a  teacher's good judgment help considerably in determining  which strategy to employ in a given situation.  Ignore the Inappropriate Behavior  Without a doubt, the most difficult skill for a teacher to  master is the skill of ignoring inappropriate student behavior.  It is almost an instinctive reaction to respond to a misbehaving student. At one time or another, we have all been guilty  of letting "the squeaky wheel get the grease." It takes a conscious act and lots of practice to consistently ignore a student  who is acting out. It is even a bit more complicated when  teachers realize that they must also assure that others ignore  the behaviors too.  To understand the importance of ignoring untoward  behavior, it is necessary to review the effects of positive reinforcement and extinction. Whenever a teacher attends to  inappropriate behavior, he is positively reinforcing that  behavior. Even a rebuke serves as positive reinforcement  because it is teacher attention. Positive reinforcement causes  a behavior to increase, and this explains why some children  continue to misbehave, even after they have been "reminded" or scolded. On the other hand, if no attention teacher or  peer is forthcoming, the behavior is not reinforced and, in  time, extinction will occur. In other words, the undesirable  behavior will cease. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Once again the importailce of consistency is made clear.  Consistently ignoring the behavior results in success; inconsistency results in strengthening the undesirable behavior.  One way for a teacher to improve his ability to ignore inappropriate behavior is to consistently reinforce other students  who are engaging in appropriate behavior. For example, if  Cathy is attempting to chat with a neighbor, don't correct  her. Rather, praise Kristen who is working quietly and  remaining on task and ignore Cathy's inappropriate behavior. Naturally, praise and compliment Cathy as soon as she  returns to task. "Students notice what the teacher does attend  to-students who follow the rule and put their hand up and  wait-and they often follow suit" Rogers, 1995, p. 18. If John  is leaving his seat regularly, ignore it, but praise him when he  is in his seat. This is referred to as reinforcing an incompatible behavior sitting is incompatible with seat leaving, and is  a very effective way of creating appropriate behavior and  ignoring inappropriate behavior. Of utmost importance, be  consistent!  The "I Mean Business" Look  Another strategy to employ with student behaviors that  are annoying but not harmful is the '' mean business" stare.  This is a strategy that requires no talking on the part of the  teacher, but one that is very effective if employed promptly.  Children have often reported that they always know their  parents meant business by that "look" in their eye. The  same phenomena occurs between students and teachers. If  Gracelyn is putting on lipstick instead of attending to the  problem at the chalkboard, the teacher can almost always get  her immediately back on task by giving her that ''you'd better  get to work, young lady" stare. Gracelyn's knowing the teacher  saw her and disapproved of what she was doing, is usually all  that is required to get her to refocus. Developing that special  glance or look is a skill all teachers can easily master with just 

Dealing with Problems  63  a little practice. It is a strategy that doesn't call attention to a  student and avoids the possibility of public humiliation. "A  student who's openly chastised, ostracized, or punished  won't readily become a classroom contributor" Reissman,  1993, p. 48.  Move to the Problem  A teacher's movement about the room is obviously important for instructional reasons, and it is also a very important  strategy to employ in dealing with many discipline problems.  Moving to an area proximate to the child or children causing  the disruption most often causes the misbehavior to desist  and the children to return to task. It signals to them that the  teacher is not only acutely aware of their misbehavior, but  that he is pOised and ready to deal with it. If Pam andJenny  are exchanging notes and whispering instead of paying attention and participating in the learning activity, a shrewd  teacher will simply move to a location between or very near  their desks. It won't be necessary for him to say a word to  them; he will just continue to teach from that location. The  girls will not be able to continue their disruptive activity.  Reissman 1993 points out that this strategy would produce  two significant advantages. First, instruction would not have  been interrupted and the disruption would have been  stopped. Second, Pam and Jenny were not embarrassed by a  public chastisement, and they can easily rejoin the activity.  Having students expect you to be moving about the classroom and your moving quickly to potential trouble spots will  serve as a highly effective strategy of dealing with disruptions  and potential disruptions.  Dramatic Pause and Change in Voice  Rogers 1995 suggests that a thoughtful use of a dramatic  pause can be an effective tool. If a teacher is explaining 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  something and Marianne is whispering to Eleanor, the  teacher might abruptly stop talking in mid-sentence, stare at  Marianne, and then in a lower, more serious tone say,  "Everyone needs to pay careful attention to what I'm saying." Then he would immediately go on with his explanation  without specifically targeting Marianne with a reprimand.  Deal with It Immediately  When there is a problem of any kind, it is imperative not  to put it off and attempt to deal with it later. In the same way  that trying to positively reinforce a good behavior two hours  later doesn't work, it is also ineffective to deal with a discipline problem at the end of the period or later in the day. In  virtually every situation, it is better to employ a discipline  strategy at the moment the infraction occurs. For example, if  a teacher sees George copying answers from Emma's test  paper, he should deal with George at that moment. He could  walk to George's desk and simply take away his test paper,  or he could quietly tell George that if his eyes wander again,  he will receive a zero on the test.  Don't Debate  The possibility exists, especially with older students, that  in a situation similar to the one described above, a student  could become argumentative, claiming that she wasn't cheating. The important rule of thumb in such situations is to  never debate the student, either publically or privately about  the issue. Some students will try to engage the teacher in a  power struggle by attempting to argue the point. In such situations, Rogers 1995 suggests that teachers, "remain  assertive but civil, redirect the student to the primary issue  . and don't capitulate to secondary behavior by discussion,  argument, or adversarial tactics" p. 19.  For example, a student who has just been dealt with for  annoying a neighbor may become argumentative and claim 

Dealing with Problems  65  that she wasn't bothering the neighbor, but rather just asking  her what the assignment was. Care must be exercised not to  get trapped into debating whether or not she was bothering  her neighbor, or whether or not it is permissible to ask a  neighbor what the assignment is. Don't debate anything; just  deal with the primary issue and simply move on.  Generating Interest  It is often a fact that students who disrupt or cause trouble  are the students who are disinterested in the lesson or generally bored with school. Rather than deal with their disruptions, teachers would be better served if they attempted to  co-opt them into participating and setting a good example  for their students. A way to accomplish this seemingly difficult task is to use the student's interest in the particular activity. In other words, attempt to integrate the interests of potential troublemakers into the regular classroom activities.  Suppose Linwood is an uncooperative, nonparticipator in  math. The teacher is aware of his fanatical interest in cars.  Perhaps the teacher could get Linwood involved by involving the class in math lessons that focus on the price, payment  schedule, and upkeep expenses of different used cars.  Similarly, the speed of different cars could be incorporated  into a series of math problems.  As another example, suppose that Libby is a sulker who  claims that she is always being picked on. Rather than complete her math assignments, which she could easily do, she  sulks and withdraws from the interaction of the lesson.  Perhaps the teacher ascertains that she, like many girls her  age, is interested in makeup. A creative teacher could easily  construct a variety of problems, activities, and lessons that  focus on the purchase and use of makeup but that also teach  the math skills the teacher has targeted.  Role playing, contests between teams of students, and the  use of current events are but a few of the many additional 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  strategies a teacher can employ to develop and maintain the  interest of otherwise disinterested students. The goal is to  find ways to ease them into the ongoing activities of the classroom.  Focus on What Students Value  Students come to school with some kind of value system  intact. It frequently doesn't consist of the values teachers  would like for students to embrace, but each and every student has learned to value certain things. Some students value  being perceived as a rebel and non-conformist. Some students value authority while others place value on their perceived right to do or say whatever they want to whomever  they want.  Sometimes the students' values can be used in dealing with  inflammatory or potentially inflammatory situations. If a  teacher observes Hannah glancing or staring at Franklin's  seatwork, it may be possible to quickly terminate Hannah's  undesirable behavior by quickly reminding her about trust  and how important it is for a young girl to maintain the trust  of her teachers and parents. If Miguel is fooling around with  the classroom weather station, it may simply be enough to  remind him how much it would cost to replace and that he  and his family would be responsible if he broke it.  There are many things students value that can be used  effectively by teachers to change student behavior. Trust,  respect, courtesy, kindness, and authority are just a few.  It may be appropriate here to point out that there are times  when a teacher simply cannot get to the bottom of a situation. Teachers should remember to try never to overreact in  such a situation. For example, if no one will own up to drawing a funny picture on the chalkboard, it wouldn't be appropriate to ground the entire class from recess for a week. It is  a good idea to recognize that there are some situations that  will occur where the perpetrators will not be identified for 

Dealing with Problems  67  appropriate action. In such cases the teacher can choose one  of several courses of action. Perhaps the teacher could  approach the situation with humor. For example, on seeing a  picture drawn on the chalkboard, the teacher might  announce with a chuckle that the artist needs to pay more  attention in art class. Another approach would be to simply  erase the drawing without showing any emotion and go on  with the lesson.  The Show Must Go On-Or Must It?  Occasionally circumstances emerge in the course of a day  that make it very difficult for the teacher to control the group  and begin the lesson. Students returning to class after a pep  rally or exciting assembly is an example of such a situation.  Teachers may fear that if they do not get the class under control and begin teaching, they will completely lose control  entirely. Actually it might be better to "go along with the  flow" for a few minutes and engage the class in a discussion  about the upcoming baseball game or the presentation on  drug abuse they just heard. The goal would be to involve as  many students as possible in a general group discussion. This  would eliminate private conversations and make it easier to  draw closure and begin the planned lesson.  Remove Competing Objects  A source of disruption or a discipline problem is often  objects students have found, been given, or brought to school  that offer more attractiveness to the student than the  teacher's lesson. These seductive objects include toys, candy,  comic books, photographs, or notes. When a teacher  observes that a student is attending to an object and not to  the lesson, he should, without calling significant attention to  the situation, simply remove the object from the student's  possession. For example, during a social studies lesson, the 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  teacher observes that Emma is reading a note. Not only is she  distracted from the lesson, but she is also distracting Fanny  and Catherine by showing them the note. Without stopping  the lesson and without drawing attention, the teacher should  walk to Emma's desk, reach down, confiscate the note, and  move away from the area. If Emma attempts to put the note  away as she sees the teacher approaching, he should put his  hand out and quietly say "Give me the note". When she  turns over the note, the teacher quietly says, "Thank you"  and goes on with the lesson.  In the unlikely event that Emma would refuse to comply,  more intrusive measures would be called for. These strategies  will be addressed below.  Separate to Prevent Problems  One of the more intrusive strategies available to teachers  is to separate a student from a situation or from other students. Often it is possible to avert a potentially explosive situation by employing this strategy. For example if a teacher  notices that Jamal is trying to intimidate Mary into letting  him copy from her paper, he could move Jamal's seat either  temporarily or permanently. In some situations it may be  more prudent and more effective to separate the one being  "victimized" rather than the perpetrator. Suppose before  class begins, Luther and his pals are trying to pick a fight with  Roger. The teacher could unobtrusively intercede by asking  Roger to perform an errand like erasing the chalkboard.  Separating Roger from the situation avoids an explosive situation.  Reprimands  There are occasions, no matter how ingrained the importance of ignoring behavior is in a teacher's mind, when he  must respond directly to a situation in the classroom. A stuDealing with Problems  69  dent being careless with a pair of scissors or two students  fighting on the floor are but two examples of situations that  must be directly and immediately addressed. In such cases  an immediate reprimand from the teacher is called for. The  reprimand must be brief and delivered with a seriousness of  tone that makes it clear that the teacher means business. The  importance of keeping the reprimand brief cannot be  overemphasized. The longer the reprimand, the longer the  amount of time the teacher is attending to and, in fact, reinforcing the inappropriate behavior. In addition, the longer  the reprimand, the greater the possibility and likelihood that  the student will talk back. Of paramount importance is the  teacher's recognition and understanding that he must not  debate the student or discuss the situation in any way. If warranted, a discussion can take place after the situation has  been resolved.  It is important for teachers to be specific when they choose  to use a reprimand. Care must be exercised not to allow students who are behaving appropriately to infer that the reprimand is directed at them. It is essential for the teacher to  direct the reprimand only at the students who is acting out  and to specify precisely what the students is doing. For  example, if Salvatore is teasing Carolyn by attempting to pull  her chair out from under her, the teacher should immediately move to Salvatore's desk and emphatically say, "Stop  moving her chair and get back to work right now!" The  teacher should then tum away to indicate that there will be  no discussion about the issue and give Salvatore a chance to  comply. Kounin 1970 indicates that reprimands should be  directed toward the targeted student and the targeted behavior. It should also identify an appropriate behavior that is  incompatible with the misbehavior.  It is crucial for teachers to understand that the use of reprimands should be judiciously employed. One of the major  mistakes inexperienced teachers make is to consistently use  verbal reprimands when a student acts in any way inappro70  Student Discipline and Classroom Management  priately. This tends to create an extremely unsatisfactory scenario where the teacher is actually sustaining the inappropriate behavior by positively reinforcing the behavior through  constant attention. The students learn, relatively early, that  they can produce a predictable response from the teacher,  and they tend to take advantage of this situation. A wise  teacher will use reprimands judiciously and will make certain  that the effect is an immediate change in student behavior.  Response-Cost  Punishment can often be a controversial topic in classrooms, primarily because it creates images of corporal punishment. The general concept of punishment should not be  confused with spanking or whacks with a paddle. One form  of punishment that teachers can use effectively and that does  not require physical force is known as response-cost.  Basically, response-cost means that disruptive or otherwise  inappropriate behavior will result in the loss of a predetermined amount of reinforcement. For example, seat leaving  might result in the loss of ten minutes of free time or repeatedly disturbing a neighbor might result in the loss of the privilege of being a hall monitor. McClain and Kelley 1994 document the effectiveness of a response-cost program with  three, eleven year old disruptive boys. They report dramatic  improvement in the boys' behavior when compared to their  baseline conditions and noticeably improved behavior when  their behavior in the response-cosUschool-home note condition is compared to their behavior in the school-home note  without response-cost condition. "This type of intervention  holds several advantages. First, this procedure can be easily  implemented by general education classroom teachers without interfering with their lessons. Second, interventions such  as this please parents of students with AD HD because many  parents are concerned about general education teachers'  ability to deal with their child's disorder . . ." Bender  

Dealing with Problems  71  Mathes, 1995, p. 230. We see response-cost operating in the  natural environment all the time, and it is only natural to  employ such strategies in the classroom. Parking tickets and  cancellation of credit cards for failure to maintain payments  are two examples of response-cost in the natural environment. A response-cost program is not unduly demanding in  terms of teacher time. In fact, it has been demonstrated that  in certain situations, students can manage the program themselves. "The student management and visual cuing of the free  tokens minimize the demands on teacher time and offer elementary educators a practical and successful system for modifying behavior that is easy to implement within the constraints of the regular classroom setting . the system is easily adaptable to a variety of behaviors that interfere with  learning in the elementary classroom e.g., calling out, out-ofseat, requests for teacher attention" Salend et al., 1988, p.  95.  Occasionally when response-cost is employed, teachers  observe an increase in the frequency or intensity of the inappropriate behavior. This typically does not continue once the  system of response-cost is in place. Teachers are encouraged  to establish their systems to minimize such an increase when  the reinforcer is removed. Smith and Misra 1992 suggest  "minimizing the possibility of escalation by making the  response-cost system part of a larger token economy where  students also earn reinforcement for displaying appropriate  behaviors" p. 364.  Time-Out  Time-out is a procedure that is difficult to situate in the  behavioral model. Some see it as an appropriate form of punishment because the aversive consequence of separation  from the group has been added to the misbehaving student's  environment. Others see it as a form of negative reinforcement because the aversive consequence of separation is 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  removed and the student is allowed to return to the learning  environment when she desists the inappropriate behavior  during the time-out condition. Of course, the argument for  extinction could also be made because in time out any inappropriate behavior is not reinforced and is allowed to extinguish.  However time-out is thought of, it is a popular strategy that  teachers frequently use in discipline situations. Even though  time-out is very popular, it is often misused and more often  misunderstood. The misuse focuses on not fully understanding what time-out really means. It is important to understand  that time-out is actually an abbreviation for "time out from  positive reinforcement." Consequently, the effectiveness of  time-out is severely limited if the learning environment is not  systematically providing positive reinforcement for appropriate behavior, especially academic performance. During  time-out access to positive reinforcement should be completely denied. Returning to the learning environment  reestablishes the opportunity for the student to earn positive  reinforcement.  Time-out can be implemented in a particular section of the  classroom dedicated to that purpose, or in some cases, in  another part of the school. Obviously a teacher should never  use a dark, unventilated closet, a windowless area, or any  other physically restrictive or uncomfortable space for the  purpose of time-out. The purpose is to temporarily remove  the disrupting child from the learning environment and from  the schedule of positive reinforcement. Teachers must assure  that other students do not provide attention or any kind of  reinforcement to a child who has been placed in time-out.  Time-out is an effective strategy but one which must be used  with care. Smith and Misra 1992 caution that "teachers are  strongly encouraged to make sure students are adequately  monitored during time-out and that specific criteria guide  reentry into the class" p. 364.  If a separate room is used for time-out, the teacher or an  aide should regularly monitor the student through a window. 

Dealing with Problems  73  Regular monitoring should also occur if the time-out area is  a dedicated section of the classroom. No verbal exchange  with the student should occur while she is in time-out, and no  nonverbal interaction with other students should be allowed.  The basic idea is that the separated student experience a  period of isolation where she does not receive reinforcement  of any kind. A teacher should have determined in advance  the criteria that will be employed for reentry into the learning environment from the time-out area. In some cases a predetermined passage of time in the time-out condition could  be used as the criterion. In other cases a behavioral criterion  such as sitting quietly without disruption could be used as the  criterion for reentry. As soon as a student returns to the  learning environment, it is a good idea to find a legitimate  reason to administer positive reinforcement to the student as  quickly as possible.  Call for Assistance  There are occasional situations when teachers must  request assistance in dealing with discipline problems. Some  student behaviors by virtue of their intensity, frequency, or  bizarre nature demand that the teacher seek the support or  assistance of others. "They are intrusive behaviors which uniformly, and almost automatically disrupt the teacher's  process; the teacher's response to them must be immediate"  Alley et al., 1990, p. 69. Smith and Misra 1992 suggest that  teachers make at least two attempts to manage the behavior  themselves before seeking help. In such a case teachers  would be able to:   describe the exact nature of the student's difficulty and  the extent to which it deviates from expectations.   describe antecedent and consequent techniques  employed, and   document the limited effect of these techniques p. 368. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Examples of situations where teachers might seek assistance  include overt, persistent defiance; acts of violence; or anything that threatens the safety of the class.  If teachers are to be effective disciplinarians, they must  have the unqualified support of their supervisors and administrators. If a teacher requests assistance, administrative  response must be immediate and decisive. If students, especially those inclined to be troublesome, realize that their  teacher will receive complete support from the administration, they will be less inclined to disrupt.  It goes without saying that it is very important for teachers  not to abuse the process by sending students to the office or  calling for assistance for any but the most serious of reasons.  Similarly, teachers should not threaten students with being  sent to the principal's office whenever there is a problem of  any kind in the classroom. In those situations where the  problem cannot be handled by the teacher in the classroom,  the teacher should, without undo elaboration, call for assistance or send the disrupting student directly to the office.  Most discipline situations should, of course, be handled by  the teacher in the classroom.  INVOLVE THE PARENTS  It is always a good idea to involve parents in the discipline  strategies you employ. Very often parents and teachers working together can produce more effective changes in a student's behavior than either party can when attacking the  problem alone. Involving parents also helps avoid the  unhappy situation of having a parent call the principal and  inquire as to what is going on in the classroom. Frequently,  parents hear a distorted explanation of the problem and the  teacher's attempts at dealing with the problem from their  child. Teachers and parents working together inevitably produces the best solutions. 

Dealing with Problems  75  Another reason to involve the parents is the fact that often  the parent is looking for help in dealing with similar displays  of behavior at home. Parents often look to the school for  assistance in such matters. In attempting to help parents  whose children had been identified as discipline or behavioral problems, McCree-Weekly 1995 set up a parent training program to help parents deal with such problems. The  parents were at a loss as to how to effectively manage their  children's behavior. They were instructed in the use of  behavior modification strategies and provided with the  opportunity to discuss their experiences and interact with  each other.  The most popular strategy with parents was time-out;  other options like limit setting, revoking privileges, and  record keeping were also popular. However, contingency  contracting was not chosen as a preferred activity.  A general observation by the investigator was that prior to  parent training students were typically sent to the office for  biting and fighting; however, after parent training the most  frequent infractions were inattentiveness and failure to  remain on task.  Perhaps it can be concluded that schools and teachers can  be a valuable asset in helping parents deal with diScipline  problems in the home. Maybe periodic discussions of the  strategies that teachers successfully employ in the classroom  will help parents by showing them that they can also successfully employ the same strategies.  REFERENCES  Albert, L.: DiScipline: Is it a dirty word? Learning, 43-46, 1995.  Alley, R., Q'Hair, M., and Wright, R.: Student misbehaviors: Which ones  really trouble teachers? Teacher Education Qyarterly, 773, 63-70, 1990  Bender,W. N., and Mathes, M. Y.: Students with ADHD in the inclusive  classroom: A hierarchical approach to strategy selection. Intervention in  School and Clinic, 30 4,226-234, 1995. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Freiberg, H., Stein, T. A, and Parker G.: Discipline referrals in an  urban middle school: Implications for discipline and instruction.  Education and Urban Society, 274, 421-440, 1995.  Kann, M. E.: Discipline, character, education. Teaching Education, 61,  7l-75,1994  Kounin,.: Discipline and Group Management in the Classroom. New York,  Holt Rinehart, 1970.  Lawrence, P. A, and Olvey, S. K: Discipline: A skill not a punishment.  American School BoardJournal, 7877,31-32, 1994.  McCain, A P. and Kelley, M. L.: Improving classroom performance in  underachieving preadolescents: The additive effects of response cost  to a school-home note system. Child  Family Behavior Therapy, 762,  27-41, 1994.  McCree-Weekly, E.: Helping parents deal with the discipline of their children through a parent support group. Practicum Report: Nova  Southeastern University, ERIC Document ED 387237, 1995.  Reissman, R.: Creative solutions to discipline dilemmas. Learning, 224,  48-50, 1993.  Rogers, B., 5 tricky personalities and how to handle them. Instructor.  16-25, 1995.  Salend, S., Tintle, L. and Balber, H.: Effects of a student-managed  response-cost system on the behavior of two mainstreamed students.  The Elementary SchoolJournal, 89 1, 8997, 1988.  Smith, M. and Misra, A: A comprehensive management system for students in regular classrooms. Elementary SchoolJournal, 923, 353-372,  1992. 

Chapter 6  DISCIPLINE VIGNETTES  T his chapter provides vignettes of actual discipline experiences of real teachers. The teachers are either early in  their careers or student teachers who are engaging in their  first full-time teaching experience. The vignettes were written by the teachers themselves, and reflect their actual experiences. Each vignette is followed by a reaction to the manner in which the situation was handled and suggestions for  more appropriate ways that the teacher could have responded or additional strategies the teachers could have employed.  Female second-year teacher in suburban middle  school.  The scenario:  The student was an eighth-grade male who was a difficult  student throughout the year for most of his teachers but was  usually fairly well behaved in Tech. Ed. Typical disruptive  behaviors of the student included refusal to do class work,  refusal to bring materials to class, cursing, or using inappropriate language. Typical responses to his deportment were  time-outs requested by either the student or the teacher,  lunch detention, after-school detention, or removal from the  classroom by an administrator. Academically, he was failing  most of his classes, including Tech. Ed.  The student came into class and he asked for a time-out  immediately. I told him he could sit in the hall during warmup 5-10 minutes but that he would have to come back in  77 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  for the activity. He agreed, and after the warm-up I asked  him to come back in the room. During the directions for the  activity, he began commenting inappropriately to other students and to me. I sent him out for a second time-out 5 minutes.  When the rest of the class began the assignment, I went  out to talk to the student to find out why he did not want to  participate. He said he just didn't feel like being in the class  today. I gave him one more chance to come back into the  room and participate. He again came in, but would not do  the work, so I gave him an after-school detention for not participating. After a few minutes, he went to the paper cutter  available to students doing the class work and chopped up  the detention form. I then called the administrator and had  him taken out of the classroom.  The whole episode took about 45 minutes to escalate. The  student had a point in saying that if I had just left him in the  hallway, he would never have erupted and have to be  removed from the room. However, I believed that he should  be required to do the class work just like the rest of the students.  The student should not have been allowed to request a "time-out."  This situation was apparently more reinforcing to the student than  the classroom. The subsequent inappropriate comments should have  resulted in a less intrusive strategy such as attempting to generate  interest or focusing on something the student values rather than in  another time-out. Sitting with the student and asking why he didn't  want to participate could well have been reinforcing the inappropriate behavior because of the attention the student was receiving from  the teacher. 

Discipline Vignettes  Female 2nd year teacher in suburban elementary  school.  The scenario:  79  During my first year of teaching, I encountered a student  who lacked motivation when completing independent work  in Language Arts. This student was an eight-year-old male.  The setting was typically at a table of four students during  seatwork.  Usually independent work consisted of three activities:  one written response, one oral response, and one silent reading activity. This student usually completed only one activity  and many times had to be continually redirected or moved  to a single desk to complete just that task.  This student slumped in his seat, would whisper to others  around him, play with his pencil, ask to use the restroom,  and walk around the room. He tended to be on task during  group time.  I immediately contacted his parents. After speaking with  his parents I created a behavioracademic progress card in  which the student had to meet the goal of completing his  work. This student wanted to work for a candy treat. If he  completed his work he received candy; if not, there was no  treat. A parent signature was required each evening. In addition, I spoke with the guidance counselor who suggested that  the student come to his office to complete his work during  Specials which were immediately after Language Arts. I did  occasionally send him to the guidance counselor's office. The  Special Education teacher also came in to complete an evaluation to rule out any type of situation that may have fallen  under Special Education laws.  This student used the card all year long, and did progress  in completing his work. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Comments:  During independent work the teacher might have chosen to reinforce those students who were working well independently, and  attempt to ignore the boy's inappropriate behavior. Any attempt on  the part of the boy to try to work independently should result in  immediate reinforcement from the teacher. Also, the student may well  value the teacher's respect and work to earn it. "Motivation" could  be developed by employing a more consistent schedule of reinforcement with the boy's target behaviors.  First-year male elementary teacher in an urban  elementary school.  The scenario:  r teach at a school where 99 percert of the student population is minority. The median income of the families in my  school is below poverty level and 95 percent of my students  come from single-family homes or fosterstepparent care.  r started out the year teaching two sixth-grade Language  Arts classes of sixteen students. Two weeks into the school  year my principal asked me if r would move to fourth. The  female teacher in fourth-grade could not handle the discipline problems or the parental attitudes involved with that  grade. r volunteered to take the departmentalized fourthgrade Language Arts position and r was in for a surprise. All  senior teachers at the school told me that the fourth-grade  class has been the worst discipline problem since they began  kindergarten. r began teaching them with an open mind.  My most difficult behavioral problem is an African  American student who comes from a single-parent family. r  will call him X. He is nine years old. r taught his brother for  two weeks in sixth grade. His brother is eleven. r will call  him Y. His brother and r became friends. He has helped me  handle the problems with X. 

Discipline Vignettes  81  It began on a normal day in early October. X's class came  in and began their warm-up. He had yet to possess a warmup journal and that day I gave him a piece of paper to begin.  He had several pens and pencils that he brought to my class.  Instead of doing warm-up, he sat and played with a pen and  a pencil. I took the pen away from him. I told him to start  doing his warm up. He refused and began playing with the  rest of his pens and pencils. As I was going over the warmup, I walked over to him. He continued to play with his pens  and pencils. I tried to take all but one pencil away from him.  He would not give them to me so I grabbed them from his  hand. He squeezed harder and I yanked them out of his  hand. He sat back in his chair and put his feet on his desk. I  asked him to sit properly and he complied hesitantly. I sat his  pens and pencils on the chalkboard ledge. As we were finishing our warm-up and beginning whole group, he walked  up and grabbed his pens and pencils as I was helping another student. I marched over to his desk and took them out of  his hand and placed them in my desk drawer. He sat down  screaming "I don't care. I will have my mother come up here  and take them from you." I stated "Bring your mother up! I  will welcome a conference with her." At that moment he sat  back down and began to do some work. He really never  started his work, but he sat there quietly enough so I could  teach the class. He still was a distraction to me and the rest  of my students.  One half hour before the class was leaving my room we  have two-hour blocks he began to play with the one pencil  he had left. He would bang the desk with the pencil as he  rocked back on his chair. I asked him to stop and he didn't.  He is very stubborn and would not reason. I told him he  would get his pens and pencils back at the end of the day. I  grabbed the only pencil he had out of his hand as he continued to defy me. He kicked his desk three feet across the  room. I told him to leave my classroom, take his books, and  go next door to the new sixth-grade teacher's room. I asked 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  him three times, screaming the last time. He would not listen.  1 threatened to call the office. At this time he said his normal  phrase "I am not doing anything wrong! You better give me  my pencils back now!" 1 told him that 1 was the teacher.  What 1 do or say is final and have a seat. 1 began to write an  Office Referral. He picked up his chair and threw it down,  almost striking another student. 1 grabbed his arm to take  him out of the classroom. He picked up his books with his  other arm and threw them across the room, hitting the door.  He ran to the corner of the room, jumped up, and sat on the  counter in front of the window and began to cry. Only several minutes were left in class. 1 left him there until class was  over and 1 could complete the Office Referral. He seemed  stable there and 1 did not want to cause any more problems.  1 lined up the class and took them to the math teacher across  the halL X remained on the window ledge.  Mter calling his mother, my principal suspended him for  two days. Later that day 1 saw his older brother and told him  about the incident and asked him to tell his mom. He did! 1  have had several meetings with his mother since then to deal  with the child's behavior. He has been suspended twice  because of his behavior. His mother is called in at least twice  a month to handle the child. She is not a disciplinarian, but  rather a talker and bargainer with her children. Lately he is  doing better. He still can come into the classroom with an  attitude, but not like that day.  Comments:  Certainly the strategy of ignoring inappropriate behavior and  reinforcing incompatible behavior should be diligently attempted.  Also, students near him engaging in appropriate behavior should be  reinforced so that he is vicariously reinforced for appropriate behavior.  The teacher should not have engaged the child in debate. Once a  teacher does this, she has lost. In situations like this there is nothing 

Discipline Vignettes  83  to debate. Simply impose the appropriate disciplinary action and  move on.  Female student teacher in a suburban high school.  The scenario:  The most unusual discipline problem that I have experienced occurred within the first month of my student teaching  experience. The student involved was a ninth grade female.  She talked a lot during class and had a slight "attitude" at the  beginning of the year. This particular day my cooperating  teacher had left the room to run down to the office. The students' assignment was a difficult worksheet, and many students had questions. This particular student called out "Hey  you!" I looked at her and she eventually raised her hand. I  then moved across the room to help a student who had her  hand raised the entire time. The problem student began  complaining, and I told her I'd be over as soon as I was finished. When I finally went over to help her she said she was  waiting for my cooperating teacher. I walked away frustrated  and upset. Then I thought about it and talked about the situation with my mentor teacher. We decided that I should issue  the student a detention for attitude and disruptive behavior.  Before class began the next day, I asked her to come outside  the room with me. Then I handed her the form and told her  it was for her behavior yesterday and asked her to sign it. She  began to argue with me and I said we can discuss this tomorrow when you're here after school. She then signs the form.  The following afternoon when she came in for detention she  said "Hi" to the coop teacher and glared at me. The following day she told me that she really enjoyed the unit we were  studying. She seems to have become my friend and definitely respects me. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Comments:  The detention that was ultimately given to the student was not  immediate and the impact of immediate reinforcement was lost. At  first, the student teacher should have ignored the misbehaving student  and ultimately used the opportunity to practice the ''1 mean business  look. " Another possibility would be to try to generate interest in the  student. The fact that the student came around and worked well  with the student teacher suggests that the student teacher may well  have been able to be an influencing variable in the student's life.  Female student teacher in a suburban middle school.  The scenario:  Phillip was a very difficult student. He was already repeating eighth grade and almost never came to schooL He lived  with his grandmother who worked early in the morning, so  when he got up for school there was no one at home to make  him go-and often he would not. I think Phillip knew that  regardless he would go on to the ninth grade because the  state law says you can't be held back two times.  I know through team teacher meetings that Phillip's attendance was a real problem. When I began teaching, I decided to observe how many days in a row he would come to  school in the next week. I told myself I would praise him if  he came consecutively for three days. Surprisingly, he  showed up for school all week! On Friday, I called him over  to me after class. I told him how glad I was to see him in class  and I hoped it would continue. I must say that it did  improve. However, Phillip's behavior was a problem, too.  He gave me the most confrontational situation of my student  teaching experience.  In class one day, I saw Phillip writing on another child. I  told him to stop doing it, or he would be "out of my classroom." He continued, of course, because he thought I would 

Discipline Vignettes  85  not follow through with my promise. I had never sent someone to the principal before. At this point, 1 asked "Phil, do  you want to sit in the corner desk by yourself? The class is set  up in groups of 4, but there is a table at the back corner  where no one sits.  He shouted, "NO!" The class got quiet and he started  smirking. 1 said "Phil, 1 think you should pick up your books  and move to the empty desk. You don't seem capable of  working with your group today." Again, he said, "NO!"  I responded by saying, "You will have to go to the office  then." He defiantly said "NO!" once more. Remaining calm,  1 walked over to the intercom and called down to the office.  1 asked for someone to "remove a young man from my classroom."  He was quiet for me from that day on and he continued to  show up for school. He even apologized to me after school  one day when he was waiting for his bus!  Comments:  The first reprimand was very appropriate; clearly the misbehaving student had to be stopped from writing on another student.  However, the threat of removal turned out to be hollow. The student  was not removed but was isolated instead. This scenario provides a  good example of how callingfor assistance, even though it was rather  late, was an effective strategy.  Female fIrst-year teacher in a suburban elementary  school.  The scenario:  I have a group of six special education students in my  class. One of the girls, in addition to having learning problems, is diagnosed as violently aggressive. Physically she is  extremely mature for her age. She is nine years old, in the  third grade as big as 1 am. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  While walking in gym one day she called the back half of  the line "stupid morons" which of course upset my class. So  I had a talk with her about respect and treating others the  way you want to be treated. After school that day my class  was still wound up over it and as far as I can tell they were  just looking at her she really does hate to be looked at and  she pinned a student up against a wall. I defused that by "you  sit here, you stay away," etc.  The next day she was trying to play soccer with my class.  She got mad because they wouldn't let her have the ball so  she hit one of the boys. He came up and told me not very  upset; he's an instigator. I told him to bring her up and I'd  get both stories. He never came back, and I went after them  both. By this time the boy was playing again and she was  chasing another child saying "you wanta be next? I'll hit you  too!" I called all three people over and asked, "What's going  on?" All three started at once, so I said, "One at a time."  Every time one of the boys started she'd yell and interrupt.  So I pulled each aside while the other two were sitting in the  grass. Next thing I know she's up walking across the soccer  field! "Karla, I'm not finished with you, you need to come  back." "My name isn't Karla," she said. "I don't care what  your name is I told her it is Karla get back here!" So I had  to follow her as she's leaving the playground. Finally, I  stopped saying anything and just walked a little behind her.  I did say before I stopped talking I thought she needed to  pay the support room a visit.  When I got her turned in the right direction I walked  ahead of her without a word and she did follow. She continued up and stood by the fence for the rest of recess. I didn't  make her go to the support room because the power struggle  go or not go would have started again. I found with her it is  best to let her think she's getting her way although she isn't.  Ignoring the behavior walking away brought her around to  do as I asked go back where you belong. There's a definite  personality clash happening with her and two or three of my  regular education students. 

Discipline Vignettes  87  Comments:  It was not a good idea to ask the boy to bring the misbehaving girl  to the teacher. The teacher should have gone to get the girl. When the  girl walked away from her, the teacher's reprimand was quite  appropriate.  The teacher saying to the girl, '' think you need to go to the support room" and then not making her actually go was inappropriate.  Always avoid power struggles; never debate with a misbehaving  student. It would also be valuable to attempt to find out what this  student values and attempt to use that in discipline strategies.  Removal to a time-out situation or some form of response-cost would  also have been appropriate in this situation.  Female fIrst-year teacher in a suburban elementary  school.  The scenario:  This problem occurred with a lO-year-old boy in my fifthgrade class. The boy is a very intelligent, outgoing, and  charismatic character; his main goal in life is to star in a  movie, and 1 am certain that he will one day achieve this! He  has been the class clown ever since kindergarten and has  informed me that a few years ago he was "really bad" and his  current behavior is, by comparison, "pretty good."  1 had ongoing problems with his behavior in the first  month of school because of his constant quest to entertain  the class. The last straw came when he completely disrupted  our Language Arts group one day by writing the word  "F ART" in huge letters on the back of his notebook and  holding it up for his friends to see. 1 told him to go sit in timeout at the other end of the room, and 1 had him turn a card.  1 have a card system; they turn cards when they break a  rule. The immediate result was that he sulked in the time-out  area for a while, then he returned to the group and was no  longer disruptive. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  I knew that I had to do something to stop the overall disruptive pattern, or it would just continue to get worse. The  parents told me that they would back me up on anything I  tried; they were well aware of their son's record. I spoke to  his teacher from the previous year, who told me that he had  more success when this boy was seated away from the other  students.  I was tired of constantly issuing negative consequences to  this boy, and I knew he was tired of it as welL I made a small,  inconspicuous behavior card to put on his desk. For each  class period in which he was on-task, he would receive a  sticker. I talked about it with him and he set his own goal,  which was to receive four stickers per day, or twenty per  week. He chose his own reward, which was to perform a  monologue from a play in front of the class.  The behavior card system worked fairly well, but there  were times when he was still totally off task and did not seem  to care whether he received a sticker. One day after school I  separated his desk from the others, and that seemed to help  because he no longer had an audience.  Comments:  The time-out strategy employed by the teacher was a good choice  in this situation. It was also an excellent idea to talk to the parents  and the child's previous teachers. The use of stickers as a form of reinforcement for appropriate behavior is a good and workable strategy.  However, it should be coupled with an intrusive strategy such as  time-out until the appropriate behavior becomes firmly established.  The "audience" of the class was obviously providing powerful reinforcement to him when he acted out. 

Discipline Vignettes  Female student teacher in a suburban elementary  school.  The scenario:  89  I was substituting for my mentor today. The first class we  have is Social Studies. I was doing one of my own lesson  plans. Many students asked where Mrs. H was. I announced  to the whole class that she would not be here today but might  visit at the end of the day.  There were two boys that I had to remind more than  enough times during the lesson to either be quiet or stop  doing something that they should not have been doing. The  students who can not see the board are allowed to come up  to the front tables. These two boys were ones that usually  move. This is nothing out of the ordinary. Sometimes, they  may sit next to each other depending on who else is at the  table and where the others may choose to sit. Today, they sat  next to each other.  The one boy has ADHD. His mother decided to try him  without his medicine this year. When my mentor called parents before school started, his mother described him as  someone who calls out and is impulsive. We had an IEP for  him. He is not one who causes a lot of trouble in our classroom and is a good student, but he does callout a lot.  The other boy is very unorganized and has been having  difficulty staying on task. He struggles with following directions and keeping up with the rest of the class. After he put a  paper I gave him in his binder, he started going through the  rest of his binder. I reminded him to stay with us, and I  flipped his binder to the page we were on.  Throughout the lesson, the first boy would call out  answers. Many times I would remind him to raise his hand  or I would praise someone else for raising his or her hand.  However, there were times I would accept his answer.  The two boys did not interact throughout the lesson until  the end. I had given them plenty of individual warnings. As 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  soon as I saw a problem, I corrected them and said that next  time they would have to flip their cards. The second boy  immediately tried to give me excuses.  After Social Studies, the class went to their specials, and  two students had to flip their cards. It was the two boys I had  repeatedly warned.  I should have had them flip their cards, but I did not want  to bring attention to them or make it into something bigger  than it was. I always hesitate, and by the time I decide to discipline, it is too late. I could have had them move back to  their original seats and away from each other.  Comments:  It most certainly would have been a good idea to have them move  back to their original seats and be separated from one another. It also  appears that the teacher provided too many "reminders." These often  serve as positive reinforcement of the inappropriate behavior. The  teacher must work to be consistent and not accept call-outs when the  rule is that hands must be raised. With a "card system" as described  above, the teacher should not warn or threaten. It is better to just go  and flip the misbehaving student's card.  Female student teacher in a suburban elementary  school.  The scenario:  On October 27, 1998, at 11:30 am Brutus, an eight-yearold boy, was misbehaving. The other third graders had come  into the room from the computer lab. They were working on  independent work that I had assigned to them. Brutus was  the only student who was not following directions. I went  over to him and asked him to take out his graphic organizer  that was due 2 112 weeks earlier and for him to write his  rough draft paragraph. Brutus made no response to me. He 

Discipline Vignettes  91  turned his head when I tried to talk to him. He glared at me  for a couple of minutes and showed disrespect towards me.  I then told Brutus that he could do his work during afternoon break, but he still did not comply. After about ten minutes, I called the students to sit over at the rocking chair.  Brutus would not move out of his chair. I gave him warnings  that consisted of missing recess the entire week, calling home  and finally going down to the office. I heard him say under  his breath, "I don't care." At that point I told him that another student's instructional aide could take him down to the  office if he did not join the group. After no response, I wrote  up a referral on him because of his attitude. After no  response, he still would not go to the office and he was now  in more trouble. The instructional aide who is always in our  classroom went to ask the vice principal to come to get him.  It was then time for lunch. I called groups to line up and  Brutus got in line. I told him that he was not going to lunch  with us. I walked the students down to lunch while our vice  principal came to get Brutus.  Comments:  In this scenario too many warnings and threats were issued. This  might have been a situation where a continued ejJort to generate  interest would have improved the situation. Most certainly an unsuccessfol stern reprimand should be followed by time-out or some type  of response-cost.  Female student teacher in a suburban elementary  school.  The scenario:  This semester I am student teaching in a second-grade  classroom. I have a very diverse class in that most are on  grade level and about nine are identified as special education 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  students. Just recently one of my special education students  has been very disruptive. I have had to send six notes home  in the past eleven school days because she has landed on that  spot in our behavior management system. First, you move  your dart to a warning. Next, you lose recess. Then you have  a letter sent home. Finally, if it moves again in the same day,  you are referred to the principal's office.  I sent this student to the principal's office yesterday with a  referral. I also sent a note home explaining what had happened. Today, her behavior was just about the same.  Although she was not out of her seat as much, she did many  things that caused her dart to be moved. Today, she sang an  inappropriate song for school, and picked up another student  while walking down the hall. She was very talkative and  called out too many times. Each time, I warned her that  those actions were not appropriate for school and her dart  would be moved. She also wrote "I love you" on another student's work. At that I said, "Maybe you need to make another trip to the principal's office." She shook her head no and  put out her bottom lip. Then I said, "Better yet, maybe I  should just make a phone call to your father at work right  now. That way, you can explain to him what you have done  today." This time she said, "N O! NO! I don't want you to call  him." I said, "The next time I even have to think about correcting you, I am calling your father."  Amazingly, she was not disruptive for the rest of the day  which was only the last period. She participated in our  Native American lesson, she was quiet, and she left the other  students alone. I sent a note home with her, explaining what  had happened today. Attached to the note I put a copy of the  behavior card I made up for this student. After yesterday, I  decided she needed something extra to make her experience  at school more positive. This behavior card will give her  something tangible to strive for, rather than trying not to lose  something such as recess. I asked her father for any suggestions or comments he may have about the behavior card. I  hope this improves her behavior . soon! 

Discipline Vignettes  93  Comments:  Obviously this misbehaving girl "values" not having her father  called. The teacher is quite correct in recognizing the need to create a  system of positive reinforcement to use with the girl. The existing system is appropriate in that it progresses from less intrusive to more  intrusive, but it must be accompanied by a system of reinforcing  behaviors that are incompatible with the misbehaviors.  Female student teacher in suburban elementary  school.  The scenario:  For my on-grade-Ievel math group, six students from other  second-grade classrooms come over to ours. These students  are usually never a problem. If I have to correct them, it  never has gone past a warning. However, today was a little  different. One student in particular was extremely distracted  and was acting out. After several of my "glances" and warnings, I told Rick that if he acted out again, he would owe me  recess. I had given him enough warnings. That seemed to  calm him down . for about one minute.  Mter doing a few more math problems with the students,  I looked over and noticed Rick on the ground with his shirt  over his knees. I said "Rick, you have until I count to five to  sit up and pay attention." As I started counting, he made a  big commotion like he was stuck. I replied, "You will owe me  recess tomorrow too." He still took his time getting out of his  shirt. So I told him he would owe me recess.  I also told him to keep it up and he would continue to owe  me recess for the whole week. He calmed down a little, but  not enough. At this point I was getting annoyed. Recess did  not seem enough. So after he began singing aloud I made  him go back to his seat. I said, "You will not continue to disrupt this class; you may leave the group and watch from your 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  desk." He walked back to his desk with his head down. After  group was over, 1 called him over to me and asked him what  was wrong. 1 wanted to know why he felt the need to distract  the whole math group. He said he did not know. So 1 told  him that was unacceptable and the next time something like  this happened, he would take a trip to the principal's office.  When he came in during his class recess, 1 could tell he  had been crying. He really did not want to give up recess. As  much as 1 hate to see a child cry, 1 think he needs to learn to  pay the price for his actions. So, 1 will see him tomorrow for  recess as well.  Comments:  It was quite appropriate to begin with "the glance" and then to  actually move to the problem. The teacher should continue to try to  ascertain elements of the child's environment that he truly values, so  that they can be used constructively to improve any discipline problems. The "response-cost" feature of this scenario was excellent. The  teacher might need to be reminded, however, that it is not appropriate to withdraw a penalty once it has been given. When you tell a  student that he will miss recess, you must follow through.  Female student teacher in a suburban elementary  school.  The scenario:  It began when 1 was walking the class to P.E. class. 1 was  at the end of the line. Mrs. B was at the front. Andy was at  the end, right behind me. Out of the corner of my eye 1 saw  him side kick another student. 1 turned quickly and told him  what 1 saw. He said that the boy hurt him first. 1 told him that  his card would be moved. He did not like the sound of this.  He replied: "I might as well have my older brother teach me.  This school is so stupid. Why am 1 here?" After hearing such 

Discipline Vignettes  95  comments, I pulled him away from the class and told him  that we would have a nice talk after P.E. He stomped away.  I told Mrs. B of the incident. She agreed that I should have  a talk with him. Mter forty minutes, I returned to pick up the  class from the gymnasium without Mrs. B.  The students  were quietly waiting. A substitute stood in front of them and  told me of another incident Andy caused in class. Apparently  he kicked another student and punched the P.E. teacher in  the stomach. The rest of the students wanted to tell me  everything. I had to calm them before leaving the room. We  walked to the end of the hallway. I turned around and saw  him catching up to the class. It looked normal.  Suddenly he began throwing himself, arm first, into the  walls of the hallway. Side-to-side this boy was literally bouncing off the walls. I had to stop him. I told him to stop and  stand in line, but that had no effect. As classes were traveling  through the hallways a first-grade teacher looked on. She  asked another teacher if she would take my class to her classroom. I was now alone with Andy in the hallway. He continued to run and bounce off each wall. I finally got hold of  him and tightened my arms. I did not want to hurt him. He  tried very hard to get away. I did not want to fight it any  longer. I let go thinking it would be OK. He went back to his  bouncing. I was scared. There was nothing I could do to  make him stop. I told him that we would go to the office and  talk with the principal. I told him that he can tell her what is  bothering him. He did not say a word. He just kept hitting  the walls. I was now afraid that he would break something,  like his arm.  The school secretary walked down the hallway. I had him  in a hold and asked her if the principal was available. She  said "No, she is at a meeting right now, but the vice principal  is in her office." Knowing that I wanted to get him there, I  said that we were on our way. She nodded and left. I continued to hold him as he struggled to break free. He kicked,  stomped, and elbowed me many times. He told me that he 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  would do karate on me and it would hurt. I told him that I  did not want to hurt him. I asked him why he wanted to hurt  me? I got no response. After some time, he stopped his struggle. I pushed him against the wall and had him sit down. I  said "Let's calm down and talk about what is wrong. You can  calm down and relax." He sat down and I loosened my grip.  He seemed OK so I pulled away. I sat down across from him.  He had his arms crossed and just stared at the floor. Then,  before I knew it he jumped up and began running. I told him  to get back and stop. He did not listen. I began running.  Without knowing it, I looked up and he was heading out the  front door. I was too scared for words. I thought to myself  "He is leaving the building, what do I do?" We got outside  and he stopped. He knew he was not supposed to be there. I  began screaming at the top of my lungs. He knew I was not  just upset but scared. I know I was hot, red, and teary-eyed.  He could see it. He slowly began walking back towards me,  still grunting with his arms crossed. I quickly grabbed him  and carried him into the building.  As we walked toward the office, the teachers who walked  by could see the anger in him and the fear in me. I took a  break and regained my grip on him. He began kicking me  again. Then, Mrs. W came down the hallway. She saw my  face and quickly grabbed his feet. We carried him the rest of  the way to the office. As we were walking, he punched her in  the arm. She said "That didn't hurt." When we got to the  office the principal and vice principal were standing there  with their arms out. I handed him over and he fell to the  ground. He began screaming: "I want to go home." The principal said she would take it from there. I left the room  relieved and shook up.  Teachers began coming over to me and helping me calm  down. They told me stories to make me laugh and gave me  advice. They were understanding and approving of what I  had done. I was still scared. I went into the bathroom and let  everything out that had built up in me. I did not want to  return to the classroom teary-eyed or red. 

Discipline Vignettes  97  I had male teachers tell me what they would have done,  but the female teachers gave me confidence and said that  what I did was right. They said I handled it just fine. I know  I will never forget this experience. I will also never name my  child after him.  Comments:  This was obviously an extremely frightening situation for any  teacher, much less a student teacher. It is perfectly understandable  that student teachers, indeed most teachers, want to handle disruptive situations themselves, but there are times when discretion is the  better part of valor. This was a situation where she should have  called for assistance early on in the episode. The potential for physical harm to the student teacher as well as the potential for the harm  that could have befallen the student, especially when he actually left  the bUilding, clearly indicates that she should have called for assistance. 

Chapter 7  THEORETICAL FOUNDATION OF  STUDENT DISCIPLINE  Behavior is what students do; anything and everything  they do in and out of the classroom is a form of human  behavior. Examples of student behavior are:   Writing answers to mathematics problems   Hand-raising during an oral activity   Open discussion of a selected topic   Seat leaving   Arguing   Fighting  If student discipline problems are defined as actions by  students that disrupt the learning effectiveness or safety of  the classroom, it can easily be recognized that student discipline problems are a form of human behavior. Such behaviors are called operants or operant behavior and unlike  respondent behavior are not caused by a stimulus. Rather  they are occasioned by a special type of stimulus which is  known as a discriminative stimulus. Operant behaviors are  emitted in the presence of a discriminative stimulus because  of the students' history of consequences associated with that  behavior. For example when Ms. Smith discriminative stimulus says to a group of students, "Settle down and take out  your workbooks", the students quiet down and take out their  books operant behavior. This behavior is supported by  their history of dealing with Ms. Smith. On the other hand,  if Ms.Jones discriminative stimulus says the same thing, the  same group of students might continue to talk and socialize  operant behavior. Their behavior is sustained by their his98 

Theoretical Foundation of Student Discipline  99  tory of dealing with Ms. Jones. It is important to understand  that it is the consequences of operant behavior that establish  and maintain the behavior. It is typically unproductive to  blame student misbehavior on some hypothetical construct.  For example, it would not be productive for Ms. Jones to  blame the students' failure to respond to her directive as a  lack of motivation or an absence of readiness skills.  In terms of discipline problems, it is certainly the case that  misbehavior, acting out, and fighting are all forms of operant  behavior and as such are established and sustained by reinforcers that are provided by the environment. In most cases  the child's environment is providing reinforcers naturally  and in many cases unintentionally. Nicole's laughing at Erica  when she makes a funny noise is a positive reinforcer in  Erica's environment and serves to strengthen her inappropriate behavior. Similarly the teacher's scolding Teddy for  not paying attention is, although unintentionally, reinforcing  that behavior by providing attention to the inappropriate  behavior. The challenge for the teacher is to conceptualize  and implement a system of classroom management that  includes providing positive reinforcement for appropriate  behavior i.e., behavior incompatible with the misbehavior  and weakening consequences for misbehavior. Weakening  consequences can take the form of extinction, where positive  reinforcement for inappropriate behavior is withheld, or  punishment where an aversive consequence is provided contingent on the misbehavior, or earned reinforcement is  removed contingent on the misbehavior. As was discussed in  Chapter 5, the actions by the teacher can range from nonintrusive to very intrusive. Table 7.1 provides a review of possible actions. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Table 7.1  DECREASING INAPPROPRIATE BEHAVIOR  Nonintrusive   Add aversive  Deliver a stern glance  consequence   Move to students location   Remove  earned  positive  reinforcers   Delete earned points   Ask to perform an errand  such as handing out  workbooks  More Intrustive   Assign detention   Give time-out   Call for assistance   Refuse permission  to attend an  assembly   Deny recess  Once the concept of student discipline problems as forms  of operant behavior is understood and embraced, it is relatively easy to comprehend that these operant behaviors will  respond to a system of operant conditioning or consequence  management. Often referred to as behavior modification or  behavior management, the objective is to manage the consequences of a student's behavior to bring about a more appropriate behavioral repertoire. Once new, appropriate behaviors become established, it is expected that the teacher will  "stretch the schedule" of reinforcement to decrease the student's dependency on extrinsic reinforcers. More will be said  about this later.  In dealing with behaviors which are examples of discipline  problems, the teacher's goal is typically to increase the frequency or intensity of behaviors that are incompatible with  the misbehavior and to decrease the frequency or intensity of  the inappropriate behavior. The manner in which these goals  are accomplished is depicted in Table 7.2. Before addressing  the actual application of consequences, it is imperative to  emphasize that the consequences must be applied immediately. In other words, as soon as a teacher observes an inappropriate behavior, she must provide the consequence at 

Theoretical Foundation of Student Discipline  101  once. Similarly, when she observes a behavior that is incompatible with the misbehavior, she must provide the strengthening consequence at that moment.  Table 7.2  EFFECT OF CONSEQUENCES ON BEHAVIOR  Increase Behavior  Reinforcement  Positive Reinforcement  Negative Reinforcement  Provide a pleasing or  preferred consequence  to the student  Remove an aversive or  undesirable consequence  from the student  Decrease Behavior  Punishment  Extinction  Punishment by Addition  Punishment by Subtraction  Provide an aversive  consequences to the  student  Response-cost strategy  Remove or  prevent  positive  reinforcement  In addressing the goal of decreasing inappropriate behavior, teachers can employ punishment or extinction. There  are two ways to employ the principle of punishment. The  first type of punishment is the application of an aversive consequence. For example, if a teacher observes George punch  Emilio, she could immediately inform George that he had  been given a detention. The second type of punishment is  where earned reinforcement is removed contingent upon a  misbehavior. For example, the teacher, on seeing George hit  Emilio, could immediately remove points or tokens George 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  had earned for appropriate behavior. This is commonly  known as response-cost.  The other way to decrease behavior is by manipulating the  environment so as to allow extinction to occur. This means  that positive reinforcement is removed or not provided. A  teacher who consistently ignores Jennifer's persistently talking out without being recognized, is allowing extinction to  occur. In other words, the inappropriate behavior of talking  out is consistently ignored and will ultimately extinguish or  disappear.  Consistent with the strategies of decreasing inappropriate  behavior, are the strategies of increasing behaviors that are  incompatible with the inappropriate behavior. The most  common method of accomplishing this is positive reinforcement. An immediate application of a positive consequence  contingent upon appropriate behavior is positive reinforcement. If Jennifer does raise her hand before talking out, the  teacher should immediately calion her or provide her with  a token or a point on her score sheet. This, when done consistently, will result in an increase in her hand-raising behavior.  Another method of increasing behavior is through the  process of negative reinforcement. It is important to understand that this is not the same thing as punishment. As a matter of fact, one way to think of negative reinforcement is as  the removal of punishment. Technically, negative reinforcement is the removal or avoidance of an aversive consequence. For example, if Zack is able to avoid the aversive  consequence of homework over the weekend by finishing his  essay in class, his on-task behavior will increase. It will  increase as a result of negative reinforcement.  Not only is it important to understand the effect of consequences on behavior, it is also crucial to understand how  those consequences are applied. The manner in which consequences are applied is most often referred to as schedules of  reinforcement. 

Theoretical Foundation of Student Discipline  103  The goal of manipulating the consequences of behavior is  to change that behavior. Generally speaking, the target  objective is usually to establish, maintain, increase, decrease,  or eliminate a behavior. A different schedule of reinforcement is called for depending on the target.  Before delving very deeply into the topic of schedules of  reinforcement, it is appropriate to consider how behavior is  measured. For the most part, behavior is measured by counting its frequency or duration. In other words, how many  times does Hector speak out without being called upon frequency or how long does Hector remain off task when he is  assigned seatwork duration? Once the issue of how behavior will be measured is addressed, it is appropriate to examine the schedules of delivering reinforcement.  SCHEDULE OF REINFORCEMENT  The term schedule of reinforcement is used to describe the  delivery of reinforcement contingent upon the occurrence of  a specified number of behaviors or upon the first occurrence  of a behavior after the passage of a specified amount of time.  Fixed Ratio Schedule  The term fixed ratio indicates that the reinforcement will be  delivered on a ratio basis. In other words, a predetermined  number of occurrences of the behavior must occur before  reinforcement is delivered. The word fixed indicates that the  number of occurrences is consistent. An example would be a  fixed ratio of three FR3. This means that reinforcement is  contingent on every three occurrences of the behavior.  When attempting to establish a new behavior, it is best to  employ a continuous schedule FRI. In other words every  occurrence of the behavior is reinforced. For example if a  teacher is attempting to establish hand-raising behavior in 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Lizzy, she would reinforce her every time she raised her  hand. As the behavior became established, the teacher  would "stretch the schedule" to FR3 or FRS. Stretching the  schedule is an important strategy because it prevents satiation essentially tiring of the reinforcer and minimizes the  possibility of extinction occurring if reinforcement is inadvertently interrupted. After a behavior is established and  maintained, it is time to move to a more intermittent schedule such as a variable ratio schedule.  Variable Ratio Schedule  A variable ratio schedule is similar to the fixed ratio schedule  in that it is based on the frequency of the target behavior.  The difference is the reinforcement is provided contingent  upon varying numbers of occurrences of the behavior. A  variable ratio of four VR4 would mean that reinforcement  would be delivered inconsistently but the average would be  every four occurrences of the behavior. As Lizzy's hand-raising behavior becomes more firmly established she would be  "stretched"; for example, from VR4 to VR6. A behavior  reinforced on a VR6 schedule would be extremely resistant  to extinction.  A word should be said about the types of reinforcers a  teacher chooses to provide. Rather than worry about which  primary reinforcers are most effective with each student, it is  usually more practical to implement a "token economy" in  the classroom where tokens or points are awarded by the  teacher. These are easy to award and can be redeemed by  the students at a later time. Token economics also prevent  students from becoming satiated on a particular reinforcer  because students have a menu of items for which they can  redeem their earned tokens or points.  Some behaviors lend themselves more to a temporal measurement rather than a frequency measurement. In such  cases an interval schedule of reinforcement is used. 

Theoretical Foundation of Student Discipline  105  Fixed Interval Schedule  A zxed interval schedule means that a prescribed amount of  time e.g., three minutes must elapse and then the next  occurrence of the behavior is reinforced. Such a schedule  would be depicted as FI3. For example, if a teacher is interested in increasing the amount of time Jessica stays on task,  she might put Jessica on a VI2 schedule of reinforcement.  This would mean that if after two minutes Jessica was on  task, she would be reinforced. This schedule should also be  stretched to, for example, FI4 or FI6. Ultimately it would be  appropriate to move to a variable schedule.  Variable Interval Schedule  A variable interval schedule of reinforcement simply means  that the amount of time that must elapse prior to reinforcement varies around some predetermined average. For example, if Alicia were placed on a VI4 schedule of reinforcement, it would mean that she might be reinforced after three  minutes, then after six minutes, then after seven minutes, and  then after two minutes. The objective is to average about four  minutes of time before the target behavior is reinforced. A  variable interval schedule of reinforcement makes it exceedingly difficult for the student to anticipate the reinforcement,  and consequently, is extremely resistant to extinction.  There are more complicated schedules of reinforcement  which combine various forms of ratio and interval schedules.  Nevertheless, the four schedules described above provide an  overview of the basic schedules of reinforcement.  As a rule of thumb it can be claimed that more consistent  schedules of reinforcement are used in establishing a behavior, while more intermittent schedules are employed in  maintaining a behavior. 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  STRETCHING THE SCHEDULE OF REINFORCEMENT  Once a student's inappropriate behavior decreases or an  incompatible behavior increases to the target level, it is very  important to change the schedule of reinforcement so as to  decrease the student's dependency on extrinsic reinforcers.  This change in the schedule of reinforcement is known' as  stretching the schedule and will also serve to prevent extinction from occurring should some circumstance prevent the  scheduled delivery of reinforcement.  For example, if Jamal's number of talk outs had been  decreased by reinforcing his hand raising every time he  raised his hand, it would be necessary to change from an  FRI schedule to FR3 and then to FRS for example. In other  words, the teacher would progressively move to an inconsistent schedule that averaged a reinforcer for every four times  Jamal raised his hand.  The idea is to progressively stretch the use of extrinsic  reinforcers with the goal of essentially eliminating them. The  idea is to build and increase the child's reservoir of intrinsic  reinforcers and decrease his reliance on extrinsic reinforcers.  The intent is to approximate the schedule of reinforcement  and the type of reinforcement provided routinely by the natural environment.  Anyone who responsibly manipulates the consequences of  student behavior for the purpose of changing that student's  behavior should embrace the goal of the student developing  self-control of the target behavior. This, of course, is the ultimate goal of behavior modification.  REINFORCERS  Reinforcers can be either positive or negative. Positive  reinforcers are provided in positive reinforcement and  removed during extinction. Negative reinforcers are added 

Theoretical Foundation of Student Discipline  107  during punishment and removed or avoided during negative  reinforcement. There are many consequences that can serve  as positive reinforcers and many that can function as negative reinforcers. However, care must be judiciously exercised  to avoid the assumption that a consequence will necessarily  function as a positive reinforcer for all children. For example,  although many children enjoy dried fruit or free time in the  art center, Shaniqua might prefer pretzel nuggets or free time  to read. If teachers want to change student behavior by providing immediate reinforcers, it is crucial that they determine  what consequences are indeed reinforcing for each child.  The task of whether a consequence is reinforcing or not is  whether or not it results in a change in behavior for the particular child.  Positive reinforcers can be subdivided into extrinsic seen  as outside the child and provided by someone else and  intrinsic that sense of satisfaction a child feels for a job well  done reinforcers. The teacher's task is to help the child  develop his own intrinsic reinforcers. However, in order to  do so, it is often necessary to legitimately use extrinsic reinforcers to create a series of appropriate behaviors.  Identifying individual, appropriate extrinsic reinforcers highlights the important differences between primary and secondary reinforcers Table 3.  Positive Reinforcers  Table 7.3  REINFORCERS  Reinforcers  Negative Reinforcers  Extrinsic  Intrinsic  primary  secondary 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Primary reinforcers, in and of themselves, are valued and  desired by children. The easiest way to understand primary  reinforcers is to think of the value of food to a hungry person. Secondary reinforcers have no inherent value; the actual value of green paper rectangles is obviously very limited.  However, people learn to value money, and it quickly takes  on a very high value.  The importance of the necessity of learning to value secondary reinforcers cannot be stressed too strongly. If something does not have value to a student, it will not serve as a  reinforcer for that student. Tokens awarded to Cathy for ontask behavior may have no value to her until she learns that  they can be redeemed for primary reinforcers. Similarly,  praise and compliments from the teacher will only have legitimate value to Cathy as she learns to value that particular  teacher's opinions.  Regrettably some teachers who are willing to try behavior  management begin by employing only secondary reinforcers. If these are not valued by the student, it is easy to see  that failure is inevitable.  Everyone has heard the expression "Success breeds success." This old saying is actually a good descriptor of how  intrinsic reinforcers are developed; they are not innate. As  primary and later secondary reinforcers are employed to  change behavior, the delivery of these reinforcers should be  accompanied by promise. This will create and increase the  value of such praise. It must be emphasized that reinforcers  should be delivered only for legitimate success experiences.  They should not be delivered "noncontingently" or just to  make the child feel good.  The more a child genuinely feels good and truly values the  legitimate success experiences she has, the more she will  develop intrinsic reinforcers that will allow her to manage  her own behavior. This, of course, is the ultimate goal of a  good program of behavior management. 

REFERENCES  Axelrod, S.: Behavior Modification 2nd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill,  1983  Bellack, A. S., Hersen, M., and Kazdin, A. E.: International Handbook of  Behavior Modification and Therapy. New York, Plenum Press, 1982.  The Council for Exceptional Children: Managing inappropriate behavior in the classroom. Eric Digest E408. 2-3, 1990.  Kazdin, A. E.: Behavior Modification. Chicago, Dorsey Press, 1989.  Matson, j. L., and McCartney, j. R: Handbook of Behavior Modification  with the Mentally Retarded. New York, Plenum Press, 1981.  Presbie, Rj., and Brown, P. L.: Behavior Modification. Washington, D.C.,  National Education Association, 1985.  Thompson, T. 1. and Grabowski, j.: Behavior Modification of the Mentally  Retarded. New York, Oxford University Press, 1977.  109 

INDEX  A  Assistance, call fonn, 73, 85, 97  B  Behavior, 23, 30, 98  Behavior, decreasing, 100  Behavior, operant, 98, 100  Behavioral approach, 17, 18  C  Classroom management, 44  Classroom climate, 25  Classroom managementgoals, 45  Cognitive approach, 17  Communication, 54  Consequences, 99, 100, 101  strengthening, 99, 101  weakening, 99  Consistency, 48, 90  Control,35  D  Debate, do not, 64, 82, 87  Deficiency needs, 16  Discipline problem, 16, 32, 57  Discipline problem types, 59  Discipline strategy staircase, 60  Duration, 103  E  Extinction, 99, 102  Extrinsic motivation, 18  F  Fairness, 58-59  Frequency, 100, 103  G  General motivation, 17, 18  Growth needs, 16  H  Hierarchy of needs, 16, 33  Humanistic approach, 17  Hypothetical construct, 17, 99  I  Ignore behavior, 61, 80, 82  Immediacy, 64, 80, 84, 100  Instructional variables, 26  Intensity, 100  Interest, 78, 91  Interest generation, 65, 91  Intrinsic motivation, 19  L  Learned helplessness, 8  Lesson flow, 54  Locus of control, 37  LOgistics, 51  Look,the, 62,84,94  M  Maslow, 33  Misbehavior, 39  Motivation, 14, 16-19,33,35, 79, 80  assessing, 38  defined,30  sustaining, 27  teaching, 20, 24  Movement, teacher, 63, 94  o  Operational definition, 17  Organization, 53  p  Parents, 74, 79, 88  Planning, 45, 46  factors of, 46  for instruction, 50  111 
Student Discipline and Classroom Management  Praise, 22, 23  Prevention, 43  Procedures, 49  Punishment, 101, 107  R  Rapport, 58  Reinforce incompatible, 80, 82, 93,  102  Reinforcement, positive, 90, 101, 102  Reinforcement, negative, 101, 102, 107  Reinforcers, 106  extrinsic, 107  intrinsic, 107, 108  negative, 106  positive, 106  primary, 107, 108  secondary, 107, 108  Reprimands, 68, 85, 87  Respect, 53, 57, 58, 80  Responding to problems, 60  Response cost, 70,87,91,94  Rules, 47  S  Schedules of reinforcement, 102, 103  fixed ratio schedule, 103  fixed interval schedule, 105  variable interval schedule, 105  variable ratio schedule, 104  Self-control, 19, 106  Self-esteem, 3, 4  atypical children, 8 -10  developing, 5, 12  minority children, 10 -12  Self-image, 7, 8  Separate students, 68, 90  Social learning approach, 17  Specific motivation, 17, 18  Stimulus, discriminative, 98  Strategies discipline, 61  assistance, call for, 73  debate, do not, 64  ignore, 61  immediacy, 64  interest generation, 65  look, the, 62  movement, teacher, 63  parents, 74  pause, 63  removal of items, 67  reprimands, 68  response cost, 70  separate students, 68  time-out, 71  value, students, 66  Stretch the schedule, 100, 104  T  Teacher characteristics, 25, 52  Time-out, 71, 77, 78, 87, 88, 91  V  Values, student, 66, 87, 93, 94  Variable, 17, 84  Vignettes, 77  W  Withitness, 54