A Guide to Promoting a Positive Classroom  Environment

A Guide to Promoting a Positive Classroom  Environment Umesh Sharma Monash University, Australia John Roodenburg Monash University, Australia and Steve Rayner Newman University, UK

A C.I.P. record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.  ISBN: 978-94-6300-341-4 paperback ISBN: 978-94-6300-342-1 hardback ISBN: 978-94-6300-343-8 e-book Published by: Sense Publishers,  P.O. Box 21858, 3001 AW Rotterdam, The Netherlands https:www.sensepublishers.com Printed on acid-free paper  All Rights Reserved  2015 Sense Publishers  No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted  in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming,  recording or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher, with the  exception of any material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered and  executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.

v TABLE OF CONTENTS Preface vii Acknowledgements ix Chapter 1: The Journey: Learning Teaching on the Road 1 Overview and Key Concepts 1 Introduction: Why Read This Book? 1 Understanding and Experience: Stories, Perspectives and Practice 3 Principles into Practice: Creating Positive Learning Environments 4 Chapter 2: Enabling Inclusive Learning Interventions 9 Overview and Key Concepts 9 Wellbeing 9 The Stress of Individual Differences 11 Problem Ownership 11 Intelligent Inclusion  14 Abilities and Learning Difficulties: Diagnostics beyond Classification  and Labelling 17 Chapter 3: Creating Positive Learning Environments through  Relational Leadership 21 Overview and Key Constructs 21 Anatomy of Conflicts 21 Evidence-Based Change 24 Problem Ownership, Control, and Effect  26 Management versus Leadership: Relationship Keys to Positive  Classroom Culture  31 Judging 36 Chapter 4: Building Independence and Wellbeing into a Positive  School Culture 39 Overview and Key Constructs 39 Effectiveness: An Integrated Approach  40 Application of an Effective Integrated Approach 43 Building a Constructive Repertoire, Defeating Old Destructive Habits 47 Dealing with Severe Adjustment Problems 49

TABLE OF CONTENTS vi Chapter 5: Understanding Beliefs and Professional Practices 57 Overview and Key Constructs 57 What Is Reflective Teaching? 59 Why Develop Reflective Teaching? 61 How Can You Become a Reflective Teacher?  62 Stage 1: What? 68 Stage 2: So what? 69 Stage 3: Now what? 70 Chapter 6: Positive Learning: Translating Research into Practice 73 Overview and Key Constructs 73 Principle 1: Motivation and Engagement 76 Principle 2: Need to Belong 80 Principle 3: Choice Theory in the Classroom 81 Principle 4: Resilience in the Classroom 83 Teaching Strategies That Work for Everyone! 85 Cooperative Learning 85 A Reflection: Choice, Change and Commitment 88 Chapter 7: Leading A Positive Learning Approach in the School Community 89 Overview and Key Constructs 89 Making a Start 89 The Need for a Whole School Policy on Positive Behaviour  92 Distributing Leadership 95 Dealing in Diversity: Consensual Community and  Intelligent Inclusion 101 Reflections: Looking Back  Moving Forward 108 Chapter 8: Creating Positive Learning Environments: What Parents  and Teacher Assistants Can Do 111 Overview and Key Concepts 111 Chapter 9: Looking Back: Teaching Learning on the Road 121 Overview and Key Concepts 121 Conclusion: Implications for the Ongoing Journey? 121 Reflecting upon Experience: Perspectives and Practice 122 Putting Theory to Work: Sustaining Positive Learning  126 Staying Positive: Including, Involving and Innovating  127 References 131 About the Authors 135

vii PREFACE This book is different. It is not a run of the mill educational text. It deliberately aims  not only to provide information, but also by using a narrative that explores experience,  develops knowledge and understanding that helps put theory into practice. Our  thanks therefore go to a vast number of colleagues, characters, friends and students  we have worked with in various educational settings. We think there is a great deal  to learn from this story, but we also hope you will enjoy considering the many issues  related to teaching, learning and professional development from what we would  claim to be a new angle and a different perspective. We do hope the reading will  prompt positive thinking, intelligent inclusion, and potential new practices.

ix ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to acknowledge a number of colleagues and family members who  assisted us with various aspects of the book. The idea for the content and style was  germinated by discussions with a number of our graduate students who said that they  liked the stories we tell about different characters when teaching about challenging  behaviour, asking for a book of such stories. Thank you all for igniting the idea: real  life stories to bring theory to life.  We thank the many real people who shared their life experiences with us; who  in so doing have helped our personal and professional formation, and now provide  material to ground our writing. It is their challenges that made us think of ways such  challenges could be effectively addressed by sound theory and understanding. It is  their success stories that confirmed the benefits of evidence-based theories working  in practice to give us a fuller picture. We thank them all, not least for enriching our  lives.  There are numerous colleagues who have kindly read various drafts of the  book and provided excellent ideas to improve the content and style. In particular  we appreciated the comprehensive feedback and editing provided by Dr. Esther  Roodenburg, and review of every-day readability by Mrs Esma Job. We would also like to thank our immediate families.  From Umesh: Shivum thank you for sharing your stories from your classroom,  playground and school. Your stories really helped me. Shipra thanks for listening to  my ideas when I was writing the book. You were a very good listener and provided a  very useful perspective of a parent. You were also highly patient  Thank you.  From John: Warmest appreciation to Esther my wife for patience, encouragement,  and lifelong shared experiences with wonderful collegial discussions.  From Steve: Eileen for unfailing belief, support and understanding. And letting  me visit Australia and work with colleagues at Monash University. We would also like to thank Sense particularly Peter de Liefde who agreed to  publish this book. The narrative style for this type of book is still gaining ground, and  we appreciate Senses openness to innovation. You were so prompt in responding  and agreed to publish this book  Thank you very much.
CHAPTER 1 THE JOURNEY Learning Teaching on the Road OVERVIEW AND KEY CONCEPTS  Introduction: Reading this book  Understanding and experience: Stories, perspectives and practice  Principles into practice: Creating positive learning environments  Why contribute to creating a positive learning environment? INTRODUCTION: WHY READ THIS BOOK? This book explores thinking about teaching and learning as an educative process.  It is about creating a positive learning environment for positive learning, teaching,  personal, and professional growth. The book is not about developing subject-based  expertise as a teacher in a specific area of knowledge content. The need for work  in subject-based development is for another book. Instead, we focus here on the  premise that teaching is not only the transmission of knowledge. It is a process that  also encompasses experiences, skills, understanding, attitudes and participation as a  teacher engages in teaching people.  Questions for reflection Having browsed the title, the table of  contents and the overview above, list  your expectationswhat do you most  hope to gain from reading it?

CHAPTER 1 2 Reading this book might usefully be likened to taking a journey. We hope the  reader  you  will find the experience of reading this book one that is both enjoyable  and worthwhile. The guess is you are an educational practitioner: a newly qualified  teacher; perhaps a senior teacher; or maybe a school leader; or even a university or  college student or lecturer involved in an educational programme of study.  We certainly expect you to be interested in learning. What we hope to do is to  convince you that learning, teaching and education are all a process that is much  like a journey. It is a never ending journey that offers a great deal in terms of  hope, aspiration, affirmation and fulfilment. The satisfaction of playing a lead role in  facilitating the growth and development of individuals and their community during  this journey is widely acknowledged by educationists as one of the greatest feelings  experienced and a reward that makes the job so very worthwhile.  Usually a planned journey, let us say, an east to west coast road trip, has a distinct  beginning and end, but then a different journey may not be such a straightforward  get on and get off experience. It may also involve seeing new places, meeting  new people, hearing new voices, discovering new ideas and well, all in all, taking  detours, deciding on new directions, making choices that like it or not will involve  learning! We would like to suggest that you might approach reading this book like an  unplanned road trip, open to new challenges and learning experiences.  Please do not expect to get a how to do it manual with lots of bulleted lists,  steps, ingredients, and claims for a one stop teaching handbook. Instead, we hope to  help you think through what it means to teach; to reflect upon the ways in which we  share and collaborate to learn; and, also to help you realize how important individual  contributions are to the success of a learning community. And in all of this, we  believe, much depends upon how you personally approach the journey.  A career in education is arguably very much like a longer version of this same  kind of journey or perhaps we can call it a road trip. It is to some extent reflected in a  set of themes described by Pirsig as a way of learning and knowing in Zen and The  Art of Motorcycle Maintenance. Pirsig 1974 writes, The classical mode proceeds by reason and by laws. The classic style  is straightforward, unadorned, unemotional, economical and carefully  proportioned. Its purpose is to bring order out of chaos. The romantic mode  is primarily inspirational, imaginative, creative, and intuitive. Feelings rather  than facts predominate. Motorcycle riding is romantic while motorcycle  maintenance is purely classic. pp. 7071 But this is where the analogy stops: we believe there are more modes than two in our  approach to learning teaching on the road. The taking of this journey is complex by  its nature, frustrating at times, yet full of the potential for deep and intense rewards in  the form of personal satisfaction and fulfilment. The message we wish to share with  you in this book is therefore the importance of being positive, and using this aspect  of personal psychology as a key resource in making the trip work well for you and  for everyone else you involve in the experience.

THE JOURNEY 3 To bring what is often presented as dry theory to life, and to illustrate practice,  the book is presented as a narrative involving several characters in different stages  of the teaching trip. The cast for this story is listed at the beginning of each chapter,  so for example includes Fred, a school Principal taking on a new school in his first  term. Then there is Kate, a newly qualified teacher starting out in her teaching career.  And there are others, including teachers with specific posts of responsibility, and  other stakeholders in the school community, such as an Educational Psychologist,  teaching assistants, parents, and a member of the school council.  These characters, drawn from real life, offer a way for us to present a continuing  series of perspectives, voices expressing points of view, and in so doing tell a story  that reflects individual contributions to the work of the school community. These  form part of what we mean to show is a complex and continuing activity in growing  and maintaining a positive learning environment. Call-out boxed allow for focus and  reflection.  UNDERSTANDING AND EXPERIENCE: STORIES,  PERSPECTIVES AND PRACTICE Let us get back to the idea of a journey. The first thing to realize is the trip is going  to involve arrival in a new place, getting to know people, and establishing what goes  on in the daily routines of the organization. Then there are the hidden aspects of  community life, less easily perceived yet equally important. These include aspects  of the organizational culture in the school community, reflecting values, beliefs  and attitudes; many of which will be deeply embedded in the ethos of the school,  and some may not accurately reflect the more formal rules, regulations and official  policy of the institution. Every stop off along the road trip requires moving through this process of making  a start. A great deal of it will draw upon tacit knowledge. This involves finding out  about people; where is the best place to get X and to whom do you go to get Y; and  most importantly when you have an issue, where you can find some help in sorting  it out. Beneath this surface level of tacit knowledge is a second level of human interpersonal knowledge. Here the work takes on more complexity as you learn who you  agree with, who you can trust or work well with, and to know those you need to tread  with more carefully. And then there is the all-important management of classroom  and staff-student relationships running through the school week and academic year.  It is the kind of knowledge that is rarely documented in the ring-binder manual on  how to do teaching. But it actually forms the most important, sometimes stressful,  and oft most rewarding part of the on the road teaching trip. To sum up: the idea behind the narrative structure of this book is in part to  access some of this hidden area of the learning community. We therefore aim in  some sense to create a learning experience in the telling of the story. It is all about  moving toward a greater level of understanding and experience, and we think this  can be achieved by paying attention to a series of accounts that describe different 

CHAPTER 1 4 perspectives and practices, all drawn from the real experiences of the authors. To  this end, we include prompts, sign-posts and indicators high-lighting key issues,  concepts and aspects of the theory under-pinning the practice related in the story.  We then set out to introduce the context within which practitioner development  remains a continuing process: this involves structure, knowledge, expertise and  professional learning. This work or agency reflects the synthesis and use of theory  in developing practice, producing a new knowledge that we recognise as praxis.  The sum total of this synthesis of professional learning and knowledge, that is the  running balance of these actions and outcomes, is praxis. Put simply, praxis is both  process and knowledge that is a combination of theory and practice. And of course  such theory relies upon well-validated evidence-based theory, blended appropriately  in a professional context, reflecting experience, and thereby contributes to ensuring  efficacy in practice. We should add that Bernstein, a leading sociologist and educationist, once stated  that in praxis there can be no prior knowledge of the right means by which we  can realize the end in a particular situation, since this is only finally specified in  deliberating about the means appropriate to a particular situation Bernstein, 1983:  147. In other words, we are always learning in teaching, and as a professional  practitioner, each year brings with it a different student cohorts, with new  challenges and a fresh start; each week a new set of priorities, and each lesson, the  great unknown. We also learn a great deal of this expertise by either listening to  peers or noticing how something is actually practiced. More complexity unfolds  however, as we think about what we want to achieve, we reconsider the best way we  might reach that desired objective. Teaching and learning for different individuals,  and when considered within a community, are not straightforward concepts easily  converted to metrics or even to a goals-based approach in managing a programme of  study. Moreover, the effect of the context within which we find ourselves will add to  the complexity of the work involved in teaching and learning. This is reflected in the  way in which a wide range of differences and diversity form the basis of the school  community, and so mirrors the way in which learning is at the same time always  deeply personal, mostly social, and invariably organizational in its implications for  the journey.  PRINCIPLES INTO PRACTICE: CREATING POSITIVE  LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS The theory behind our approach to learning and teaching in this book is largely  drawn from several areas of educational psychology. These include humanistic  psychology Maslow, 1954; Rogers, 1969; positive psychology Csikszentmihalyi,  1990; Peterson  Seligman, 2004; Robbins, 2008; individual differences and  dispositional psychology Galton, 1865; Riding  Rayner, 2000; Zhang, Sternberg   Rayner, 2012; educational leadership Rayner 2009; Shields, 2011; pedagogy  Zeichner  Liston, 1996, inclusive education Mastropieri  Scruggs, 2010; 

THE JOURNEY 5 Rayner, 2007; Sharma  Loreman, 2014 and teacher education Sharma  Nuttall,  2015; Sharma, Simi,  Forlin, 2015.  Humanistic psychology includes a set of ideas about motivation and the need  to maintain a healthy approach to life as an individual. To be mentally healthy,  individuals must take personal responsibility for their actions, regardless of whether  those actions are positive or negative. An individuals potential and the importance  of growth and self-actualization form part of a person-centered explanation for  human behaviour that is grounded in the notion of a natural desire for growth and  development. One fundamental belief of humanistic psychology held by some is that  people are innately good, with mental and social problems resulting from deviations  from this natural tendency, though some would disagree with this philosophical  position, while holding other humanistic values of individual worth. The second and major psychological influence in the approach to learning and  teaching in this book is the area of positive psychology. This is an approach that  seeks to understand positive emotions such as joy, optimism and contentment.  Positive psychology is interested in the conditions that allow individuals, groups  and organizations to flourish. There are several key constructs in this theory that are  immediately relevant to the task of building a positive learning environment. These  include well-being, fulfillment, happiness, affirmation, engagement, mindfulness,  and perhaps most importantly, the ability to find meaning in everyday life, work  and play. For our purposes here, so much of this recently developing branch of  psychology can be applied to the stories of travelers journeying on the learningteaching road trip.  The psychology of Individual Differences also provides a range of theories  and assessments which can be used to tell us how a student or indeed how any  colleague will typically approach a task, or tackle a learning problem, each having a  set of preferences for thinking, socializing and interpreting the world around them.  This approach includes key variables and constructs drawn from the domains of  personality, intelligence, sex, ability, as well as other constructs more closely linked  to performance in learning, such as cognitive style, learning styles, meta-cognition,  motivation and self-perception as a learner. The theory is particularly relevant as  a major contributor to shaping tacit most often unspoken knowledge and related  ways in which a school community will manage its educational diversity  personal,  social and organizational. A theory of educational leadership is extremely diverse and for our purposes here,  we draw upon some particular theories of inclusive, transformative and distributed  leadership. These in turn are used to introduce new ideas for organizing practice,  clustered around the concepts of intelligent inclusion, positive behaviour, and an  integrative form of educational management. Similarly, and implicitly, a theory of  pedagogy is adopted to establish a pragmatic approach, describing the part played  by action-based participatory professional development in leading to the idea of  combining reflective practice with researchled and evidence-based information. 

CHAPTER 1 6 This approach presumes that theory can inform practice and indeed the reverse in  ways that support, enable, and ensure continuing professional learning.  For those who like to dig a little deeper, the idea of journeying on a road trip in  this book is also influenced by an understanding of a constructivist basis to learning,  subject in turn to epistemic beliefs that more generally influence approaches to  thinking and learning, for example the Epistemological Reflection Model see  Baxter Magolda, 2004. This framework pre-supposes several levels of learning,  moving from an initial stage of passively receiving and conceiving knowledge in an  absolute way as right or wrong, along a progression toward a relative perception of  knowledge as a point of view, and then on to beginning to perceive knowledge as  correct relative to various contexts. Finally, at the highest level, the learner begins to  realize multiple possibilities for knowledge and the need for knowledge claims to be  evaluated, set against the quality of the argument and evidence provided. The design  of curricula and construction of study programmes of represent an important aspect  of pedagogy and mirror the way in which we propose what theories of learning and  thinking should be applied to the continuing development of professional learning  and applied practice. Crucially, personal and professional values andor beliefs  reflect a moral basis for this development over time. The over-riding intention throughout our book is therefore to draw upon notions of  resilience, well-being, transformative leadership, and inclusive education, to inform  evolving conceptions, explanations and the management of practitioner development  contributing to positive learning in a school community. We aim to further shape  the idea of a reflective practitioner evolving into a thinking practitioner. Such  practitioners are conceived to be professionals who will be engaged in leading  the learning, while managing a continuing and worthwhile contribution to the  educational community to which they belong.  Some of the key features in this approach, involve a number of different ideas and  applications of theory such as Positive Behaviour Support including:   Reflective teaching.  Well being and self-confidence.  Personal motivation.  Intelligent inclusion.  Transformative leadership. Chapters 2 to 4 deal with the underlying psychology for developing positive  school cultures. The section introduces the narrative approach of the book: real  life experiences told through fictional practitioners telling their story of improving  practice while continuing to contribute to the learning organization or community  in which they work. The characters provide exemplars of teachers at the coalface  humanizing education in finding ways of effectively building positive inclusive  relationships marked by trust, collaboration, self-efficacy, independence, and  engagement.

THE JOURNEY 7 Chapters 5 to 7 of the book deal with ideas and ideals, recognizing the role of  beliefs, and putting evidence-based theory into practice for developing a positive  school community. This section deals with the wider issues relevant to managing the  whole school. It provides an account of leadership distributed throughout the learning  community. It also gives consideration to the nature of the benefits that a positive  approach to learning and teaching can bring to everyone in the school community.  This includes the students, the work force and the wider community. The focus  for the reader, however, remains on the individuals personal contribution to all of  these areas as an important member of the learning community. The recurring theme  running through this story and our main message for the reader is to emphasize the  place of reflection and thinking about practice. To put it more theoretically, this takes  us to the highest level of epistemic development identified earlier in a description  of the Epistemological Reflection Model: that is, evaluativismobjectivism subjectivism see Muis, 2007. If we refer again to the idea of journeying along the  road trip, it is like learning how to drive and quite crucially, remembering to use  the rear view mirror. The driver makes full use of the reflection, aware of what has  passed, in order to take decisions about the present, so that the journey may continue,  and a destination at some point in the near future, be safely reached.  As expected in any journey, we sincerely hope this book will not be boring,  but rather that you will actually enjoy the trip. For most of us the trip is the most  enjoyable where we can watch, socialize and learn from others. By using a narrative  approach in this book, we hope that dry theory still comes along, but in the back seat. 
CHAPTER 2 ENABLING INCLUSIVE LEARNING  INTERVENTIONS OVERVIEW AND KEY CONCEPTS  Wellbeing  Stress and Individual Differences  Problem Ownership  Intelligent Inclusion  Diagnostics beyond classification and labelling  Meet the Cast Main Characters:  Kate  Teacher, newly appointed as principal of rural three-teacher school  Mary  An experienced teacher, working at Kates school for a long time. Nick  School Psychologist Minor Characters: Robert  Junior teacher at Kates school Stan  Teacher at a neighbourhood school WELLBEING As Kate rounded the corner in her small car, wipers working furiously, she braked  hard so as not to plough into the herd of jerseys that were lazily crossing the road  from milking. She watched the dairy farmer in the sleet following close behind the  herd on his four-wheel motorbike. As she waited she pondered how different this  was from the previous 10 years, travelling to her western suburbs school through  busy and impatient traffic. Here, now in a lush valley with snow-capped mountains  in the distance, time or rather timelessness and community seemed to be worlds  apart from her previous experience. At first the 23 km distance from the house she  rented in the town to the three teacher rural school seemed a long way, but then, she  didnt want to live by herself in a house down a lonely country lane, and she soon  realised that it took her half the time to travel the 23 km than it had taken her to travel  half the distance to her previous school in the city. 

CHAPTER 2 10 There had been lots of adjustments in the last six months: new social networks  in town, the new community surrounding the school, the role of principal of a  small school, composite classes, and yes, finding herself the one to make the final  decisions. Why, only last week when the school toilets all failed, the regional office  had told her it was her decision as to whether she needed to close the school! In  a new context with so many changes, she was also wrestling with the notion of  leadership and management. It felt as though no one had prepared her for it. All of  this was on top of a full-time teaching load and an empty house to go home to. The  pace of country life might seem to be easy-going and slow, but with school council  meetings, parent meetings, mid year reports, well, she had hardly had any time to go  back to Melbourne and relax with friends.  As the last cow cleared the road and the farmer waved, Kate recalled the excitement  she had felt when she had received news of her appointment. She recalled how easy  the first few days had seemed. The kids all settled down so quickly. The older ones  looked after the younger ones. The parents had been so welcoming. The only initial  reservation she had felt was about the other two teachers. Mary had been at the  school at 27 years and her territory was well staked out: having taught grades 3  and 4 for most of this time, she remained with this level. Robert was on a one-year  contract fresh from university, and although enthusiastic, he made it quite clear he  really wanted to be back in the city. Come Friday 3.30pm and he was on the road,  only to drive back on Monday mornings. Kate had never taught classes below grade  4, but on hearing from the school council members that they were very excited to  have a man to teach their footballing boys in grade five, she thought it only sensible  to allocate herself the junior grades. It didnt take long to realise that with ten of  her class being prep children, it wasnt easy to leave the classroom to attend to  principals duties, but at least there were no behaviour problems. Questions for reflection 1.	Identify stressors in your  professional  and  personal  life  and how do you handle  them? 2.	 Would others describe you as  authoritarian or consultative,  or somewhere in between?  3.	 Do you share your dilemmas  with friends or keep silent ?

ENABLING INCLUSIVE LEARNING INTERVENTIONS 11 There were some clear advantages in driving the beautiful country road to school.  It gave Kate time to think. She seemed to be more easily irritated than she ever  had been with the more difficult children of the western suburbs. Yes, she was  increasingly more organised, more directive, and perhaps more authoritarian. But as  she drew up at the school, a couple were waiting for her, giving her only enough time  to squelch the minor pang of guilt that such a dictatorial management was warranted  by a need to cope with so much that was expected of her. THE STRESS OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES The couple seemed a little uncomfortable and it soon became clear why. They had  moved up to an inexpensive rental house on one of the local farms. They hoped to  pick up local seasonal farm labouring and domestic work. They had three children  they were wanting to enrol, a boy in grade six who suffered from Aspergers, and  twins in grade 1 who both had learning difficulties: Kate only later found out these  were associated with foetal alcohol syndrome. As Kate completed the enrolment  formalities the next day, she made a decision: it was time to stop being the selfeffacing idealist. Inclusion was all fair and well, but if she were to survive she would  need to morph into a Sergeant Major, which left her wondering about her decision  to enrol the kids. Over lunch, Robert chewed her ear about the new boy in his class.  What could be done to get more help, and how long would it take to get someone  to support him? After all hed had a teachers aide at the previous school! He said  he was only just surviving, and as for a kid with a mental condition, well, he didnt  have a clue. With the thought that she didnt need any more drain on her time, having  already had to provide more support for this problem than she really had time for,  and pondering what Rob had learnt in his course at university, Kate decided to  telephone the regional office.  She now started to wonder about the twins in her class; they appeared, well, fairly  docile now, but what was she in for? Why on earth werent these kids properly  assessed and placed in facilities where they would get the help they needed, she  pondered. Realism, she thought, get real Kate, she told herself: just a silly  romantic dream, a stress free life under the shadow of snow peaked mountains, oh  yea? Not such worlds apart after all. The regional office put her through to the school psychologist. Nick would be out  in two weeks.  PROBLEM OWNERSHIP Two weekssurely next week at least? Is there no earlier time? She tried to keep  the distress out of her voice. This is really urgent. I may have a teacher going off  on stress leave. Besides, we have a duty of care and there may be things we need 

CHAPTER 2 12 to know that we currently dont. And the two in my room, well I need to know fast,  before other parents start to complain.  Nick asked her to send the childrens details so he could check if there were any  files. He asked a series of questions, and on assessing the situation, the best he could  do was give some interim pointers. While he could not manage to come out for a  couple of weeks, he also offered to talk with Rob over the phone. Finally, they set up  for Rob to go in to talk with Nick the next evening around six.  Kate felt some relief, but frustrated that even with Nicks support, she would  probably have to wait quite a few months if not a year before she could expect  any real assistance. She found herself rather hoping that the two kids with learning  difficulties in her class could be identified as having an identifiable condition  sufficient to warrant a teacher aide. Yes, she thought, come what may, she was  determined to get a teacher aide!  That evening she rang Stan at the school up the road. Stan had some fragile X  kids, and seemed to know how to get resources. The discussion was very useful.  Stan had managed to get quite a few resources and pointed her to a number of ways  of getting them.  But, he warned, you must get an assessment and be careful, they will do  anything to find an excuse to cut your entitlements. Last year the Ed Psychs told me  they thought the disabled kids in my school were over-resourced and that too much  individual attention was detrimental for them! They have no idea. Kate appreciated  the discussion: to be forewarned was to be prepared, and now she was ready for a  fight.  Despite having given Rob some materials, and the promised follow up phone  calls from Nick, Kate was relieved when the day finally arrived for Nicks visit. She  was well rehearsed with every possible argument as to why they needed a teachers  aide, and urgently. She had organised for her class to be distributed across the other  two rooms so that she had the morning free to talk with Nick. After brief pleasantries  and some coffee, Kate sat down with Nick in the small staffroom. Nick looked out  of the window that framed the mountains, still snow capped in the distance, and  commented on the beauty of the drive down the valley to the school. But Kate was  in no mood for the positive talk. With three weeks full of cogitating concern, she was  ready to get on with business. Arms folded she asked: So, what extra help do you have to offer us for ensuring we can meet the needs  of these three at-risk disabled children?  Nick sensed that he was being handed the problem, but he wanted to work  together, so he acknowledged Kates stress.  Yea, such kids can be really stressful  eating up our time. Before we move on,  I would like to know how you have been going with them. In the process of Nicks attentive listening and seeming understanding, Kate found  herself outlining her concerns of the last three weeks. Nick was a good listener. Trying  to appear professional, she carefully tried to make the most of various frustrations  and incidents, while working hard to sound caring, competent and conscientious. 

ENABLING INCLUSIVE LEARNING INTERVENTIONS 13 It sounds like you are doing all the right things.  Kates heart sank. She wanted extra resources. Had she sounded too competent?  Had he not heard the frustrations?  Look, well may we be coping, but only just, and it isnt without a considerable  cost in time and effort, taking away valuable time from other kids. And I have to  spend a lot of time with Rob. And even now, here I am away from all the other kids  having to take time out talking here because of them. Kates voice had risen and  there was clear frustration in her voice. The bottom line really is: What can you do  to help us get a teachers aid? There. She had him. She had come to the point, no  soft talking.  But Nick still did not engage with her challenge. This is very frustrating for you.  I do understand. Kate wanted to challenge him about how someone from a comfortable office who  could choose his time in coming out had any idea, but she kept her cool to hear him  continue: Believe you me, I know how tough it can be. It throws me back to my days  as a rural school head teacher when freshly out of Uni. I had twenty seven kids  including a hearing impaired kid all on my own! and it was twelve months before  they appointed a rural school aide, who came in for three days a week.  That was him then, Kate thought, but this is about me now! Nevertheless, here she  was talking to a colleague. She was curious. So, you are a teacher  you taught in a rural school  where was that? There  ensued a frank exchange and sharing of the joys and frustrations of teaching in a  rural community and at a small school. Nick knew intuitively how sharing feelings  associated with common experiences facilitates trust. Trust was slowly taking over  from all the mistrust that had been generated in the discussions with Stan. Nick  sensed that Kates veiled hostility was ebbing. But, he knew, returning to the point  of stress would require sensitivity and an unconditional appreciation for Kates  dilemmas. He recognised and reminded himself of the underlying issue of problem  ownership. He recognised the potentially destructive scenario: if he accepted  responsibility for the problem, the next step would carry considerable pressure to  capitulate to her pre-determined solution of a teachers aide. He needed to establish  genuine trust, at least enough to allow for an introduction of cooperative problem  solving. It required genuineness in the context of what Carl Rogers had established  as unconditional positive regard and understanding: only then could they move  from what Nick perceived as a somewhat adversarial position to cooperate in  ganging up on what he regarded was really Kates problem. Only then, if she  felt ownership and Nicks genuine concern and support, was there any hope for  getting Kate to think in a broader context beyond immediate practical wants andor  solutions. To do this meant talking about inclusion in the broader sense before he  did any assessment work with the students. It was, he believed, such an important  part of getting effective professional development: on the job coaching.

CHAPTER 2 14 Questions for reflection What resources are available to you for  professional mentoring or coaching, and  what use do you make of them? INTELLIGENT INCLUSION  But Nick also knew that the field was ever changing, and he hoped this change  meant effective advancement. Having gone through the integration initiatives, on  to the inclusion imperatives articulated over the last two decades, he was now old  enough to realise an enduring dilemma: in practicality, no clearly established point  of arrival had been achieved, though for some this had been resolved by declaring  that inclusion is about process, the journey, and thats it. But so what? Journeys go  places! A recent discussion with a visiting scholar, Steve Rayner from the UK, to the  University in Melbourne, now came to mind. Steve, in conversation, had suggested  that essentially, the academic debate over inclusion remains locked in an argument  over ideals albeit generally accepted as laudable and imperfect or impossible  practice. Some practitioners, hed pointed out, claim to practice inclusive education,  others social inclusion, yet when closely examined, such practice still reflect the very  powerful tensions, contradictions and dilemmas posed by implementing an ideal.  Nick had enjoyed the intellectual stimulation of the academic debate Rayner  had pointed to: less public, however, and yet still equally relevant to this attempt at  revising and refining our ideas of what is inclusive education, Nick thought, was the  theoretical debate reflecting differences people adopted in terms of ontology what  one knows and epistemology how one knows. Much of this surrounded notions  of equity, fair play, discrimination and say, positions held by some who argue any  affirmative intervention is unfair. Rayner had suggested that the underpinning  argument in this debate is both ideological and moral: it involves asking fundamental  questions about education, its purpose, its implementation, and a belief in what it  is to be human. And behind this debate again lie yet deeper questions about the  nature of the human being and the worlds she inhabits as an individual and also as  a member of any social groups. These issues needed to be considered in terms of 

ENABLING INCLUSIVE LEARNING INTERVENTIONS 15 pedagogic, philosophical, sociological and psychological aspects of practice. A lot  of necessary debate and integrative work yet to be done, but how could he hope to  begin to share this with Kate who simply wanted answers to what she perceived as  her immediate needs? How, pondered Nick, could he get her to see these within the  perspectives of a broader educational, interdisciplinary context? As Nick understood it, Steve Rayner had suggested making a start with intelligent  inclusion as an idea. This was perhaps best imagined as a conceptual framework:  it strives for a pragmatic approach to the learner and learning in an integrative way,  synthesising new and old ideas. It posits the notion of an educative process that  reflects a seasonal cycle of growth essentially transformative in nature. It anticipates  education as an outcome that reflects an enabling and empowering experience that  provides the individual and society with ways to engage in managing knowledge,  for both a personal and a public good. This means taking more seriously the  implications of schooling and its limited resources, as located within the locale, and  as a part of the wider social community. The school holds a central position in the  life beat of the community.  Nick paused, recalling the following notes hed been checking the previous  evening in preparation for teaching a doctorate class due in a fortnights time. Nick  was planning to talk to the following key points about implementing what he wanted  to call an intelligent way of practising inclusive education. These considerations  required thinking about making basic changes, that is, taking decisions and showing  leadership in key aspects of re-shaping pedagogy and re-balancing the curriculum  intended and experienced, together with a new consideration of relevant aspects  of educational sociology and psychology. Such change meant professional and  sometimes personal movement. It would include: 1.	Pedagogic changes  Movement away from recent or current understandings of  Categories SEN  Disability.  IQ based discriminatory setting  streaming classes.  Comprehensive mixed multi-mix classes.  Easy one-size fits all curricular frameworks.  Movement toward new understandings of  Renewal of integration  inclusion models.  Learning needs.  Learning performance.  New forms of assessment  assessment-led pedagogy. 2.	Sociological changes  Movement away from recent or current understandings of  Multi-cultural models of community for social inclusion.

CHAPTER 2 16  Human Rights without Responsibilities.  A common culture specific to the learning community.  A new identity  culture specific to the evolving diversity in the local  community.  Movement toward   Inter-cultural models of community for social inclusion.  New conceptions of integrative  transformative culture.  Revisionist exploration of assents  artefacts  affiliation.  Revisionist exploration of accommodation  assimilation  acculturation.  New forms of cultural accommodation, assimilation and values clarification.  3.	Psychological changes  Movement away from outdated understandings of  Intelligence deficit and giftedness models.  Motivation andor affective resilience.  Unitarycategorical models of personal and social diversity  differences.  Unitarycategorical models of deficit diagnostics.   Movement toward   Models of individuality and personal cognition.  Recognising individuality  Individual Differences in predispositions.  Current models of differential abilities.  Models of personality trait.  Positive strengths psychology.  Models of situated cognition and social diversity.  Learning differences.  Use of capability theory.  Integrated forms of psycho-educational assessment authentic, ipsative and  gnostic.  New forms of assessment-led pedagogy. This was all too much to impart to Kate at this point in time, but for Nick it was a  good foundation to work from.  Nick turned to Kate and said, You know Kate, in the good old days Ed Psychs  were called in to classify kids: the familiar story of labelling so we know where to  put people. It came out of an age where we thought understanding meant finding  the right classification for every flora and fauna. Such classification required  discrimination, which gave credence to differences according to race in ways we  now recognise as racism. In more subtle ways such classificatory misconceptions  attracted people to pseudoscientific intellectual pursuits like phrenology and  eugenics. In this way, differences are considered as deviation from the norm, and so 

ENABLING INCLUSIVE LEARNING INTERVENTIONS 17 classed as deviant, and any such deviance as disabilities and illnesses requiring  specialist treatment. To this day, we have assessment-based processes of confirming  eligibility for funding resources that are still based on that deficiency model, where  with the best intentions, funding and resources reward and reinforce discrimination. Intuitively, and as a result to her Education courses, Kate understood that  theoretically and ideally there was something wrong with labelling, but her frustration  was in translating that to the practical world.  I know what you are getting at, Nick, but dont you think we need to be practical  here: what we really need here is some resources for these kids, and I think it is  discrimination if we disadvantage them by not recognising their problems and  appropriately giving them a label. So, while it is all very well to be so idealistic, isnt  it a matter of compromise? Questions for reflection In practicality, is inclusive educational  practice just too hard? What is the difference between labelling  and diagnostics? ABILITIES AND LEARNING DIFFICULTIES: DIAGNOSTICS BEYOND  CLASSIFICATION AND LABELLING This gave Nick an opening to talk about issues he had tried to think through a lot.  As a psychologist, Ive become deeply interested in an area called Individual  Differences. This area principally concerns the study of abilities and personality.  Many people who are worried about labelling see the study of individual differences  as the problem  the basis on which we classify people, thereby creating the very  basis of what leads to discriminating against groups of people. What Ive come to  realize over a period of time is that denying that we are all different in some way can  be as equally harmful as classifying people. We are each unique, and the product of  a remarkable interplay of a whole lot of predispositions, traits, and notions of self  in relation to one another, with our environment, and with our experiences. In that  sense, the study of individual differences is really the study of predispositions, and  thats why it is sometimes called a dispositional psychology. If we understand our 

CHAPTER 2 18 individual differences, and we accept that there really is a broad range of individual  differences, and that some of these individual differences make it more difficult for  some of us to adjust to the demands of the world known as maladaptive while  other individual differences are highly adaptive, well then, we are well on the way to  diagnostics rather than classification! Kate shrugged. I dont really see any difference. Nick smiled. Well, theres a world of difference, really. In ascertainment we are  simply concerned with a categorical classification of a condition, and the condition  is a matter of the fact: you have it or you dont have it. If you have it, then you  warrant extra resources. These resources have little relationship to the actual impact  of what you have, nor do they take into account understanding the diagnostics as a  basis for intervention or specifically tailoring any assistance or help. Simply having  a recognized categorical disability makes you eligible. The term idiot for example  has its origins in 20th century medicine and psychology, as a classification indicating  severe mental retardation. While we might pride ourselves on being better informed,  and not using such a term as it has become a pejorative, in reality we nonetheless  carry on the same thing by simply substituting specific IQs score ranges that can be  less easily used as insulting discrimination. Its a little less appealing to call someone  you want to insult as You below 70 IQ person!  The point is, though, that simply classifying someone like that doesnt tell us  how we can support such individuals, not least because with every individual scoring  70 or below on an ability test, there are a multiplicity of other factors that come into  play to help ensure their well-being and capacity for adaptation and adjustment and  learning. Nick paused before continuing. In fact, take for example the area of intelligence  research: research has been shown to have advanced more in the last decade than the  preceding 100 years, so that the notion of any usefulness in a global IQ score is now  seriously challenged. Kevin McGrew 2009, one of the leaders in the field has made  the point that, building on a lifelong work of 3 giants in the field, R. B. Cattell, John  Horn and John Carroll, the most recent developments in ability research has given  us what has become known as the CHC model. In that model we now have a table of  differential abilities that is equivalent to the periodic table in chemistry. Kate in spite of herself, and somewhat irritated, interrupted. So how is that any  different from classification  just sounds to me as though it is a finer grained way  of labelling interjected Kate. Well, no, its not because it helps us to understand how the brain is handling or not  handling information: things such as working memory as distinct from say Gf: fluid  abilities general sequential reasoning, deduction and induction, Gc: crystallised  abilities, breadth of knowledge developed through learning or say Ga: auditory  processing ability to analyse and synthesise auditory stimuli. Understanding  exactly how these abilities differ one from another within the individual intraindividual differences as well as in comparison to other individuals inter-individual 

ENABLING INCLUSIVE LEARNING INTERVENTIONS 19 differences makes for diagnostic conclusions, with direct implications for how we  can accommodate such individual differences in learning. You mean, these accommodations involve direct advice as to how to teach or to  provide appropriate allowances? Yes, exactly! Whats more, because we now have a decent model of abilities,  there is an explosion of research around relating these to effective strategies. But  ability research isnt the only area; in personality research we now better understand  how different traits work. We have defined these a lot better in the last decade or so,  and there are researchers looking at these neurodevelopmental predispositions in  children and ways of building personal resilience to counter maladaptive traits. So,  you see that far from being a sentence, by acknowledging and understanding how we  are all different, we are empowered rather than sentenced. In this way, good psychoeducational assessment looks at the individual and offers a firm basis for tailoring  accommodation. In an ideal world, and hopefully in the future, the allocation of  extra resources would be based on resourcing with appropriate and targeted support  programs, rather than being for a specific classification. Even now, I can use those models to help us understand your challenging kids  better, and work with you to devise specific strategies and accommodations for their  own personal special needs. This means that the diagnostics are program focused  rather than resource focused. This is what we mean by assessment led pedagogy.  Does that mean I wont get any extra resources? Where does that leave us now,  because we dont live in an ideal world! asked Kate, not sure if she really wanted  to grasp what was being said, if it would lead to her being denied resources she had  been looking forward to.  No. We still need to live in the real world that suffers from the research-practice  gap, and I do feel that this gap is ever widening as research is speeding up. It might  mean that for the sake of social justice we play the old classificatory game. If we  Questions for reflection Was Nicks advice to Kate effective useful?  Why do you think so?  Would you do something different from  what Nick suggested? If yes, why? 

CHAPTER 2 20 can meet some criteria for resourcing that will enable us to better implement clearly  indicated strategies and accommodations, well, then we may need to do that. The  danger however will be that in accepting such classifications; we need to ensure  that it does not become a life sentence. That means a pedagogical focus with a  constant review of how the kids are adapting. And that makes for a far more positive  classroom culture. Kate sighed. She waited to hear what Nick wanted. There clearly was going to be a  need for give and take on the part of the school, as well as the education department.
CHAPTER 3 CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS  THROUGH RELATIONAL LEADERSHIP OVERVIEW AND KEY CONSTRUCTS  Anatomy of conflicts  Evidence-based change   Problem Ownership, Control, and Effect   Management versus Leadership: Relationship keys to positive classroom culture   Judgement Meet an Increased Cast Main Characters:  Kate  Principal  Teacher Mary  An experienced teacher Nick  School Psychologist Minor Characters Robert  Junior teacher at Kates school Unassertive Louise and bossy Jenny  twins and students at Kates school Judy  an experienced teacher at Professional Development PD session:  Recalcitrant Rebecca Bec  teacher at PD session: Compulsive record keeper Jeff  teacher at Kates school Michael  teacher at PD session Yvette  a shy teacher at PD session ANATOMY OF CONFLICTS Kate was waiting for the last students to be picked up before she could lock up the  school: if they were late it might help her decide. She was in two minds about going  off to the district Professional Development session that was a follow up on their  group curriculum day last month. In the enthusiastic afterglow of the day, it had  seemed such a good idea to follow through with activities that promised to help put  the theory into practice. But in the busy weeks that followed, the homework for the 

CHAPTER 3 22 session had been neglected, and it wasnt something she could do at the last moment.  Did she really need to go? Did it really offer her anything she needed? She reviewed  her last semesters work. She felt more in control now: the classroom had become  hers, a quiet orderly culture pervaded it. She reflected on a satisfying day when  suddenly her attention was distracted by the last couple of girls waiting to be picked  up by their mother. The twins had started squabbling and she walked over.   What are you two up to? Louise says my painting isnt good enough to give to Nana and I said that Nana  always likes my pictures and she said Nana just says that cos thats what Nana  always does.  I did not! You did so too! Now, now intervened Kate, I am sure that Nana will love your drawing  Jenny. and turned to speak to Louise to hear her quietly mutter: Its not a  drawing, its a painting, and anyway, mine is much better.  Louise, Jennys painting is beautiful, and I am sure that Nana will love yours just  as much. Remember: its not about who has done the best or who is best but simply  doing your best. I am sure Nana loves you both just the same. Heres Mummy Louise called out as she ran off over to the car that was pulling  up. With a shrug of her shoulder, Jenny slowly followed. As the children climbed  into the car, Kate heard the argument continue: Mummy, Louise says my painting  is ugly and Nana . The car door slammed and she heard no more. The contented feeling that shed had before, the self-assured pride in bringing  order to the school was now replaced by a sense of frustration. How many times had  she watched the twins squabble like that? Had she not noticed an increase in other  childrens bickering? If it wasnt over their work, it was over their lunch. She had  noted some time ago that the squabbles so often represented the same little routine,  just different content. Her perception moved from a glass three-quarter full, to one  a quarter empty and with it, self-criticism. Yes, she reflected, she had brought order  into the small school, but there was a niggling concern as to why there was so much  more squabbling.  She had been sensitized even more to the change by the recent PD workshop run  by the local school psychologist: Nick had teachers reflect on why children came  up to them in the playground. What did they talk about? He had suggested teachers  make notes and keep a tally of their playground interactions, categorizing them,  and asked teachers to bring these to the follow-up session, to use as a baseline to  determine what the school or classroom culture was really like, and also to monitor  change. Kate hadnt wanted more paper work though.  The suggestion had nevertheless raised her awareness of some things as she had  found herself mentally keeping a rough tally. She recalled how when she first arrived,  recess and lunch times were times where the kids all headed off to their favourite  corners of the playground. In the first few weeks she had been surprised to find yard  duty so pleasant, simply wondering around with a coffee in her hand enjoying the 

CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS THROUGH RELATIONAL LEADERSHIP 23 country air and some mental space. If anyone came up to her, it was to show her  something, or offer to share something. But now, she reflected, when someone came  up, it was more often than not about some dispute, or to tell tales. In fact, not only in  the playground, but also in the classroom, she had noticed the change: they came to  her for such trivial and annoying things.  Self doubt. Maybe it was something she was doing and the base line could help.  But Kate was good at finding alternative reasons and excuses. She handled the selfdoubt nicely by assuring herself the bickering was probably just due to the time of  year, winter approaching and the farming community stressed by the weather. But  her subconscious mind didnt allow her to switch off quite so easily. She had done  enough psychology to know deep down her cunning capacity for rationalization  a  very effective defence mechanism when you dont want to or know how to change.  But, for the moment it worked for her.  Her sister Megans challenge last Christmas intruded yet again. Kate had seen a  couple of Megs children squabbling outside and couldnt help intervening. Kate,  you are always the quintessential teacher; a lot of Dad in you eh? Megan, a graphic  artist, had said it with a smile, but Kate recognised this as her way of not directly  confronting her sister with Leave my children be. In fact Megan never confronted  anything directly, let alone discipline her children, those unruly children who bogged  into the finest food before the adults had a chance. Kate felt reasonably calm as she  recalled the incident, but what hurt most was the sting in the tail: did she really have  to add that part of being like her father? He had been a teacher of the old school  who believed children should not be heard and preferably not seen either, except  of course in their proper place. Recalling Megans jibe also aroused the jealousy  Kate had for so long felt for the way Megan had got on with their father, while  Kate always felt judged. How mean of Megan! Kate prided herself that through the  personal development in her teacher training she had grown to be balanced: neither  too authoritarian nor too laissez-faire.  As Kate had driven away, she felt the bind in which she was trapped. A part of  her wanted to justify herself and be angry with her judgmental sister. What did she  know? She had led a charmed life. Another part deep down though, knew that it was  she who was judgmental, and remembered that when she had needed someone most,  Megan had been there for her. Did she blame her poor mood now on her sister, or did  she move on to see if there might be something she needed to confront in herself?  Torn between love and pride, she consciously repressed any thought that she might  have a choice.  Just then she found herself pulling up at the neighbouring school, and relief at  the escape it provided, quickly joined the other teachers who had come for the PD  follow up. She didnt really need another coffee, but at least it gave her something  to have in her hand while she wandered over to find the least obvious seat. Nick had  put the chairs in a semi-circle. Three oclock looked a good position, sufficiently off  to the side, and hopefully, if she didnt make eye contact, there would be little risk  of being embarrassed. 

CHAPTER 3 24 After a ten word welcome Nick simply turned on the data projector to show a tally  sheet projected onto the screen. If this group is typical of other groups I have taken,  in the pressured world we now live, I will be very happy if at least one of you has  used the handouts from the PD. Most of you will be sitting where you think you will  be least likely to be asked, but fear not, Im not into motivation by guilt. No extrinsic  motivation today. Instead, I hope to demonstrate the more effective alternative: the  power of ownership. An embarrassed laugh of relief ran around the circle as he  announced that, when Rebecca had contacted him earlier for some clarification, he  had asked her if she would mind reporting her use of the tally sheet.  EVIDENCE-BASED CHANGE Rebecca owned up to being a compulsive record keeper. My dad is a research  scientist in agronomy and from an early age we were taught to have fun recording  things and looking at frequencies. When we went on holidays, we would guess how  many Holdens, Fords, and Toyotas we would see, counting them as we went along.  We soon learnt to investigate first so that we made an informed guess. But even then,  we were often surprised how different the tally was, and had fun trying to explain.  Dad quickly taught us how that was good science, and we were rarely bored. So  when Nick suggested a tally sheet, well it was kinda second nature, science that  could help me understand what was going on.  Kate wondered what Science had to do with classroom culture, or more precisely,  in developing responsibility. A short surprised interjection from some of the teachers  registered admiration and surprise. But Rebecca went on: I didnt only record freetime interactions, but also all interactions in the classroom. I simply kept a tally  sheet on a clipboard with me all the time, and I ticked each interaction as much as  possible as it happened. I didnt take time for too much detail. I rated interactions  Questions for reflection To what degree do you think you  have the capacity for honest self  reflection? How  open  are  you  to  being  constructively self-critical, and  How informed are you in making  choices for effective change?

CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS THROUGH RELATIONAL LEADERSHIP 25 with students for three weeks across four sets of columns with Check marks. The  first was in one of two columns: teacher initiated or student initiated. The second in  one of four columns: free time such as at recess and lunch times; formal academic  like maths; informal academic like art and drama; and physical like sport and phys  ed. The third set of columns indicated whether the interaction principally concerned  the behavioural, affective, cognitive or physical domain. The fourth set of columns  indicated the main thrust of my action: listenedaffirmed, adjudicated dispute, gave  command, answered questiongave information, asked question. Then there was a  note column which I didnt use much. Rebecca then projected the following table of results:  Rebecca continued, I purposefully didnt add up my tallies and tried to get an  accurate record of my current habits in the first week, wanting to get as typical a  base line as possible she went on to explain. As you can see, I got a surprise when  I did add up the results, and you can see that keeping tally changed some things over  the next two weeks, but some things nowhere near as much as I would have liked. I  improved on asking questions and listening, acknowledging feelings and not being  so cerebral, and in interacting in free time. They are all things I have some control  over and happy that in such a short time I have been able to adjust my teaching to  foster more enquiring minds. I just have to maintain that. However, even though I  thought I was more available, students did not initiate more interactions, and I found  myself give as many instructions as usual and adjudicate more disputes than ever. I 

CHAPTER 3 26 now have lots of questions about how to change those things over which I dont feel  I have any control. I feel trapped in discharging my duty of care efficiently, spending  so much time stopping disputes and arguments and ensuring that students, especially  the ones who have self control and attention problems, have been properly instructed  and warned about dangers. Kate felt a little vindicated to hear of another teacher who took the need for  discipline seriously. The theoretical ideal she reflected was all too often frustratingly  different to the practicalities of reality. She wondered what answers Nick would  come up with. All very good for an advisor, but what about when there needed to be  workable solutions? Nick rose to his feet.  Thanks Bec, thats really great. When I compare your sheet to the tally sheet I  first did after seven years of teaching, well, you spend a lot less time disciplining  than I did!  Kate felt even better, and was encouraged to learn that Nick had teaching  experience, not just theory. Maybe he had worked out something that did work. She  couldnt help asking So Nick, did you get to spend less time adjudicating, how  much less and what did you do? She wanted straight answers; direct practical what  to dos. Nick looked over briefly acknowledging her with a smile, but didnt answer  her challenge.  Bec, can you give us an example of one of the disputes you recently had to  adjudicate?  PROBLEM OWNERSHIP, CONTROL, AND EFFECT  Well, there are a couple of year four boys who are always getting into squabbles. At  first I used to tell them how disappointed I was and tried to explain to them how they  should behave responsibly. Then, after a while I gave up talking to them because I  figured they were just attention seeking, so now I just tell them to stop, and go away  from each other. Sometimes they take their time, and then I give them detention. I  have tried to minimize the time it takes so they dont get any more of my attention  than necessary, but they just dont seem to learn. I even praise them at the end of a  session when they havent squabbled, by telling them how well they have behaved,  letting them out early for recess. I cant separate them any more than I do because  my class ranges from years three to six, and the two boys and a girl are the only year  four students.  Other teachers were nodding knowingly, and Nick invited others to share similar  scenarios. One of the teachers asked what the squabbling was about, and wanted to  know if the boys were related, or how their parents got on with one another. Another  wanted to know if one of the boys was brighter than the other. As teachers started  raising situations where they found themselves getting frustrated with continually  repeating instructions and commands to various children who just didnt seem to  listen or take responsibility, Nick broke in: In all of these, who do you reckon has a problem? 

CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS THROUGH RELATIONAL LEADERSHIP 27 These kids all have problems, problems being responsible for themselves, and  behaving  just too spoilt these days came the immediate response from one of the  older teachers. But it wasnt just the heads of the older teachers who were nodding.  Maybe I should rephrase the question: in each of these incidents, who has THE  problem?  Well, the kids have a, well, the problem dont they? suggested Kate.  I reckon we have the problem, suggested Judy, the older teacher who was  sitting opposite. Well, we are responsible, but the kids have the problem. Were responsible for  making sure they mature in the long term, and making sure no one gets hurt right  now.  Doesnt that mean we have a problem, especially when we dont seem to  succeed? I dont think the kids think they have a problem at all! challenged Judy.  Kate, with the squabble just before leaving school still fresh if not raw in her  mind, had been happy in justifying her approach. Now it was under challenge again,  and as she felt a little resentful that her sense of satisfaction had been threatened,  she wasnt quite sure as to whether she should argue or try to understand. But, she  reminded herself, she was not so insecure as to need to have all the answers  deep  down she knew she was frustrated, and wanted to try something else, and yes, this  was an experienced teacher talking. The fight response died down as she decided to  listen while a couple of other teachers tried to argue that the kids had the problem.  When the discussion turned to trying to understand why the kids wanted to fight,  Nick broke in again: Maybe Judy has a point? What if in each case, you the teacher has the problem  here and the kids dont have any? Then, if that is so, and you want to solve YOUR  problem, knowing why or what the kids are fighting about is only a distraction.  Consider this proposition: the kids chose to fight or not to bother listening; thats  what they wanted to do and thats not a problem to them. And, if this is so, why you  have a problem is not a question as to why the kids are fighting. Rather, you own  these problems because you have taken responsibility. Stunned silence. Then after what Nick had said, Kate couldnt help challenging  with Thats upside down and unfair! It is our job to be responsible; wed get sacked  if we let kids do what they wanted to. We have a duty of care! We have to make them  stop when they misbehave, and we have to make sure they learn, do their work! She  could feel herself getting flushed in the face as she thought about how unfair all this  was, how often she had heard parents criticizing teachers. A couple of other teachers  clearly felt likewise, expressing their frustrations in no uncertain terms.  OK said Nick, Listen carefully to what you are saying. We must make them  stop doing bad things and make them do what is good for them. That suggests you  are responsible for their behaviour. But I am, we are said Kate.  Well, if that is so, you are in an impossible situation, because at the end of  the day, you cant make anyone stop doing anything they want to without being 

CHAPTER 3 28 controlling, you being there, you standing over them. What happens when you are  not there? But as Kate said, our job means we are responsibleand we have to make sure we  are there watching the kids all the time, on yard duty for example came a somewhat  frustrated voice from the other side of the group.  Well, said Nick how about discussing this in pairs or groups of three and he  wrote on the whiteboard:  KIDS BEHAVIOUR AND MISBEHAVIOUR THINK? 1. WHAT  THE PROBLEMS?	 2. WHO HAS EFFECTIVE CONTROL? 3. WHO IS RESPONSIBLE?	 4. WHO IS HAPPY? 5. WHO IS STRESSED?	 6. WHO OWNS THE PROBLEMS? While teachers were discussing Nick went out to the storeroom and came back  with a white vinyl basketball and two somewhat smaller balls and put them on the  table.  OK, what have you decided about the questions? The teachers generally agreed that the kids needed to be in control, taught selfcontrol, and if a child was uncontrollable, then they had to be taken out of the school  because in the end they were responsible for what went on. When kids misbehaved,  they were unhappy, teachers stressed, and everyone had a problem. As teachers were  reporting their discussions and without commenting, Nick then wrote on each of the  small balls with black whiteboard marker: Behaviour. Now lets make the behaviour more concrete. Nick then asked Judy and Kate  to come forward. Lets pretend these two are kids in my classroom. These balls  represent?  yes, their behaviour. Nick went on as he gave them a ball each:  Who has effective control of those balls? The kids.  Nick went over to Kates balls and drew  and the word good next to the word  behaviour on her ball. Everyone agreed that everyone was happy, no one stressed,  and there wasnt a problem with that behaviour.  Nick then put the word misin front of behaviour on the other ball that Judy  was holding, and drew . As if on cue, Judy mischievously started bouncing the ball  and running around with it, knocking over a coffee mug in the process. Grinning,  Nick asked her to stop, but she ignored him. He jokingly threatened her with cleaning  up the coffee cups after everyone had gone home.  Theres a dishwasher there anyhow, and thats simple to load, was the sassy  reply as she continued bouncing the ball. Nick went over to take the ball from Judy, 

CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS THROUGH RELATIONAL LEADERSHIP 29 but she ducked away laughingly: Youre not allowed to touch me  remember, Im  a girl!  Over noise of the bouncing ball Nick continued: So much for power! So much for  any effective control! But who is responsible here if something goes wrong? Clearly  a case for stress, and what an invidious situation when we know from Organisational  Psychology that the best way to get really stressed in a job is the senior-managersdreammiddle-managers-nightmare: to have responsibility for things over which you  have little or no effective control. In the end I cant effectively control the ball, or  Judy for that matter. Judys happy, well sort of, but I am not! How do we stop Judy? Do we have anything beside the threat or imposition of  greater punishment? In the past this had been inflicting the physical pain of corporal  punishment, and today we still torture no less but by inflicting psychological pain  of some sort, including deprivation. Call it what you will, its punishment by which I  hope I can cause Judy sufficient pain for it to give her a problem bigger than the one  the misbehaviour is giving her, and I have an emotional pay-off in the resolution of  my frustration, annoyance and perhaps even anger. Now, because I was a teacher, I have learnt to very cleverly rationalize: I tell  myself that I am much nobler than that; it was really all about suppressing the  misbehaviour so I could help her understand and take control cognitively: selfcontrol. There might be a couple of problems with that though. Firstly, behaviourists  will tell us that especially for extroverts like Judy, reward is many times, at least ten  times, more effective than punishment. So, Judy just has to get satisfaction every  once in a while, by getting away with the misbehaviour for her to be powerfully  conditioned to continue next time. Then, if she has some sort of attentional problem,  she wont be very aware of consequences past the immediate gratification, and  unlikely to exercise cognitive control until it is too late. And if you are really angry,  she is more likely to be left confused in dealing with your anger and feeling put  down, and not hearing the content or think clearly about what you are lecturing  her on. In fact, she is unlikely to like you enough or feel you like her enough to be  receptive to any of your advice. In the end, while you might get your way for the moment, it wont endure, but  even worse, such a power approach doesnt lead to a happy classroom either. Nick  had learnt much of this as part of Thomas Gordons Teacher and Parent Effectiveness  Training, and in his postgraduate studies has enjoyed finding the research evidence  that underpinned it.  In the ensuing discussion, some of the teachers didnt agree that this was a power  approach. Whether it was or wasnt, they all agreed that it was what any seasoned  teacher had to do to maintain discipline and discharge their duty of care. It worked  for most kids, but not for the real behavioural problems. They turned to Nick,  challenging him as to what workable alternatives he had to offer.  Lets have a look at whats going on here in this group, with Judy bouncing her  ball. Nick added the groups responses to the whiteboard:

CHAPTER 3 30 Nick stood back and challenged: OK, I want to challenge Judys misbehaviour  as being our problem!  Some teachers wanted to object, but Nick went on: Who has ownership of the  misbehaviour? I havent got hold of that ball but I do have a problem, so where is  the problem? He walked over and fetched the basketball, and coming back to the  group wrote on it Problem. Interesting isnt it, we have been so preoccupied, so fixated on the misbehaviour,  distracted by that ball, the little ball Judy is bouncing, that we completely missed,  left out, the REAL problem  the big problem, teacher stress by having responsibility  for what we have no effective control over, and of course annoyance in having the  peace interrupted by a kid with ADHD, a label which suggests the kid has no control  either. Here is MY PROBLEM  I am holding it now. It is mine. And its fair and  square between Judy and me. I dont want it. In the end, it is the only thing I have  effective control over. What can I do? Get another job! came a voice from the far side.  Yea, thats one way of dealing with it. But if we dont want to run away, maybe  we can deal with things constructively and effectively if we can understand some  KIDS BEHAVIOUR AND MISBEHAVIOUR 1. WHAT  THE PROBLEMS?	 2. WHO HAS EFFECTIVE CONTROL?

Judys behaviour 	 Judy: i.e., student 3. WHO IS RESPONSIBLE? Nick, ie ultimately the Teacher,  students should take responsibility, but with misbehaviour they dont. We cant make them if they dont want to. 4. WHO IS HAPPY? Judy who the student, well, sort of,  Except if Nick wins on the dishwasher, 5. WHO IS STRESSED? Nick, ie teachers Kate and other kids 6. WHO OWNS THE PROBLEMS?  that is who has a problem with the behaviour? While Judys behaviour is a problem to the teachers  everyone,  Judys only problem  the dishwasher So, everyone else has a problem! I am a fool if I take responsibility for what I have no effective control over. Extra  problem!

CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS THROUGH RELATIONAL LEADERSHIP 31 things that give us a handle. Notice where the ball is. said Nick, as he asked Kate  to stand away from Judy so that the three were at the points of a triangle, with Nick  holding the ball in between himself and Judy. It is blocking my relationship with  Judy, and while it has come about by Judys misbehaviour, it is clearly mine. It is my  problem! That means I can do something about it, and resigning isnt the only way! MANAGEMENT VERSUS LEADERSHIP: RELATIONSHIP KEYS TO  POSITIVE CLASSROOM CULTURE  He went over to the whiteboard and amended it: 1. WHAT  THE PROBLEMS?

stress from Judys behaviour Nick went on with everyones undivided attention: Notice what I just said.  It is blocking my relationship with Judy. Herein lies a challenge about the sort  of classroom culture I want. Its either a matter of control powerauthoritarian   extrinsic management and compliance, or its a matter of relationship democracy   intrinsic control and motivation. While there is a third possibility: do nothing,  permissiveness and anarchy, if I want positive harmonious culture and not a power  dominated one, the research supports people like Thomas Gordon Effectiveness  Training, Rudolph Dreikurs Social Discipline and Democratic Teaching Models  and Carl Rogers Person-Centred Psychology, who all suggest that effective  strategies must focus on the quality of relationship, not control. In practical terms,  this simply means that if I am to operate strategically, I have to get that basketball  out from between Judy and myself.  There was silence as everyone tried to come to grips with what Nick was saying,  and he took the opportunity to draw four columns on the whiteboard: Culture  Authoritarian,  top down Democratic, equality Permissive, indulgent? Type of leadership  Manager Consultative leader anarchist  Here is the challenge, said Nick. It is one of management versus leadership.  Who here likes to be managed, or do you respond better to being led? A controlled  classroom climate is one in which students behaviour is a responsibility to be  managed by the teacher. A positive classroom climate is one where individuals  are led into taking responsibility for their own behaviour and learning. Positive  relationships motivate independence and a sense of responsibility for selfmanagement in any organisation. These are well established principles in  organisational psychology. 

CHAPTER 3 32 I like a quote from Trish Jacobson 2002 writing on effective leadership in the  Canadian Manager: 

Management maintains a focus on  Planning and organizing;  Controlling and problem solving;  Focusing on outcomes.

Leadership maintains a focus on:  Creating a vision and developing strategies;  Engaging, motivating and inspiring people;  Building trust and having courage; and  Creating action. Well, thats all very fair, nice and sounds logical, in fact ideological, and it might  work with adults, but I have been around for quite a while, and as a teacher with a  lot of experience of kids, and I like kids, I dont really think that kids can live up to  that; they simply havent got the self-control or the maturity. Nick smiled. One teacher had spoken quietly, but with conviction. Im just going to digress. I want you each to think of something you might have  done or would hate to have done, that you would find very embarrassing. Just take  30 seconds.  There were some interesting murmurs and smiles around the group.   Now, think of someone you know who would be the last person in the world you  would want to talk about it with. Just take another 30 seconds.   Okay, said Nick as he picked up a whiteboard marker and moved over to the  whiteboard. Im not going to ask any of you to tell me what you thought about,  who you brought to mind. Rather, tell me the sort of characteristics that person  exhibits.  Very quickly the following list appeared on the whiteboard as teachers called out. PERSON A Judging    Talks at you    Factual    Directive    Judgemental    Preachy    Cold Doesnt understand    Tells you what you should be doing    Gives lots of advice Is impatient    Isnt really interested    Is analytical    Controlling    Severe Proper    Lacks kindness    Doesnt like animals giggles    Critical of others Insensitive    Gossip    Controlling    Has all the answers Now Id like you to just take 30 seconds and bring to mind the person you  probably most like to talk to if youve done something really embarrassing, or there  was something really troubling you. The list on the board grew quickly: 

CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS THROUGH RELATIONAL LEADERSHIP 33 Finally, Id like you to bring to mind a third person you know: a person you  might often catch up with, you might even know quite well, someone who doesnt  seem to ever mind what anyone else does, but is nonetheless also a person you would  be unlikely to want to confide in or seek an opinion from. After thirty seconds of reflection, the adjectives flowed quickly: PERSON C Calm   Even temperament   Agreeable   Self-preoccupied   Accommodating   Quiet Not easily flustered   Unfussed   Uncaring   Unconcerned   Irresponsible   A-social Dreamy   Follower   Disconnected   Unthinking   Adaptable  Now, if I was to give these lists to the kids in your class and rate you against  each of these words on a 10 point scale, how do you think you would come out? How  about people in your family, or your own ratings of yourself? There were smiles all  round the group. Which sort of person would you prefer as your teacher? As Nick paused, there  were further knowing smiles around the group. In your school days, which teachers would you have wanted most to muck up  on? Which teacher, if they ask for your help, would you most want to cooperate  with? Which teacher would it be hardest to be nasty to? Are you saying that we simply have to be namby-pamby, all nice and sweet  with the kids and everything will be right? That takes a lot of work, and we simply  havent got the time for it, said Jeff. No and yes said Nick No: its not simply a matter of being nice and permissive,  but rather being the sort of person who, while having standards, the kids also find  it easy to trust; where there is a trusting relationship that has been built over time.  And Yes, that takes time, yet in the long term saves time. Now the aim here is not to  produce kids who are just going to do what they are told because they feel beholden  to you. That would still be being a dictator, albeit a nice one. PERSON B  Listens    Empathic    Understanding    Principled    Caring    Forgiving    Accepting Knows what is right but doesnt tell you what to do  Non-judgemental    Wise Informed    Considerate    Gentle    Has a mind of hisher own    Ethical Acceptsunderstands how I am feeling    Doesnt gossip    Fun loving    Sense  of humour

CHAPTER 3 34 Nick returned to the columns and asked the group where each of the three might  fit best, and then went on to ask them to nominate the characteristic role, emphasis,  control structure, and who carried responsibility for each. After some discussion the  board looked like this: Culture  Autocratic democratic permissive Type of leadership authoritarian facilitative anarchic Style of leader Person A: Bosssuperior Person B: confidante collegial Person C: unremarkable Role Manager Leader unengaged Leadership Emphasis Management Cooperation chaos Control structure Topdown control Mutual responsibility none Responsibility Topdown shared Defacto leaders Where do you fit most easily? asked Nick as the group reflected. Well I reckon the autocratic is the most efficient came Jeffs immediate  response. Id like to be democratic but we dont have the time. And I would  prefer to call what you name autocratic authoritative. It might be OK with your  own family or peer group, but with a bunch of kids from all sorts of backgrounds,  some of them quite dysfunctional, well as they say, the buck stops with me. A  little bit of authoritarianism never hurt anyone, especially if it was done in a  caring way.   Yes came another voice, how can you make democracy work among kids who  lack impulse control?  Seems to me how you teach has a lot to do with your personality and how you  were taught and how you were brought up, continued Jeff. Well, there are a lot of challenges, acknowledged Nick. These three differences  have been noted for some time, and Rudolph Dreikurs see reprint Dinkmeyer  Questions for reflection Which of persons A, B or C best  describes who you are most of the  time? Which would you prefer to be, and  why?  How are you going to make a  commitment to change? 

CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS THROUGH RELATIONAL LEADERSHIP 35  Dreikurs, 2000 some three or four decades ago showed how you succeed  democratically with the most challenging students, so lets look at the disruptive  Judy from a democratic view. Nick asked the other two members of the group to stand where they had stood  before, holding the problem ball between himself and Judy. Remember, this is my problem, and if I have in the past developed a good  relationship with Judy, I should be able to get her to come over to my side and deal  with it. Nick turned to Judy. Imagine that Im a person you quite like, a person whos listened to you in the  past. This is a very important factor here: Im a person you quite like, a person  whos listened to you in the past. Now, Judy, I have a problem, and I was wondering  whether you might be able to help me? Nick clearly held Judys attention as she looked positively at him. Would you mind coming around here and looking at this ball with me? And  Kate, could you also come around here and help me deal with this ball? The three now all stood together opposite the one ball. Nick turned to the group. Can you see that Im not blaming anyone, but its quite possible that with the  next few words Judy will feel some guilt, and may even want to exonerate herself.  That would in fact be a really good sign, indicating that she knows she is doing  something that she really shouldnt, and this is really a form of self-censorship. Im  going to try and avoid in any way implying any blame by avoiding the word you as  much as possible, that is, Im going to try to avoid any you-messages. You-messages  always blame and put people on the defensive and distract them from constructive  cooperation, in fact distract them from factually looking at what they need to focus  on. So, instead, I need to demonstrate ownership by stating everything as much as  possible as my problem, and that is best achieved by stating things in terms of I  thats what is called and I-message. So, can you help me frame what I should say to  Judy? And Judy, listen to what they suggest and go and stand where you think that  would make you feel you should be. I need that behaviour to stop came the first suggestion. Judy started moving  away from Nick. Yes, said one of the other teachers that might be efficient, but youve simply  left out the word you  its really saying I need your behaviour to stop, because you  are annoying me, implying blame. How about first making a positive statement  about what she is doing? Nick turned to Judy. Judy, I see that you are having a lot of fun bouncing and  playing with that ball, and I know that school can be a bit boring for someone with  so much energy, in fact, Id love nothing more than for us all to join in a game with  you.  While Kate moved away a little, Judy, continuing to bounce the ball as vigorously  as ever, nevertheless slowly but surely had moved a little back toward Nick.  I have a problem right now that I cant solve without your help. We all need to get  some other stuff done right now, and we cant do that without your willing involvement. 

CHAPTER 3 36 JUDGING I can see how that would work if you and Judy had good mutual respect, but not  if she was suspicious of you reflected Michael. So what do you do with someone  who is a ratbag? Isnt considering any student a ratbag a little, well harsh, maybe just a little  judgmental? I find that once I have used such a negative label for a person, it simply  doesnt leave me anywhere to go other than writing them off, suggested a quietly  spoken Yvette who had been silent until then. Well, its just a manner of speaking. No need for political correctness here,  surely. We all care about the kids and I am sure you all know what I mean, came  Michaels somewhat defensive reply.  I agree, we see no harm and mean no harm in such shorthand Nick said. But  language is powerful, insidious, it can be a Trojan horse that brings with it unchallenged  implicit assumptions. Names can really hurt you despite the old saying. I think Yvette brought out the points I wanted to make very nicely. Firstly, getting  cooperation will only work in an environment where you have established mutual  respect, and secondly, the best way to prevent that is not to use labels that imply bad  motivations. The latter is something that comes so naturally to me and even though  I have done training programs, I can still slip up! Its all around us. We model it as  we grow up. It is so common place that we dont recognise its destructive power. But  stop and think about it. Think of someone you recently gossiped about or felt angry  at, where you felt they were doing what they did for the wrong reasons. Once we  judge a person as having bad motives, we have nowhere to go with that person, and  they have no comeback. We have blown the relationship. Now lets analyze it a bit  further in terms of the two sorts of people we thought about earlier: this is being the  first type of person. It destroys trust and community.  Whats the alternative? Can I suggest the challenge of choosing the type of person  you are going to be, by refusing to be judgmental, carefully watching your language  and self talk, and as the father of effective counselling, Carl Rogers demonstrated  that utilizing the power of showing everyone unconditional positive regard. We  know from research in counselling and therapy, as well as in teaching, that the most  significant factor in effectiveness is the relationship between the helper and helpee. Dont you think thats a bit idealistic, if not nave? asked Jeff. I dont think we  have a choice. Some people really do have bad motives, and if you dont recognise  them, you will get hurt. You have to be at least a bit street-smart in this life if you  are going to get on, if you are not going to be taken for a fool. Looking around the  group Nick could see that some of the others clearly agreed.  Mmm, well, said Nick, are you suggesting that in reality, to survive in the  world, you have to be more like the person 1 than person 2?  Well yes, said Jeff. You can only have good relationships with a small number  of people; there arent many people who are really thoughtful and trustworthy and  in the end non-selfish. 

CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS THROUGH RELATIONAL LEADERSHIP 37 Okay said Nick, each of you recall the first two people you brought to mind.  On the whiteboard he wrote the questions: Which one: do you like more?	 do you respect more?	 has more friends? has better relationships?	 is happier?	 is healthier? is wealthier?	 feels fulfilled?	 is taken for a fool? is astute?	 is less stressed? After some discussion, all agreed that the second person they thought of won on  each of the points except for wealthier, being taken for a fool and astuteness: Wealth  being a mixed bag and the other two both were generally pretty much equal.  It is interesting continued Nick that the second person you thought of can be  astute without being judgmental. And that is where we have to leave it this week.  Next week we will look at specific techniques as to how we can get those who have  given us a problem to help us solve the problem without being authoritarian. This  means getting the ball out from between us. In the meantime, you have quite a bit  to reflect on back at your schools. And please remember that changing the culture  takes time and skill. Kates notes centred around three pictures of three people: in the first, two were  holding small balls and one very large ball in the middle separating them; a second  with all lined up together and the big ball in front of them; with the third the big  ball was soaring up about to go through a couple of goal posts. Below that she had  written One team, one goal: Shared responsibility through mutual respect.  Questions for reflection Are there any professional and  personal development goals you  might like to consider setting?  How are you going to achieve them?
CHAPTER 4 BUILDING INDEPENDENCE AND WELLBEING  INTO A POSITIVE SCHOOL CULTURE OVERVIEW AND KEY CONSTRUCTS  Effectiveness: an integrated approach.  Ownership: developing self-control and responsibility.  Recognising judgemental negative thinking.   Replacing Automatic Negative Thoughts ANTs with Automatic Positive  Thoughts APTs.  Active and Reflective Listening.  I-Messages and You-Messages.  Application of an effective integrated approach.  Building a constructive repertoire, defeating old destructive habits.  Dealing with severe adjustment problems.  Positive psychology.  Drilling down to a common goal: wellbeing and happiness.  Student empowerment and problem ownership.  Unconditional positive regard: the positive relationship of understanding.  Locus of Control and Self efficacy.  Meet the Cast Main Characters:  Kate  Teacher Nick  School Psychologist Minor Characters: Karl  a naughty boy at Kates school Mayur  a student at Kates school Robert  Junior teacher at Kates school Megan  Kates artistic sister Jason  Secondary student with severe behaviour problems

CHAPTER 4 40 EFFECTIVENESS: AN INTEGRATED APPROACH  It was Saturday afternoon. Kate had enjoyed the peace of working in the garden,  and come in for a cup of tea. As you do when you relax during repetitive physical  work, she had found herself cogitating, churning over and over the previous  afternoons details. She recalled the role-play and pondered on how what she had  learnt yesterday might change the way she would deal with Louise and Jennys after  school squabbling incident. She decided to get out her notes as she sipped her hot  tea. She needed to reinforce her new understanding, preferably before she was back  at school on Monday if she was to retain or use the learning. She wanted to recapture  the sense of hope she had felt when she wrote one team, one goal, and the yearning  for a greater sense of cooperation with the students in her class had resurfaced while  she was enjoying the tranquillity of her garden.  Questions for reflection Mindfulness can help you be more  effective in creating a positive school  environment:  Have you noticed that the best times  for reflection are often when you are  doing menial things like gardening,  walking, and house-keeping ? Do you take advantage of quiet  reflection? or keep yourself from  thinking by bombarding yourself with  entertainment  information from your  phone or portable music player? She recalled how she had started to understand that she needed to focus on the  big ball and not be distracted by little ones. Identifying problem ownership gave a  different perspective. If she framed the incident in terms of identifying her problem,  well, it was that she felt responsible for stopping the squabbling. And how had she  tried to do that? Of course! By going straight to the content, the little balls, trying to  be reasonable, reassuring, joining the argument.  Clearly she needed to add what Nick had suggested she should avoid. And, yes,  now she thought about it, somehow she felt sucked in and, well, sort of found herself  saying things she really didnt mean or know about or had a right to say. In fact, she  thought, Louise was sort of right: Jennys drawing wasnt very attractive, but then,  she couldnt really speak for Nan, in fact she didnt even know Nan. By playing the  small balls she had joined in their game! The kids were oblivious to her big ball. She  had never even realised it was there! But now.

BUILDING INDEPENDENCE AND WELLBEING INTO A POSITIVE SCHOOL CULTURE 41 OK, so if I dont need to consider the small balls, I could solve my problem  by exercising my authority: just tell them you must stop this squabbling Kates  thinking continued reflectively that, and a little moral lecture maybe would  be a quick and economical answer in the short term. Ah, but what was the bit in  the session about an authoritarian approach? And the word you suggests that it  would really be sending a you-message. And then, it still felt like she was taking  responsibility for stopping them, clearly evident by the potential frustration that  would follow if they were to ignore her: in which case she would need to ramp up  the power. The big ball was still firmly between her and the girls. No team playing in that  scenario! How to make it a team game? How then could she get the kids on side to  solve her problem: how to get them to want to stop squabbling, by sharing in the  responsibility? It dawned on her: the girls were oblivious to the big ball! She had to  tell them about the big ball and get them on side to help her with it! How could she  do that without blaming, she wondered, as she remembered Judy moving away in  the workshop? There was Nicks emphasis on needing to build a climate of mutual respect. Did  the students see her as someone they would want to trust, a confidante? Someone  who was not judgemental? But they were young. Was it too much to expect? She  shuddered as to how they might rate her if she gave them the list Nick had written  up. How hard we work at only allowing people to tell us what we want to hear, she  thought. The phone rang. It was her sister Megan. Would she like to come to dinner?  Kates first impulse was to wonder whether her sister was ringing her out of duty, or  pity for her being on her own.  Hey, stop mind reading  whats our problem? came an unexpected voice from  deep in her subconscious. As she thought it through, she felt a sudden release from  judgement, and found herself surprised by the warmth in her own voice as she found  herself saying, That would be great Megan  thanks for thinking of me.  She put the phone down, and needed to understand what had just happened. She  was normally in control. She knew her normal automatic response was No, Im  fine, I have already got something organised for tonight. It was based on trying to  second guess the reason Megan would invite her over: a sense of obligation or feeling  sorry for her living alone! All of a sudden she realised that even if that were so, that  was Megans problem. Any feeling of Kate being judged was her own problem.  She would enjoy not having to cook for herself tonight, and indeed, enjoy one of  Megans creations: she had a knack of putting ingredients together in interesting and  balanced ways.  On her way out to Megans, Kate grabbed some silver beet from the garden,  and a few lemons, and yes, some broad beans. When she arrived at Megans, she  discovered Megan pottering in her own kitchen. She pulled out some nibbles and  offered Kate a pre-dinner beer. As they started chatting, Kates two young nieces  came over to say a polite hi to their aunt, and on seeing the nuts, made a grab for 

CHAPTER 4 42 them. Not a murmur from Megan. Kate felt her sense of irritation and responsibility  rising. Hey, stop mind reading  whats our problem? An internal debate had  begun.  These kids should have better manners. They are being spoilt. They wont eat  their dinner.  Is that our problem? Well no. Then whats our problem? Those kids arent really here because of me  they just know a visitor brings out  nice nibbles. Im not even sure they like me.  The inner dialogue continued: Automatic negative thoughts: ANTs. Remember  the recent program on Cognitive Therapy? Kate recalled the useful material she  had found on the internet on ANTS after seeing the program. No use knowing if  it doesnt translate into doing fleeted through her mind, but it was the immediacy  here that distracted her from following this through: Kate sensed herself blushing  as she realised that her nieces had little reason to like their stern, negative thinking,  judgemental school-teacher aunt. After all, when had she taken any real interest in  them recently?  Arent we mind-reading again? ANTs undermine good relationships, let alone  your own wellbeing, and we have a problem we have to solve. Kate was suddenly  aware of having been distracted, deep in thought, and Megan saying Had a pretty  full-on week? Where were you just now? And for the first time since they were  children, Kate accepted her sisters care and concern for what it was, and, for the first  time in a long while, felt her sisters natural warmth.  Oh, Kate replied, yes, it has been getting harder at school, but we had a PD on  Friday, and it has given me lots to think about. Couldnt really get it out of my head  while I was gardening today.  Megan was a good listener, so over the next hour Kates thinking from the last  24 hours came together and it all poured out. She had been reflecting on their  father, loving but autocratic, distant, well-meaning, but controlling, judging and  preaching, and how she felt she was just like him. How she always felt responsible,  prided herself in being responsible, making herself be responsible for everyone  else, and how jealously she had grudgingly admitted to herself that despite having  the same father, Megan was the quintessential understanding, non-judgemental,  accepting yet principled listener who seemed to have unconditional positive regard  for people, irrespective of what they did. Now in tears, and so caught up in the  torrent that was pouring forth that she wasnt aware her sister had her arm around  her, Kate asked Megan if she thought she could ever change: could she ever stop  the ANTs?  Megan didnt answer immediately. She didnt affirm, gainsay or make light of  anything Kate had said. She had just been there, listening intensely though. And then  Megan quietly asked, Remember the one about how many psychologists it takes to  change a light bulb? 

BUILDING INDEPENDENCE AND WELLBEING INTO A POSITIVE SCHOOL CULTURE 43 Yes, Kate answered, one, but the light bulb needs to be willing. Kate had often  wondered what people meant when they said they had experienced an epiphany   now she realised she had just had one!  The next morning, a bright sunny Sunday, Kate woke up feeling emotionally  exhausted but unusually optimistic, though a little wary as well. She decided to  spend another day in the garden, but by 11am she wanted to go inside and dig up the  material from a workshop she had been to last year on building rapport and trust  in teaching. Understanding problem ownership had unlocked the issue that so far  had stopped it from making sense. She had understood reflective listening, active  listening as they called it, as a means of establishing trust so that students would like  you enough to do what you told them to in dealing with their problems. But now she  saw that suddenly very differently.  She could use reflective listening to help individuals become aware, just as  Megan had in allowing her to reflect last night, without saying very much at all   just being there, accepting her unconditionally, and then superbly handed over  problem ownership with the light bulb analogy. She had never thought she could see  her sister as a role model, but with still a little twang of reserve, she acknowledged  that maybe she could learn from her, and most certainly from a couple of other  people who had come to mind in the exercise, people who one could turn to and who  would also most likely be comfortable confiding in others too. They were all really  good listeners. Kate looked through the lists she had copied down on Friday, and  considered again which ones others would most likely tick about her. How much,  she thought, were they the ones people would also have marked about her father.  She wrestled with the thought of fighting her genes. She was Kate  and how could  she ever change? She recognised the ANT pushing into her thoughts  consciously  replacing it with a positive thought: she was going to change that lifelong destructive  habit by cultivating positives  APTs! Well, she determined at least this bulb is going to do all it can to change.  During the afternoon Kate first spent half an hour searching the internet for material  on dealing with automatic negative thoughts, finding plenty that she bookmarked.  Then she pulled out the material from some recent workshops, working her way  through a number of exercises on constructing active listening statements, as well as  the road block exercise.  That afternoon flew as Kate searched the internet for further useful material:  she was surprised to find a lot on active and reflective listening, road blocks to  communication and problem ownership. Kate also found YouTube material from the  Gordon Training International based on Dr Thomas Gordons Effectiveness Training  to be particularly helpful.  APPLICATION OF AN EFFECTIVE INTEGRATED APPROACH On Monday morning, as if part of some conspiracy, the first children to arrive at  school were Louise and Jenny. It seemed so long since Friday, but not for the twins. 

CHAPTER 4 44 Within minutes, Kates attention was distracted from writing up on the board by  the girls bickering. Here was an opportunity for Kate to put her understanding and  practice into action. Jenny was already in tears. Youre feeling a little unhappy, arent you Jenny? Yes, replied Jenny, Louise says the other kids only like me because I am her  sister and they want to play with her because she is really good at basketball and I  am not.  Kate felt instinctively she wanted to resolve the issue with a quick reprimand  to Louise. The scenario had played itself out many times between the twins; just  different content each time. Instead of feeling this was her problem, however, with  the insights and practice of the weekend behind her, she recognised that the only  person here with a problem was Jenny, and her role as teacher was to help her learn  to deal with the problem, and if possible get Louise on side as well.  She had to get her head around this fast. It wasnt automatic  not yet. As she  thought about it though, the problem seemed to be that Jenny allowed her sister to  put her down. This understanding helped Kate avoid what she might otherwise have  done: join in the power struggle by telling Louise off for being nasty. It was after all  a set up by the twins, with Louise watching on carefully. Previous actions had simply  served to maintain the scenario time after time. Active listening, thought Kate.  Active listening no matter what. No judgement. No taking sides. And, every ANT  is an opportunity for a APT. She brought to mind how she had seen both Megan and  one of her other role models handle such a situation.  And you are really upset with your sister saying that? Yes replied Jenny, glaring at Louise as if waiting for Kate to turn and reprimand  her. But Kate just kept her gentle focus on Jenny, and nodded, acknowledging: That  must feel horrible.  She is always being nasty like that to me continued Jenny, pushing to get Louise  into trouble. But Kate kept her focus on Jenny and what Jenny was feeling and then  planned to move on from her feelings to her underlying beliefs.  I understand how horrible it feels when a sister says things we dont like, but do  you think she is right? No, she isnt! Suddenly Jennys tears started giving way to more assertiveness,  and her shoulders straightened up. Kate felt she had been able to get onside with  Jenny against her problem instead of it being handballed to her. Now that Jenny  felt a little understood, she was also changing gear, from unconditional acceptance  reflecting the emotional to moving to the rationalcognitive, ready to challenge her  misbeliefs.  So, if you dont believe your sister, why do you accept what she says? Because Mummy says she shouldnt say those things!  Kate wanted to ask Jenny why she thought her sister might want to say hurtful  things, but past experience had taught her that that simply resulted in blamefully  attributing bad motives, and the need to address these by engaging with Louise. 

BUILDING INDEPENDENCE AND WELLBEING INTO A POSITIVE SCHOOL CULTURE 45 Instead she now realised she needed to get Jenny to focus on taking responsibility  for what she could control herself.  It really feels horrible when your sister says things like that, and your mummy is  right. So, how do you think we can help your sister stop doing that? Besides Jennys  sudden look of indignation, Kate also caught a look of surprise on Louises face.  But, protested Jenny its her fault, and, . and, well, she just shouldnt be  allowed to say things like that and make me feel unhappy. Kate recognised that Jenny was not getting what she was accustomed to, winning  the power play, and was turning up the volume by playing the victim role hard.  There were also issues of an external locus of control: she was blaming Louise for  her own emotional state. If Kate was not careful, Jenny would become very upset,  in which case Kate would need to change gears back to listening, but that would  take time. While in terms of seriousness this was a relatively low level game, it was  laying a pattern for far more damaging and serious habits in later life. Here was  an opportunity to squelch the emerging cycle. This was not a time for explaining  what was going on and telling Jenny to take responsibility for her own feelings, but  it was an opportunity by doing to give her some skills to jump out of the victimperpetrator frame. And you dont like being unhappy, do you? It feels terrible. Feeling she was gaining leverage, and possibly feeling understood, Jenny  responded with Yes  And you would really like to feel happier. You cant make your sister stop,  especially when there is no one else there, but you know, you could ask your sister if  she would like to help you be happier I could, but I know she doesnt want me to be happy. Well, we dont know that for certain: so why dont we ask her. Kate was finding that keeping her eye on the problem, keeping Jennys ball in  focus at all times, was helping her focus clearly on remaining on the ball. Most  surprising was the good feeling that came with her newfound freedom of not needing  to solve a problem of her own. Identifying the real ball in the room, and having  revised reflective listening and changing gears gave her somewhere to go without  needing to resort to power.  Jenny, there are lots of times I see you playing together where you look like you  are enjoying what you are doing. Is that right? Can you tell me of times when you  enjoy doing things with Louise and you are happy? Yes Jenny responded slowly. When we made breakfast in bed for mummy and  daddy last week, and when she watched our favourite show with me last night and  when we talked about the new bicycles we are getting in the car on the way to school  this morning .  OK then, said Kate turning for the first time to Louise who was standing there  curiously watching the whole procedure, please tell Louise how you enjoy doing  these things together with her and ask if they make her happy too. Jenny asked 

CHAPTER 4 46 Louise, and Louise said they were fun for her too. Now ask if Louise likes you to  be happy. Louise answered, yes. Kate continued, And now ask her if she would like to help you with a problem of  being unhappy when she tells you that you are no good at something. Before Jenny could say that, Louise had turned to Kate and said: But sometimes  Jenny is just stupid! Kate refused to engage directly with Louise, but taking this as an indication  that she was not ready to come on side to help with Jennys problem, she decided  to teach Jenny to be assertive by sending an I-Message. Based on what Kate had  learned from a workshop on positive psychology and Albert Elliss ubiquitous ten  irrational beliefs various iterations readily available on the internet, Kate went  on to a discussion with Jenny about what water off a ducks back meant, and that  everyone did silly things sometimes; that people quite liked others who did silly  things as we all had things we are good at and things we are not so good at; that  whether they might be true or not, and things people say might not be nice, in  the end it is we who can decide to ignore them or take them personally. She then  asked Jenny if she had friends of her own, to which she replied she did. Kate asked  Louise to tell her three things she thought others liked her for and Louise was able  to answer quite quickly.  Having dealt with the cognitive work underlying Jennys ANTs, and having  established a positive base for APTs, all the while conscious that Louise was  watching every fine detail, Kate now asked Jenny to pretend she, Kate, was Louise  and to laugh at her no matter how she felt when Kate repeated what Louise had said.  This worked beautifully, Jenny not only laughing, but giggling as well.  Next Kate asked Jenny to simply repeat after her, and saying it to Louise,  Everyone enjoys being stupid sometimes. Not everyone likes everyone, and my  real friends like me cos I am me, and if they only like me cos I am your sister, they  arent real friends. Next time you say things I dont like, I am going to laugh at you.  Its going to be water off a ducks back.  Though Louise was clearly somewhat embarrassed, both girls then laughed. Kate  sent them off to play. It hadnt been easy, but Kate felt she had empowered Jenny  to recognise, own, and deal with her own problem. She was rather proud of how  she had managed to stay out of being the superpower who comes in to adjudicate  a conflict. This had taken just over fifteen minutes instead of three, but in the long  term Kate knew it was time well spent. It didnt take much coaching subsequently  to help her out of it.  Kate knew that basically, Jenny and Louise had been no great problem. While her  success had burned itself as an ideal into her mind, she wasnt so sure how it would  work with more difficult cases. In a few of these, lacking confidence and finding  old habits die hard, she found herself in the fray of the day, with no time to think,  resorting to her well-honed previous behaviour management techniques. 

BUILDING INDEPENDENCE AND WELLBEING INTO A POSITIVE SCHOOL CULTURE 47 Questions for reflection Analyse Kates approach in terms of:   where you see various particular  balls being at various stages  the use of various techniques  such as active listening.  How might such new patterns be  developed and maintained in the  future? BUILDING A CONSTRUCTIVE REPERTOIRE, DEFEATING  OLD DESTRUCTIVE HABITS While Kate had made a mental shift and experienced some success, old routines  and habits are often deeply engrained. Kate was still always rushing; an over  inflated sense of responsibility someone had once suggested. Well, she thought in  defence of her relapse, if only there were more responsible people in this world. all very well to have these reflective practices, but where does anyone find the  time? Kate had tried to keep a log of types of interactions with students, as Nick  had asked, but she knew she had done that far too irregularly, in fits and starts.  None the less, from time to time her success with Louise and Jenny had the effect  of getting Kate to reflect somewhat on what she was doing. This happened most  clearly when one day, feeling less rushed, she had paused to think before acting.  She had taken time to talk with Karl, a boy who could be quite wilfully naughty  and distractible, and connected with him about writing a story about his trail-bike  riding accident.  She had been very happy with how engaged he had become as she practiced her  active listening, focussing much of the conversation on reflecting on what Karl had  felt. But the glow she felt crashed when, within seconds of returning to his group, he  started to poke and wrestle the boy next to him. She felt betrayed and angry, with a  feeling that he had taken advantage of her. She was about to take control, and though  she would not admit it, exact some revenge, by sending him over to the time-out  corner when she drew breath just long enough to hear rising from her subconscious:  Hey, stop mind reading  whats our problem?  The thought rang so clearly that it stopped her in her tracks. It served as an anchor:  Where is that confounded ball? she asked herself. And then, she saw it, clearly.  Its my problem! No it isnt! Yes it is  identify and dont take your eye off the ball! 

CHAPTER 4 48 Its our feelings that are the problem. And I am justifying myself, pumping myself  up by mind reading, attributing malevolent motivations and cunning wilfulness to a  boy who probably just has some attentional and self-management issues, and when  all is said and done, is pretty straightforward. Karl was still letting off steam in his  scrum and it struck her that rather than spitting in her face, this might be little more  than some sort of displacement behaviour, some compensation for the discomfort of  the unusual experience of feeling accepted by his teacher. Whatever, she thought, at the very least she understood this much: his  misbehaviour was her problem, not his, and the ball was dangerously in between  them, threatening the good work of the affirming discussion they had more recently  enjoyed. Kate needed to think fast: how to manoeuvre him to get him on side so that  they could together tackle her problem? No, manoeuvre implied manipulation, and  that was covert power. Rats! She needed to get his free and willing cooperation she  had been given to understand. She was trying to recall. But how? Maybe share it  with an I-Message. But how? It didnt come to her automatically. She started walking over to Karl. He wasnt looking in her direction. He had his  mate in a headlock. And as she walked she was aware that she wanted Karls help in  solving her problem, but she might not get it. Karl released his mate as he suddenly  became aware of Kate standing next to him, and his friend was about to return Karls  favour when he too stopped in his tracks on realising that Kate was standing next to  them. They both looked sheepish, expecting a reprimand. But even to Kates surprise  it never came. She addressed both of them: I have a problem that I was hoping you two could help me with. In her minds  eye she saw them coming around from the other side of the ball as they both nodded  their consent. Kate was desperately looking to make I-messages, thinking about  starting sentences with I, excluding the word you, and avoiding covert youmessages. Keeping an eye on the ball seemed to be helping. Her problem had now  resolved into getting Karl working rather than stopping the misbehaviour and hoping  that somehow that would motivate him to apply himself to his work.  I really enjoyed hearing about your trial-bike riding Karl, I learned heaps and  think I understand a little about how you enjoy it even though you might sometimes  hurt yourself as you do in the accident. At this point in time she thought to draw in  Karls friend as an accomplice.  Do you do any trail-bike riding, Mayur? she asked, in the process winning  some time in which to frame a question that would get them to help with solving her  problem without focussing on it in a negative way. No, but I am saving up, and Dad said if I got a much better report from school I  might be able to get one at Christmas. OK, she said, Well, I am really looking forward to Karl writing up his accident  as a good story so we could share it with others, including how the helmet probably  saved him from serious injury. What can we do to get this under way quickly, and  what do you think you might be able to help, Mayur?

BUILDING INDEPENDENCE AND WELLBEING INTO A POSITIVE SCHOOL CULTURE 49 To Kates surprise, Mayur suggested that they could turn the writing into a project  and that he could find pictures of trail-bikes and helmets, and even some facts about  helmets while Karl could write up his story, and it could take centre place.  As Kate left the pair focussed on their project, she realised that she had not spoken  a single word about their misbehaviour, and even though she was aware that Mayurs  father was applying some extrinsic motivation, she had not bought into that, though  she had been sorely tempted to use it for some leverage. She reflected on how the  resolution involved encouraging intrinsic motivation. This surely must be what they  meant by a positive classroom culture, she thought.  A few weeks later though, when he was in the area, Nick dropped by her school  following up on the PD. Here was her opportunity to share some of her successes, but  also to challenge him about its limits. Secretly, she was looking forward to stumping  the know-all. How applicable was the positive classroom for kids who really had  problems, who had definable psychological conditions, like those who suffered from  mental problems such as ADHD, ASD spectrum, and learning problems? Questions for reflection How applicable do you think these  methods are with individuals who  really have major social adjustment  problems? Can you imagine how you might need  to adapt these somewhat? DEALING WITH SEVERE ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS Nick listened quietly. Well, he said, you know all kids are much the same, and the  same things apply. We are so quick to blame others for our problems. There are a number  of key constructs that we can learn from positive psychology. Primarily, we all want to  be happy, which really means we all want to have a sense of wellbeing. Everything we  do is motivated by a subconscious intent to improve things, make us happy or happier.  Its just that many of us dont understand what makes us happy; we blame others and  get into power struggles, we dont grasp the opportunities when we have them. How come you seem to have all the answers, Nick? asked Kate, wanting to hide  her attraction. But didnt Freud help us and the advertising industry to understand  that motivation is ultimately all about sex? she challenged in semi-jest. 

CHAPTER 4 50 Ah, such a good point responded Nick, I dont have all the answers  what I  have learned is not my opinion, but based on good research in positive psychology  which sees even sex as a means to an end, not an end itself. A means to a few ends  like having kids as well as pleasure? suggested Kate. Well, ultimately those other ends could be considered as no more than things on  the way to what we believe will make us happy. We have kids because we expect  them to make us happy.  Or maybe it is out of a sense of duty challenged Kate. And what do you think someone fulfilling their duty does for them?  I get your point. So you think we are all fundamentally hedonists then?  Not quite. I understand hedonism as the self-interested pursuit of pleasure in  the belief that pleasure is the ultimate good. Positive psychology can attract a cult  following from many who erroneously think that it is the pursuit of pleasure for its  own sake. In reality it is about evidence-based ways of knowing, that is, utilising  the science of achieving and a healthy pervasive sense of wellbeing that we identify  as happiness. Working at achieving a healthy psychological state of wellbeing is no  different to working at being healthy physically by eating and exercising well. A  healthy mental and physical state of wellbeing is good not only for us, but everyone  around us. It is an effective antidote to the epidemic of depression that is enveloping  the developed world.  So, what does positive psychology have to offer the classroom teacher? asked  Kate The key issues from an educational and developmental point of view that make  for happiness involve identity, growing up being comfortable with ourselves. As  Victor Frankl put it, knowing who we are, where we are going, and who is going  with us. Can you see how that would involve self-acceptance, self-determination  and self-control? Thats where positive psychology comes in, by showing the  importance of an internal sense of locus of control and an independent sense of selfefficacy as essential for happiness. These are keys in creating a positive classroom  culture. As Kate wrote the terms down, Nick suggested that probably the most convenient  way for her to learn more was to look them up on the Web. Kate returned to her  earlier challenge. Thats all very well Nick, but again how about the really damaged  kids who suffer from things like problems such as ADHD, ASD spectrum disorders  or learning difficulties? This theory is all well and good for kids who are pretty well  OK, but surely we need to be practical in managing and controlling these others, and  this is where behavioural methods are best?  I dont agree. Remember I started off by saying that everyone needs to be happy?  The other differences dont matter nearly as much as we think when we invest in the  positive approach. Differences are too often used as an excuse to exclude, and people  who have a need to control, all too often hijack behavioural measures as a tool to  be used to that end. People who want to shape the world in their own image scare  me. They dont understand the limits of their understanding or the potential evil that 

BUILDING INDEPENDENCE AND WELLBEING INTO A POSITIVE SCHOOL CULTURE 51 can come even from power that is benevolently motivated. A positive approach that  avoids the power game also avoids the victim-perpetrator paradigm and makes for  a happier society.  Enough of the theory. I understand you want to see it working at an applied  practical level, so Ill give you an example. I have just come from one of the  secondary colleges down the road. The principal just sent me a thirteen year old who  they are at their wits end with in that he is a real behaviour problem. I had it laid on  me that I was their last hope or he was out. They had tried everything, I was told,  including a tightly managed behaviour modification program. Now, thats not a nice ball to get passed, a bone everyone has had a chew at,  and I wasnt about to accept the impossible. I have limited understanding, but some  basic principles I am convinced of because I see them work, and there is also good  research evidence. This is a kid who has honed his skills to defeat teachers over  seven years of school. He knows exactly how to play the power game. So, I said to  the principal, Well, you know, I cant make him do anything any more than you can;  I cant fix him, and even if I could force him to change I wouldnt, because for me  thats ethically unacceptable. The light bulb bit butted in Kate with a grin.  Yes, exactly. If I was to have any chance of effecting change, it would be because  the lad chose to make that change himself. So, I told the principal that I was happy  to speak with him, if he would like me to, but I could promise nothing, to which the  principal said that at least he would be able to put the consultation on the paperwork  as evidence that he had done all he could.  Jason had swaggered into the counselling room. Arms folded, it was a  situation with which he was long acquainted. I knew he had convinced himself  that everyone else had a problem, and he felt in charge. Meantime, I felt free of  any problem ownership. Simply, if I could, here was a lad who was in denial  about having a problem that was ruining his life. No musts or should be for me  here; only the simple desire that if I could ,get him to recognise and then own his  problem, I could perhaps help him to deal with it for his sake. Jason was now my  client. Until he came to realise that he had a problem and that he had sole control,  he would be fighting everyone else to make sure he was their problem. Its all  a blame-game around power, and the moment I entered into the power game, I  would lose.  But isnt the school your client? It is they who have called you in, asking for  help. They have the problem dont they? asked Kate.  Well, the way I see it is that he is their client too. But they are enmeshed in  a power struggle because they have taken responsibility for his behaviour rather  than leaving it with him, and as soon as I join in with that I would be setting  myself up for a certain failure certificate along with everyone else. I am sure  that there are a lot of very clever people trying to help this fellow over the years,  in the process training him to stay in charge. My only hope is to come from a  completely different angle, admitting that I am completely powerless in regard 

CHAPTER 4 52 to his misbehaviour. While I would like the school to be happy with Jason, that  would be a by-product.  So, did you last more than 5 minutes? Kate was curious now. Nick went on to say that hed simply accepted the fact that Jason had come into  the room as an indication that not all was lost. Jason had slouched down in the  chair, trying to look nonchalant, yet arms defiantly folded: all too familiar to Nick.  Nick gave Kate a quick rundown of what had actually happened, pointing out how  positive principles could win through:  Well Jason, Im Nick. I guess you dont really want to be here?  Its awright. Beats class came the short answer. At least hes talking thought  Nick. Nicks goal was simply to get alongside Jason, and he knew that would be  neither easy nor easily sustainable. To do that he would have to show unconditional  positive regard and stay out of any power challenges, and in any way own Jasons  behaviour problems as Nicks.  Well, I dont really want to be here either, said Nick, by implication not  accepting Nicks denial about not wanting to be there. So why are you here then? asked Jason. Same reason as you  I have to be here, to earn a living, and the school has asked  me to see you because they think you have some problems. Well, I aint got no problems. The schools got the problems: they want me and  some of my mates to do all this dumb stuff that we dont want to, and they cant  make us do nuffin anyhow,. and you cant neither challenged Jason. Nick was  amazed at how clearly right up front Jason was able to sum up the entire power  conflict.  Bang on, Jason. I cant make you do anything, and nor would I if I had any real  power, because at best I could only get you to do what I wanted while I was holding  a gun to your head so to speak. Jason rather liked the idea of a gun. But he was suspicious. So, what you here  for? To write another one of them reports? No. I told you, I wouldnt be here if they werent paying me to be here. I hate  writing reports. They dont do anything for anyone except the filing clerks. No,  when Mr B the principal asked me to see you, I told him I didnt think I could do  anything, but he wanted me to talk with you anyhow, so I thought OK, Ill listen to  Jasons story.  I aint got no story to tell.  So you are telling me that Mr B simply wants me to see someone for no reason  at all? Well, how would I know  Im not Mr B, am I? At this point Nick was feeling Jasons resistance was palpable. There was a  determined hostility in Jasons voice and demeanour. He just wasnt managing to get  alongside Jason in any way. In fact the opposite: Jason wasnt even admitting now  that the school might have a problem. He could either push on ignoring the denial  and build on the earlier admission, or changing track and rapport build around some 

BUILDING INDEPENDENCE AND WELLBEING INTO A POSITIVE SCHOOL CULTURE 53 common interest outside school Im not sure why, but instinctively I felt the better  option was to change track, Nick reported to the group.  What did you do on the weekend? Nick went on. Nuffin much Just as boring as school?  We went shooting. Nick understood this to be another power statement and  wondered whether he was meant to look shocked or impressed by an under age,  uncontrollable boy with a gun. But he stayed away from any matters of concern and  went straight to opening a window for sharing feelings.  What sort of gun do you use? Nick asked Jason, looking for an opportunity to  share his interest in the sport.  A Ruger  1022 longarm. I use a Remington 700 BDL with iron sights said Nick grasping the opportunity,  and it was immediately obvious that he had made a connection.  Nick continued to relate to Kate what had happened over the next ten to fifteen  minutes: they enjoyed sharing about guns and shooting vermin, Nick learned a lot  about Jason. Jason went shooting with his father and uncle on his uncles farm. He  held a junior shooters permit. He prided himself on knowing a lot about gun safety.  He was such a good shot his father had said he could make the Olympics. Nick asked  Jason if he knew what might be required for getting into a team. Jason knew little  about target shooting clubs.  Nick asked Jason what going shooting did for him. He replied that he really liked  being outside. Nick asked him what being outside in the night air did for him. Jason  said it made him feel free. And then Nick asked him the chain question again: what  did feeling free do for him. It made him feel happy.  Chain questions are a useful technique for drilling down to real purpose: the  questioner keeps inserting the respondents reply into the same question until ultimately  there is nowhere to go. This endpoint often usefully clarifies the ultimate goal. Questions for reflection 1.	 Take something you do, perhaps  something you would like NOT  have to do Ask What does x do for you?  and chain onto each answer 2.	 Try it today: Run the exercise  with a friend or student 3.	 Practice it weekly to get really  familiar with it as a skill 

CHAPTER 4 54 So Jason, ultimately you want to feel happy? Nick had asked somewhat  rhetorically. A little more guardedly, Jason agreed. Nonetheless, it was time to return  to the matters concerning school, thought Nick sensing strength in their talking  together.  What do you want to do for a living after you leave school? asked Nick. Professional Roo Shooter was the immediate reply.  What would Roo shooting do for you? asked Nick starting the chain question  again. Jason followed through: he would make money doing what he enjoyed;  making money would allow him to do more of what he wanted which included  living in the bush. Living in the bush with his own house would make him happy.  Yes, he wanted to be happy for no reason other than that he liked being happy.  Nick felt that he demonstrated enough unconditional positive regard in sharing to  establish enough trust to tackle Jasons problem without the defences rising to block.  Meantime we have a few years of school to deal with. School doesnt make you  happy does it? No. Jason was visibly tightening up. Nick was determined not to enter the fray.  He wanted to grasp the momentum to get Jason to deal with the ball before he had a  chance to go into denial.  I wonder what we can do to stop school being such an unhappy place for you?  Nick was careful not to blame either school or Jason, but to encourage a sense of  problem recognition and ownership. Jason sat there for a moment, and then tried to deflect the question with: School  sucks. Teachers are nerds. Jason wasnt accepting the ball.  Nick went with it but without compromising himself: Yes, I know, but you will  never be able to change the school. Pretend you are Mr B. What would you do with  Jason? he asked while watching the body language keenly. Nick pointed out to  Kate he often used this role-reversal play as an acid test of the quality of that trust  that had been built. Jason didnt disappoint, though to Nicks surprise, Jason also  demonstrated the authoritarian paradigm he understood all too well: the problem  person turned vigilante.   Id chuck him out, or detention every day til he picked himself up and got  towork.  So, there are things Jason does that the school doesnt like? suggested Nick  trying to get Jason to acknowledge a problem, which Jason did, but at the same time  justifying himself.  Yeah, but thats because they deserve it. They are such nerds they just dont  getit.  Keeping it in the third person, Nick asked Jason: So, what does mucking around  do for Jason?   It gets him into trouble.   and what does getting into trouble do for him? 

BUILDING INDEPENDENCE AND WELLBEING INTO A POSITIVE SCHOOL CULTURE 55 It makes him angry and get even.  Does being angry make for Jason being happy? Nu. But you want to be happy, and school makes you unhappy because of what they  do when you muck around? How would it feel if you felt the teachers respected you?  If you really want to be happy at school, do you know you could have the teachers  respect? Jason sat there silently, thinking, and after a moment: Nu, never.  Well, I reckon that together we could work this through and make it happen  challenged Nick, but its your choice. Yeah, but how? asked Jason. Now Nick knew that Jason was acknowledging  the problem and entertaining some ownership, the initial rays of hope that come  from a glimmer of self-efficacy and empowerment. Time was running out and he  had to plan for the next session. Nick knew he would lose ground between now and  then, but there was hope.  Well, if you are happy to talk next week when I am back  we can talk it through  more, and we can even role play some of your teachers and explore alternatives for  you. And, we can make sure you dont get into such trouble as to stop you getting a  full gun licence when you get to that age.  By the level of attention the last comment drew, Nick commented to Kate, he  knew that he had a chance to move Jason from the recalcitrant victim role caught  up in a power paradigm to one that takes responsibility for how others treat him by  taking responsibility for his own behaviour.  But for now, cutting short his time with Kate, Nick needed to be off, to a school  down the road.  Questions for reflection The narrative about Jason is based on  a real case.  Where and how were you challenged  by the case study of Jason? Did keeping your eye on the ball help  you understand what Nick was doing? Jason reflects disengagement typically  found in a rural culture. Can you think  of an exemplar of inner-city streetwise disengagement, and a potential  scenario for facilitating self-efficacy?

CHAPTER 4 56 Two months later when Nick next dropped by, Kate wanted to hear the next  episode! Nick had found out that Jason experienced reading difficulties. He was able  to report how seeing Jasons behaviours as maladaptation rather than wilful, and  keeping his eye on the ball enabled him to make progress so that the school was no  longer talking of exclusion, but in fact was providing extra support, notwithstanding  some tensions from time to time with some of the more authoritarian inclined  teachers. 
CHAPTER 5 UNDERSTANDING BELIEFS AND PROFESSIONAL  PRACTICES OVERVIEW AND KEY CONSTRUCTS  Beliefs about teaching  Reflective teaching: from theory to practise Meet the Cast Main Characters:  Tracy  Teacher Tom  Student with ongoing behavioural issues.  Beliefs have a significant impact on how you teach and what you teach. Think about  a child, Tom, who you might strongly believe should not be in your classroom. The  reasons for your beliefs may largely be based on how Tom behaves, and perhaps also  on your ability to deal with his behaviour and its effects on others. The report from  Toms past teacher states that Tom is often non-compliant, shows little interest in  what is being taught, and on some occasions has shown his aggression by picking  fights with others and tearing up his workbook. Reflecting on my experience when  I first started teaching, I would have been terrified by the thought of having such a  child in my classroom. I must confess here that I am presuming that a majority of  teachers prefer not to have such children in their classrooms. The presumption is  based largely on my personal experience, observing teachers in regular and special  schools, teaching pre-service teachers at universities, and a large body of research  that indicates that teachers are least receptive to teaching students who display  disruptive behaviours. This is not to deny that there are many teachers who are  challenged by those students who display disruptive behaviours on some occasions,  and that such teachers work hard to make students like Tom feel welcome in their  classrooms. Unfortunately, however, research shows that generally speaking, the  majority of teachers are reluctant to have such students in their classrooms Daniels   Cole, 2010.  Now, my question is: does it matter if teachers believe that having students with  disruptive behaviours in their classrooms is undesirable or unworkable? How would  it affect the way they teach? I will ask you a series of questions and would like you 

CHAPTER 5 58 to reflect on your teaching practices. You will find it useful to closely examine your  responses and determine if there is a need for you to change the way you teach, or  if you are already doing most of the things that a reflective and effective teacher  would do.  We know there is plenty of research that indicates that teachers who would prefer  not to have students like Tom in their classroom but are then required to teach such  a child are not able to do him justice Daniels  Cole, 2010; Rogers, 2000. One  such teacher is Tracy. She pays attention to Tom when he misbehaves rather than  when he behaves appropriately. She provides few opportunities that allow Tom to  show his potentials. For example, she asks him questions less frequently compared  to other students in the class, and she also provides fewer examples to explain  difficult concepts when Tom dares ask something about which he is not certain. As  a result, Tom starts behaving or continues to behave consistent with the way Tracy  believes is typical of him. In other words, her beliefs influence the way she interacts  with Tom.  There is evidence available that our beliefs are self-generating, simply based on  conclusions drawn from our selected observations Argyris, 1990. Research also  shows that we tend to choose data that matches our views and understanding of the  world and we tend to ignore data that does not fit into the schema we have created,  to help us understand the way things should work in every day life. We use such  selective observations to draw conclusions, adopt beliefs, and then act according to  these beliefs. Tracy believes something is wrong with Tom andor with his family,  so she continues to treat Tom as someone with a problem. She believes she can do  very little to change her teaching practices to accommodate Toms individual needs.  She prefers to refute research which shows that a change in her teaching style might  improve Toms classroom behaviour, since such research is not congruent with her  beliefs about Toms behaviour.  Questions for reflection Would you like Tom to be in your  class? Why? Explain the reasons to  your Principal. If your reasons are accepted, what  would be the likely consequences for  Tom?

UNDERSTANDING BELIEFS AND PROFESSIONAL PRACTICES 59 If we understand that beliefs can and do influence our teaching, the next question  concerns how we identify and change our beliefs. We are presuming that a teacher  such as Tracy has recognized that her beliefs are not conducive to effective learning  for Tom and she needs to do something about it. There are many ways that a teachers  beliefs can be changed. One important means of achieving this concerns reflective  teaching. WHAT IS REFLECTIVE TEACHING? According to Dewey 1933, an early leading authority on reflective teaching, there  are two kinds of teachers. In one category, there are teachers who believe in routine  action and impulse, where tradition and authority is essentially enacted in their  professional behaviour. These teachers continue to teach in a routine way, as long  as everyday life continues without major interruptions Grant  Zeichner, 1984,  p. 104. They continue to find this the most efficient and effective means to teach  and to solve problems that are largely defined or perceived as having been created  by others. Such teachers look forward to finishing their day so that they can go  home to the things that they like doing. In the other category there are the reflective  teachers, educationists who frequently ask questions about their teaching and are  able to be self-critical. We have seen examples of this type of teacher described  in the previous chapters in this book. They look back at their teaching, review and  evaluate, reflecting on what happened and seeking to understand why it happened.  They frequently change the way they teach to accommodate the needs of their  students. They look forward to the challenges at school and the opportunities in  teaching students and even in learning from them.  Long ago, Dewey 1933: p. 9 defined reflection as active, persistent, and  careful consideration of any belief or supposed form of knowledge in the light of  the grounds that support it and the further conclusions to which it tends. It may be  useful to think about this definition and how it applies to your teaching situation.  This explanation suggests that if you are a reflective teacher, you will continuously  question your beliefs and practices. In a practical way, when you come across a  new theory relevant to your teaching, you will first closely examine the theory,  and then test it out before fully incorporating it into your teaching, or alternatively  dismissing it.  Reflection thus forms an important part of problem solving see, Loughran,  2002. The act of teaching effectively requires teachers to be able to see the problem  from different perspectives. We need to frame and reframe the problem; this allows  us to identify actions that we would not have taken if we had not continued to look  at the working context from just one perspective. It is easy to recommend that  educators should learn to view educational problems from different perspectives; in  reality it is very hard for educators to do that, unless constantly reviewing their own  practices. This is by no means an easy task, yet an essential element if trying to teach  individuals who do not fit a preconceived norm. , In the previous example, Tracy 

CHAPTER 5 60 believes Tom remains disengaged in the class because he is lazy and disinterested in  learning. If she takes this perspective to solve the problem and continues to see the  problem as Toms, she is less likely to try new ways to engage Tom in her class. If  Tracy sees the value of looking at the problem from another perspective, she may  find that Tom is disengaged because he does not find the material interesting and thus  lacks motivation to learn. This different perspective shifts the focus of the problem  to other aspects, and now includes considering problem ownership that must involve  the teacher. She is now more likely to look for solutions that will require new ways  of teaching that potentially, ensures that Tom can become more motivated to learn.  This not only will help Tom to be engaged but it will also lead to a more  adaptable learning environment that also benefits other students. An ability to look  at the classroom context from different perspectives is a fundamental attribute of a  reflective teacher, a person who is willing to create a positive learning environment  for all students. Another important aspect of being a reflective teacher is that you  may need to accept that something you believe to be right could indeed be wrong  Larrivee, 2000. These ideas are well summarized by Boody, 2008, p. 506 who  reports that a truly reflective teacher, is not only willing to talk, but to listen deeply,  to be open and relatively non-defensive, to consider the possibility that what she was  doingthinking was wrong or at least inadequate and then to act, even at the cost of  personal pain and change. This is not an easy but important option as part of good  and effective professional teaching practice. Moreover, reflection should not just be seen as a new technical skill that must  be learned in order to be considered a better teacher. Reflection should also  enable a moral and personal response to what happens in the classroom, creating  a culture in the classroom based on mutual respect, unconditional positive regard,  and understanding. Without such a value system, a large number of students may  experience a sense of isolation and lack of connectedness in school, since the teacher  focus remains on fixing the student, with very little time given to changing the  classroom culture where our students need to feel a sense of belonging.  In order to be truly reflective, Dewey had suggested teachers need to develop  three important attributes: openmindedness, a sense of responsibility and what  he called wholeheartedness Interestingly, research on open mindedness shows  that most people see themselves as far more open minded than others see them.  Open mindedness is an active mean to examine the many facets of one issue. A  teacher who is open-minded is likely to be receptive to new information, and others  viewpoints Garmon, 2005. Accordingly, teachers who lack open mindedness risk  either rejecting new information or interpreting it in ways that will be consistent with  their current views. The second attribute identified by Dewey is responsibility. These  teachers are deliberate in taking responsibility for their actions and consequences.  On occasions a teachers actions may be deemed troublesome or unacceptable by the  school. But being a reflective and responsible teacher, she will take responsibility for  heractions and be prepared to deal with the consequences. The third characteristic,  Dewey suggested that wholeheartedness acts as a fusion that like glue helps to 

UNDERSTANDING BELIEFS AND PROFESSIONAL PRACTICES 61 bind a teachers commitment to the two characteristics of openmindedness and  responsibility. Implications of these three attributes are discussed in greater detail  shortly.  WHY DEVELOP REFLECTIVE TEACHING? The use of reflective teaching allows teachers to make a significant shift from their  existing belief system. A teacher who reflects on her teaching frequently, is more  ready to realize when a change in her teaching is necessary and when such change  would improve the learning of all students, and increase her own satisfaction with  teaching. It becomes an intrinsically driven need to change practices, not initiated  by an outsider but realized and initiated by the teacher herself. It is therefore likely  to result in longer lasting change. Many teachers, including Tracy, make judgments  about their teaching based on what they had personally experienced during their  years of schooling Christensen, 2004. It is therefore possible that during these years  of modelling, Tracy also had frequently observed her teachers controlling disruptive  behaviour by sending a student like Tom, to the Principals office and accepted this  as an acceptable strategy for dealing with such students. When asked to include a  student like Tom in their classroom, teachers will naturally look to evidence from  their past experiences in support of either segregating or using alternate strategies  to manage the inappropriate student behaviours. Use of reflective practice may  allow Tracy to re-think her past experiences of teaching and learning and to reconceptualize her notions of effective teaching practice Christensen, 2004.  It is widely accepted that the incidence of behaviour problems in schools is  increasing and it remains one of the most stressful issues for teachers Daniels   Cole, 2010. Schools are generally responding by ensuring that teachers in their  schools undertake professional development in how to effectively address problem  Questions for reflection 1.	 Do you consider yourself to be  openminded? 2.	 Is being a responsible teacher  something you can be without  becoming overly responsible  for changing others?  3.	 Does Deweys concept of  wholehearted  bother  you?  Why?

CHAPTER 5 62 behaviors. This seems like a right step in addressing the issue. However, there is  one problem with it. Teachers may learn technical skills such as managing student  behaviour, creating engaging classrooms and keeping students on task. However  if the skills do not mesh with the personal beliefs of the teachers, it is less likely  that skills learnt during professional development will be sustained. According to  Larrivee, 2000, p. 294: When teachers become reflective practitioners, they move beyond a  knowledge base of discrete skills to a stage where they integrate and modify  skills to fit specific contexts, and eventually, to a point where the skills are  internalized enabling them to invent new strategies. Questions for reflection Reflect on a professional development  activity you undertook recently. Do  you think it merely provided technical  information or was it closely tied with  your belief system? Are you likely to  use what you learned during the PD  program? Why or why not?  To sum up: the use of reflective practices allows teachers to both challenge  then change existing beliefs, which is likely to result in their using better teaching  practices congruent with their beliefs. The change in beliefs thus promotes practices  that sustain a more positive culture in classrooms. Once a teacher has reached this  stage, then teaching new skills becomes much easier.  HOW CAN YOU BECOME A REFLECTIVE TEACHER?  As hinted at in the previous chapter, you cannot become a reflective teacher unless  you want to be one. There is no one way that a teacher becomes reflective. You will  find it useful to think about a reflective teacher as one who believes attitude, with  the Heart that being a reflective teacher is good for her teaching, cognitively knows  about reflective teaching with the Head and who practices with the Hand being  reflective. This is reminiscent of Pirsigs account of motorbike appreciation, utility  and maintenance p. 9, ch. 1. For the teacher on the educational road trip there are  ways and means of better enjoying the experience, better doing the work and staying 

UNDERSTANDING BELIEFS AND PROFESSIONAL PRACTICES 63 safe and sound. In other words, you need to have Head, Heart and Hands 3Hs of a  reflective teacher to teach like a reflective teacher.  One cannot become a complete reflective teacher unless you possess andor use  all three Hs. The first H i.e., Head of reflective teaching requires you to know what  reflective teaching is and why should you be a reflective teacher. This information  is already covered in the first part of the chapter. The second H Heart of the  reflective teaching requires that you have the necessary attributes open mindedness,  responsibility and wholeheartedness to teach effectively. These three attributes are  like three pillars that form the foundation for becoming a reflective teacher. If any  of the three pillars in this construction are weak, the foundation will not be able to  sustain the use of reflective teaching practices. These pillars are explained more  fully in the next section. Openmindedness This is an attribute that demonstrates you are open to new ideas and constructive  criticism about the way you teach. It also means that you believe that teaching in  your class could be improved and such an improvement will make the classroom a  much better place for all students including Tom and a satisfying experience for you.  To quote Grant and Zeichner p. 104: Being a reflective teacher means that you keep an open mind about the content,  methods, and procedures used in your classroom. You constantly re-evaluate  their worth in relation to students currently enrolled and to the circumstances.  You not only ask why things are the way they are, but also, how they can be  made better. The reflective teacher understands that one of the reasons Tom is misbehaving, could  be because he has not yet found a teacher who understands his version of the story.  The reflective teacher also understands that giving voice to students, listening to  them and asking them questions about her teaching, could lead to better solutions  to many problems the class is facing. The teacher is also willing to learn from other  teachers, parents, and students in her class and also students in other classes.  Responsibility Teaching is a moral and ethical responsibility Grant  Zeichner, 1984. The  decisions we make about what we teach, how we teach and what resources we use  to teach will have a profound impact on what students learn and what they do in the  school and outside the school. For example, if Tracy believes in promoting racial  harmony in the class, she will mix students of diverse racial background to work in  small groups. The group will understand that their success is interdependent on how  well they perform as a group, rather than individually within the group. She will also  use resources e.g., text books, that show the value of appreciating diverse racial 

CHAPTER 5 64 backgrounds. On the other hand, if she does not believe in racial harmony, she will  pay little attention to how students are grouped and may choose resources that fail  to promote the idea of racial harmony e,g., choosing a book where children of only  one race are represented.  Another way of being morally and ethically responsible lies with the way a  teacher interacts with students. For example, she would find time to play with Tom  in the playground, would ask questions and provide positive feedback to him, would  provide leadership opportunities to him e.g., taking attendance roll, library monitor.  These interactions are strong signals to everyone in the class that Tracy values Tom  for the things he can do well. It must be emphasized here that it is not easy for  most teachers to find good qualities in a student who has often been identified as  a problem behaviour child. A childs disruptive behaviour often clouds all current  actions and future reactions of a teacher. The child is only seen as the behaviour  problems child rather than a child with lots of abilities and strengths.  Wholeheartedness Wholeheartedness is the glue that binds open-mindedness and responsibility. A  teacher who lacks this attribute is someone who says one thing and does another  thing. Think of a teacher, who often says I believe in social equity, that all students  should be given an equal chance to succeed and we should never use punishment.  However, you know this is the teacher with whom Tom spent his last year. Toms  report does not indicate that he was given any chances to succeed. On the contrary, his  Questions for reflection Is your teaching philosophy congruent  with your teaching practice? ,This  might be a good time to write your  own  teaching  philosophy.  Most  importantly, include students like Tom  in your statement. Where do they fit?  How do you see such students being  taught? Why do you think they should  be taught this way?  Then  reflect  on  your  teaching  practices  are they consistent with  what you wrote or believe in? If  theres a mismatch between what  you believe and what you do, then it  is time for you to either re-write your  teaching philosophy or change your  teaching practices.

UNDERSTANDING BELIEFS AND PROFESSIONAL PRACTICES 65 report states that he has been sent to principals room many times for inappropriate  behaviours. You also saw this teacher singling out Tom for an incident in the  playground, for which he was not responsible. Another classical example of lack  of wholeheartedness is when teachers say they love and enjoy teaching all children.  What they really mean is not all kids but some kids who behave well or who are  highly compliant Grant  Zeichner, 1984.  It is possible that you are already doing many things that a reflective teacher  would do. This section presents a more systematic way of how you can teach like a  reflective teacher. We are aware that teachers have limited time and to teach like a  reflective teacher could be seen as an added responsibility. But as Scheffler 1968:  p. 11 put it: Justification for reflection is not  simply a matter of minimal necessity. It  is rather a matter of desirability, and a thing may be desirable, not because  it is something that we could not do without, but because it transforms and  enhances the quality of what we do and how we live. For those of us who are used to teaching in traditional ways, becoming a reflective  practitioner is going to be challenging. If you have decided to teach as a reflective  teacher, be prepared that initially the journey may not be as smooth as you might  be expecting, but it will be highly rewarding in the end. To practice as a reflective  teacher and create a positive learning environment for all students, including Tom,  you need to be reflective at two levels. Firstly, share your experiences in being  reflective with others  question what you are doing to improve on past practices.  Secondly, engage your students in evaluations of what they need, and how it might  best be achieved. Level One: Evaluating and Changing Self-Practices  Asking appropriate questions to evaluate what is happening in your class, is  fundamental to the art and craft of reflective teaching. Teachers who never question  their goals and the values that guide their work, the context in which they teach, or  never examine their assumptions, do not do justice to their students or to themselves  Zeichner  Liston, 1996. Asking questions about your teaching practice will allow  you to grow and become a better teacher. An encouraging thought: One indicator  of whether you are an effective teacher would suggest that disruptive behaviours  become minimal.  A model that may be helpful: SCREAM If you need a structure to help in becoming a more effective teacher, you may  find the following of use: it is but one way to help you conceptualize your teaching  practice, particularly with younger students, or those who struggle to organize  themselves or be self-motivated. An effective teacher is sometimes described  as a SCREAM teacher Mastropieri  Scruggs, 2010. Yes, a SCREAM teacher!  SCREAM teaching is characterized by 

CHAPTER 5 66 Structure establishing what will be taught, with clear objectives,  Clarity use of examples to clarify difficult concepts,  Redundancy targeted practice until all students have understood what needs to  be mastered,  Enthusiasm love teaching the subject and that is quite evident in the way you  teach, Appropriate rate know the learning levels of your individual students and ensure  that you do not rush through the topics nor spend too much time so that it becomes  boring, and Maximised Engagement keep the whole class engaged by effective questioning  and feedback, and by placing them in small co-operative groups.  The survey below may be useful: Self rate yourself on each of the items and then  ask your students to rate you on each item. Compare results to see if there are any  discrepancies. I highly recommend that you do this exercise so that your students  are not identifiable by their responses. You can also use your peers to evaluate your  teaching practicestyle. Read each question carefully  then circle a response that best describes the way  your teacher Mr or Mrs X teaches. Do you know each day what you will be learning? Always Sometimes Never Do you know at the beginning of a lesson what you will learn by  the time the lesson is finished? Always Sometimes Never Does your teacher explain all the difficult ideas so that you  understand the topic completely? Always Sometimes Never Does your teacher use examples to explain what is difficult? Always Sometimes Never  Do you get enough opportunity to learn about what is difficult in  class? Always Sometimes Never Does your teacher allow all students to practice when heshe has  introduced a new topic, so that you understand it well? Always Sometimes Never Does your teacher enjoy teaching? Always Sometimes Never Does your teacher make learning fun? Always Sometimes Never

UNDERSTANDING BELIEFS AND PROFESSIONAL PRACTICES 67 Do you think your teacher looks forward to teaching your class  when you return to school after holidays? Always Sometimes Never Do you think your teacher spends enough time on each topic in  the class neither too fast nor too slow? Always Sometimes Never Does your teacher ask questions to understand the learning level  of all students? Always Sometimes Never Do you feel comfortable asking questions about something you  are not sure of? Always Sometimes Never Do all students get an opportunity to respond to the questions  asked? Always Sometimes Never Do you get sufficient feedback on your work? Always Sometimes Never Do you get sufficient positive attention from your teacher? Always Sometimes Never Questions for reflection Spend some time to self-rate yourself  on the survey. Do you have many  items where your rating is never? If  yes, what do you plan to do about it?  Do you think your students responses  will match your responses? How  confident are you about it? Self-evaluation, feedback from your peers and from students should provide you  with some idea of what you need to do to make your teaching more effective. I  recommend that you do such evaluation of your teaching at least twice in a year: at  the end of the first teaching term around 3 months after the beginning of academic  year and at the beginning of the last teaching term around 34 months before the 

CHAPTER 5 68 end of academic year. The first survey will tell you something about your teaching  and what needs to be improved. You could use the survey information to change  the way you teach. The second survey will tell you whether what you changed has  made any difference to the way you are teaching now. If you feel confident, you  can ask your students about how best you can improve one of the aspects where  you scored poorly in the survey. You may be surprised with some of the ideas that  may provide real improvements to your teaching. The process of evaluating your  teaching practice may do two things: first, it is likely to make your classroom more  engaging for all students and second, send a strong message to your students that  you value their feedback.  Level Two: Using Evidence-Based Practices to Change the Classroom Culture The survey provided above may assist you in determining if you are teaching well.  While it is an important tool for creating a more conducive environment for all, you  may face situations or incidents e.g., Tom tearing up worksheets that still occur  despite you being a SCREAM teacher.  We suggest that reflective practice and evidence-based practice should be used  simultaneously to improve your classroom culture and to deal with such incidents.  Applying evidence-based practice EBP requires educators to be aware of the best  available, current, valid, and relevant evidence, so that they translate that research  into something meaningful for their classroom situation Bannigan,  Moores,  2009. The aim of EBP is to help teachers to identify and then cease using ineffective  practices, in preference for proven effective ones McCuskey, 2004. Many educators  continue to use practices entirely reliant upon custom and practice, simply using  anecdotal or familiar old practices rather than using research evidence to guide their  educational decisions.  When asked why they teach in one particular way, many educators respond  by saying that they do it intuitively. One of the fundamental problems with being  intuitive is that intuition is not always right and should not be the only guide for  the practices of educators Doust  Del Mar, 2004. Bannigan and Moores 2009  have described a useful model that integrates reflective practice and evidencebased practice. We believe use of this model enables educators to solve educational  problems more effectively. The model consists of three stages: What? So what?  and Now what? A description of these three stages is presented below. STAGE 1: WHAT? The process of reflective practice begins with a challenging or a disturbing event.  It is an experience that leads educators to being unsettled, disquieted or angry. It  requires educators to revisit the incident to make better sense of it. An example  of such an event could be: an unexpected student reaction to a task e.g., Tom 

UNDERSTANDING BELIEFS AND PROFESSIONAL PRACTICES 69 tearing his worksheets, a comment from a parent that may challenge attitudes and  beliefs, or an unsettling comment about your educational practice by one of your  colleagues or your school principal. One of the fundamental tasks at this stage  requires educators to describe the event as objectively as possible. This set of needs  to be addressed in stage 1 relates directly to the management of problem ownership  as described in Chapters 3 and 4. There is a danger that a teacher will only be  concerned with her own perspective and feelings when analysing what happened.  You need to be aware of such feelings and should avoid dwelling on emotional  responses when describing the event. Ideally, it should be done when you have had  sufficient time to allow emotions to settle, and that then you can hope to be more  objective in describing the event. When an event is examined honestly it should not  only identify how the situation has affected you but also reflect on how you may  have contributed to the situation. Note this is focussed on what happened  asking  why can only be considered after the details AND emotions have been considered  or listened to.  STAGE 2: SO WHAT? The second stage of the model suggests the teacher analyse the incident to understand  why the incident happened, what she could have done differently, and what she has  learnt from it. It is an important adjunct here to note that one believes such a critical  analysis of the incident and a resultant change in teaching practice is possible,  and, would enable her to be a better teacher in the future. This aspect of analysis  involves reflection on the rationale for her actions. This is the most significant aspect  of the reflective process. Why did the teacher decide to deal with the incident in  one way rather than another? What relevant or potentially inappropriate source of  information did she use in making the decision to act as she did? Unfortunately,  some teachers make decisions based on knowledge derived solely from their past  experience, without looking for alternate sources of knowledge of best practice.  Boud and Walker 1998 describe this as celebrating nave experiences. Teachers  should avoid being so self-directed that the basis of their decisions for action rests  entirely on their own experiences.  Reflective teachers look beyond the immediate and search for knowledge that  could explain what happens in their classrooms. They also look for proactive  practices that might prevent such incidents and that also offer alternatives for  dealing with them more effectively in the future. This essentially involves searching  for evidence-based practices EBP  a corner stone in the construction of being a  reflective teacher. Searching for new knowledge in relation to a particular incident is  not always easy. This book provides some insights into current best practice, but we  also know that knowledge evolves and what is best practice today may not be the best  practice tomorrow. Publications of research in online format do provide alternative  options to some extent, but access to a wide variety of educational journals is still a 

CHAPTER 5 70 challenge. Schools and educational departments need to be encouraged to subscribe  to the most widely known educational journals e.g., Intervention in Clinic and  Schools, to assist staff to keep up to date with the most recent knowledge.  Deciding to utilize new knowledge into teaching practices can be achieved in  several ways: Sharing such knowledge with your colleagues allows you to clarify  what you have understood about it; Ask a colleague to observe you using that new  knowledgepractice, with honest feedback on both its application and how well it  works. You can also attend professional development programs to learn how to  apply the strategies you have read about, to gain additional confidence in making  changes that might improve your teaching practice.  STAGE 3: NOW WHAT? Once you have critically analysed the incident using an evidence-based practice  framework, you need to know whether or not your practices are consistent with  the best practices. A decision has to be made about your future actions. You may  decide to continue past practices since they retain significant supportive evidence of  their efficacy. Alternatively, you may decide to change the way you have previously  dealt with a similar situation like removing Tom from the room after tearing up his  workbook, or alternatively listen to his frustrations, then find a way to fix his book,  and, reflect with him about preventative strategies to address the incident before it  occurs e.g. Tom using a signal card asking for help when feeling frustrated.  In a majority of cases when dealing with problem behaviour, a change in existing  teaching practice is both helpful and imperative, in response to such questions as: Is  Questions for reflection You read about the three Hs of  reflective teaching. Reflecting on  these, do you think you have the  head, heart and hands of a reflective  teacher? Even if weak in any one of  the three areas  how do you plan  to make the foundation of reflective  teaching stronger? 

UNDERSTANDING BELIEFS AND PROFESSIONAL PRACTICES 71 what I have been doing working?: Am I convinced that I should make a change in  the way I teach? What changes are likely to make a difference? If you begin to make  changes half heartedly, not convinced you should, it is unlikely that you will be  able to sustain the new behaviour. Sometimes, maintaining a routine past practice is  easier than trying an innovative idea. But an effective change in practice at this stage  can occur if you realize that: 1. your current practice is not perfect, 2. research has  shown better ways of dealing with the situation, and 3. that translating that research  into practice may be tough but necessary for creating a positive learning environment  for all the students in your classroom. And the bonus? a much celebrated personal  satisfaction in you being more able to enjoy your chosen teaching profession. 
CHAPTER 6 POSITIVE LEARNING Translating Research into Practice OVERVIEW AND KEY CONSTRUCTS  Evidence-based teaching  Motivation and engagement  Need to belong  Choice theory in the classroom  Resilience in the classroom  Effective teaching strategies Meet the Cast Main Characters: Liam  parent of a student at odds with the school due to behavioural issues  of his son. Mr. Fred  A smart principal. Cynthia  a sceptic teacher Minor Characters: Tom  a student with behaviour problems Mr. Jones  teacher in Freds school. In this chapter we return to the teaching road trip and a narrative to explore a range  of issues pertaining to the positive learning environment. One parent wanting to  contribute to an engaging classroom is Liam, who has just arrived at the school. As  he walks into the schoolyard, the serious lack of discipline is clearly a big issue.  Students in the playground are using unacceptable language. He walks across the  corridor only to hear Mr Jones, Grade 5 teacher, shouting for students to be quiet.  But Liam is on his way to the principals Fred Stone office, and he looks stressed.  The reason he is here is because his son was suspended from the school for verbally  abusing his teacher, Mr. Jones!  After brief but congenial introductions, the conversation speedily turns to the  reason Liam is talking with Fred the principal: his sons behaviour. Initially, blame  lingers in the air about who is responsible, but it is soon evident that Fred is solution 

CHAPTER 6 74 focused, and very aware that this is not a matter of blame, but of people pulling  together cooperatively. Fred is interested in finding out ways Liam can work with  the school to improve his sons behaviour. Fred acknowledges that the school is  going through a tough phase and he unapologetically asks Liam for his patience  and support. He is clearly committed to building cooperation to make this school a  better place for all. Fred has been head hunted and has been transferred to the school,  as he has been successful in the past in transforming school cultures. The schools  culture and standing in the community had recently tumbled because of significant  discipline issues. Many parents have withdrawn their children and sent them to other  schools. While the names have been changed, the real school on which this story is based  does exist and it actually lost over 50 of its students in less than 2 years. There are  many more similar stories. With the school on the verge of closing, with a worsening  reputation and an increasingly dysfunctional school climate, most members of staff  were highly stressed. Fred realized that he had to look for resources outside the  school to improve the situation. Experience had taught him that the whole school  culture needed to change. School staff needed to be supported in regenerating a  positive learning culture supported by constructive discipline.  Top down authoritarian control was not Freds way. It would only last as long  as the authority was there. And that was what had happened in this school: an  authoritarian principal followed by a laissez-faire one who had previously been  considered highly successful in a small specialist and highly affluent private school.  Unfortunately, the current school had suffered a collapse in management and, as  many members of the local community agreed, effective school leadership was  missing. Fred believed that the only enduring way forward would be if the teachers  and community gained a renewed sense of ownership and empowerment over the  problems facing the school.  Fred was under no illusions as to the magnitude of the task. He ascertained that  it would need substantial outside support if he were to truly engage his teachers and  parents in reviewing and implementing effective change. Fred had been inspired by  some of the research and by his mentors, when he had completed his masters degree  in Education a few years ago, so he contacted the Faculty of Education at his Alma  Mater, to find out what support, particularly by way of professional development,  they could provide.  The rest of this chapter tells the story of this change, involving professional  and organizational development. It offers an account of how support and research  evidence can facilitate change in a struggling school such as Freds, to create a  more engaging, inclusive school environment. Also, without the conviction and  commitment of the principal, and wholehearted support from the department of  education, change is unlikely to happen. Fred remained aware that some teachers  were entrenched in their approaches to teaching and anticipated resistance for what 

POSITIVE LEARNING 75 he hoped to achieve. Fred was certain he needed to get alongside staff, earning their  confidence and trust by showing them positive unconditional regard and acceptance,  meeting them in the here and now of day-to-day work.  Many members of staff were very stressed, and to some degree most had established  a range of self-defence behaviours against being blamed and abused. Clearly outside  support would be necessary if teachers were to be helped to face the need for change.  Outsiders coming in would need to gain teachers acceptance and approval before  any application of research-based interventions discussed in this chapter would have  any acceptance, no matter how well validated. Furthermore, these principles are not  only relevant for dysfunctional schools; understanding them allows schools that do  not have any significant problems with behaviour, to strengthen environments so  that discipline will not be an issue in the future. Such principles are in our opinion  practical fundamentals that both service and reinforce the readiness for members of  the organization to engage in and contribute to a positive school community. In the previous chapter we discussed how teachers could use reflective practices  to create positive learning environments for all students. To learn to be reflective  is not an easy task that merely requires following a simple prescription. Fred will  have to show that he also is a reflective practitioner if he is to be successful in  encouraging and supporting other teachers in learning to become reflective and  thinking practitioners.  The evidence base is important: to be an effective reflective teacher one should  not accept any theory or research on its face value. Rather one should carefully try  out new practices in the classroom and then make a judgment  whether to adopt  the practice or not, based on sound practice evaluation principles. Any judgment  to accept or reject a research finding or theory should be made after systematic  implementation and careful evaluation. Systematic implementation means that a  teacher makes her best efforts to apply the research or theory in its entirety.  Consider Cynthia. She has been teaching in Freds school for the last five years  and she is frustrated with Toms behaviour. She says that she has tried everything but  Tom continues to be a huge discipline issue. She wants him permanently excluded  from the school. She has just completed some professional development and learnt  about a new theory of dealing with student disruption. She tries out the new theory,  implements it for a short time and notices that Toms behaviour does not improve.  Discouraged, she blames the theory and says it was a waste of her time. A closer look  at what she did however might well show that she failed to apply the theory as the  researchers intended when they designed the interventions, and she may well have  given up prematurely. Lets consider a parallel example. A patient is suffering from a bacterial infection.  The patient has been prescribed 15 antibiotic tablets and is asked to take one tablet  three times a day for five days. The patient takes the medicine as prescribed for the  first three days. He notes a significant improvement in the symptoms and decides to 

CHAPTER 6 76 stop taking the medicines. The symptoms reappear after five days. The patient then  starts taking the left over medicine and finds that the symptoms do not improve. In  this example it would be understandable for the patient to blame the medicine or  the medical practitioner, even though we know that he did not take the medicine as  prescribed. Blaming the medicine or the doctor is not only erroneous; it is unlikely  to improve the symptoms!  A careful appraisal means that when we evaluate the effect of an application of  a new theory in our class, we must have a sound understanding of the underlying  theory and evidence on which the theory is based. Moreover, we should know  what we can realistically expect to change as a result of its implementation. In  Cynthias case she wanted to see an improvement in Toms behaviour, tearing up  work sheets. She needed to have realistic expectations of what change she can  expect, for example as to whether the behaviour of tearing paper might disappear  immediately or gradually.  This chapter is based on a well-known adage that the best time to implement  behavioural strategies is when there is no behaviour problem. It is most effective to  be proactive and preventative rather than reactive, in regard to disruptive behaviours.  Moreover, such strategies allow us to create an environment where everyone enjoys  learning and so then there is no need for our students to misbehave, no need for  controlling behaviour. It makes for well-being and happiness all round. The key  principles presented in this chapter have been well validated by a wide body of  research Dev, 1997; Glasser, 2007; Klem  Connell, 2004; Monahan et. al., 2010.  Translation of these principles into evidence-based classroom practices is the most  assured way of creating positive learning environments for all students. Such  environments innately encourage students to constructively and responsibly learn  cooperatively, naturally minimizing disruptive or destructive anti-social activities. PRINCIPLE 1: MOTIVATION AND ENGAGEMENT It is well established that motivation and engagement are essential ingredients for  effective learning. Motivation offers a cogent explanation for behaviour Guay  et al., 2010. There is an extensive body of research that shows that students when  highly motivated are less likely to drop out, perform better academically, are better  adjusted to school, are more likely to feel confident about their ability to learn new  material, and behave better in the classroom Dev, 1997; Guay et al., 2010; Lai, 2011;  Lumsden, 1994. We also know that keeping all students motivated and engaged can  be challenging for many teachers. However, there are strategies that teachers can  learn to understand and use to enhance student motivation and ultimately student  engagement. Prior to learning about what can be done to improve student motivation,  we do well to understand why some students have poor motivation.  Student motivation can be placed in two categories: extrinsic and intrinsic  motivation. Extrinsically motivated students engage in a task purely to earn rewards  or to avoid punishment Dev, 1997. These rewards could range from students getting 

POSITIVE LEARNING 77 stickers, candies or public recognition. Example of a punishment could be privileges  being taken away from students, such as asking a student to stay in the class during  recess to complete the work that he or she has not completed. Intrinsically motivated  students engage in a task because they are motivated from within to do an activity.  They engage in a task because they like it, they are curious about doing it, and  enjoy the act of doing it. Intrinsically motivated students typically have a greater  degree of interest in the task. They will engage in the task because they are excited  by its challenging nature Dev, 1997. Students who are intrinsically motivated are  likely to do better academically and socially when compared to students who are  extrinsically motivated. Some researchers have even argued against using extrinsic  motivation as it can lower student achievement and commitment to the task, when  there are no rewards or contingencies in place Brooks, Freburger,  Grothreer,  1998; Dev, 1997. It has also been argued that while extrinsic motivation can sustain  or improve productivity in the short term, it reduces the chance that the task will be  sustained in future Brooks et al., 1998.  A student, who is extrinsically motivated, performs an activity because he or she  expects a reward at the completion of the activity, rather than experience a specific  sense of satisfaction for the act of doing the task. Clearly intrinsic motivation is to  be preferred over extrinsic motivation. However, motivating someone intrinsically  is no easy task. As educators, we do well to identify those activities in which all  students would like to intrinsically engage and succeed. Cynthias interaction with  Tom so far, has been negative. Cynthia, in one way, might demonstrate that she is  genuinely interested in working with Tom by drawing upon interests that motivate  him. This requires sharing time with Tom that focuses on his interests, activities and  routines. She might also find it useful to spend time with his parents and friends in  order to get a better picture of Toms interests, preferences and abilities. Setting up and creating motivating and engaging tasks requires purposeful and  careful planning for each student. Understanding all our students requires focused  Questions for reflection Do you know the interests of the  majority of your students most  importantly a student like Tom? Do  you have a profile of what motivates  each student and what does each  student want to be when he or she  grows up?  If yes, how do you use  this information in your teaching? If  not, how would you like to gather this  information and use it when teaching?

CHAPTER 6 78 effort. This is best done early in the school term so that the majority of classroom  activities can be linked to students interests and routines, setting up good patterns  and habits from the very beginning rather than having to modify and remediate.  Teachers who are most successful in creating engaging classrooms are those who  learn about their students really well right from the start. These teachers quickly come  to appreciate the individual psychological and intellectual needs of their students.  They take an interest in their students subculture. They familiarize themselves with  the movies and TV programs that their students watch, the sport their students play,  and how they spend their weekends and holidays. Such information offers invaluable  basics for a teacher to use in creating a motivating and engaging classroom.  How well do you typically go about creating engaging classrooms? You may find it  useful at this stage to rate yourself on a scale from 1 to 10  where 1 stands for never  and 10 stands for always.  In my class, students a.	 participate in interesting activities? b.	succeed rather than fail? c.	 work co-operatively alongside their peers?  d.	have choices and some degree of autonomy? and class activities are built upon  what students, e.	 already know, and  f.	 can relate to in real life.  If you find there are some areas where you or your students would rate you  below 5, then you should seriously think about what you can do to improve your  ratings and eventually your teaching.  While creating an interesting activity sounds simple, as teachers we all know it  is by no means an easy task to achieve day in, day out. It requires teachers to design  activities which not only motivate one student, but the majority of the students in a  class. Back to Cynthia: she has spoken to Tom and she knows that Tom likes watching  Pokmon cartoons. He also has a big collection of Pokmon cards. Other students  in the class also have some interest in Pokmons. Cynthia can use this information  about her students and Tom to design numeracy and literacy lesson plans around  Pokmon characters. Tom, in fact, could actively help the teacher with the teaching  activities. Interesting activities could also be designed by using a mystery approach.  Students are presented with contradictory information and they have to solve the  mystery to find the right answer. An example of such an activity would be when  a teacher describes a mystery creature by presenting limited information about an  animal e.g., an extinct species and then students have to find out what the animal  is, based on the information given by the teacher and by undertaking more research.  This activity not only enhances student motivation, it also encourages co-operation  amongst students to solve the mystery. The difficulty of the task could be increased  or decreased based on the grade level or abilities of students. 

POSITIVE LEARNING 79 The second fundamental consideration in creating a motivation centred classroom  is to ensure that all students, including those who may have a disability, have a  chance to succeed in the task. Sometimes we design tasks that are too easy for  some and too difficult for other students. The task should engage all students and  ensure they are adequately challenged but at the same time, they can succeed.  This requires us to think of a variety of activities for each lesson. Students who  are highly competent can do advanced activities. Low ability students, on the other  hand, need to do activities appropriate for their capability level. Advanced primary  grade students in the above example could be asked to do research on reasons for  extinction of dinosaurs. Low ability students, on the other hand, could draw their  favourite dinosaur and describe two main characteristics of it. By the way, dont  forget that children have wonderful ideas and imaginations, so we need to encourage  them to suggest appropriate activities! The third consideration relates to students working in small groups in a cooperative learning environment. Children learn best when they have opportunities  to clarify their questions, interact with others, and explain their understanding  to others. Systematically designed co-operative learning activities enable the  achievement of all three. In a co-operative learning environment, each student is  responsible for his or her learning as well as the learning of other group members.  The teacher has an important role, to ensure that all groups are working well  and that each group has access to all the resources necessary to participate in the  learning activities. Most significantly, co-operative groups allow each member to  benefit from sharing their understanding of the topic with their group and with the  whole class.  Allowing students to make choices and therefore act with some degree of  autonomy in class activities, represent good strategies that will enhance student  participation. Students can be given choices in the way they receive information about  a new concept, and also equally importantly, in the way they can demonstrate their  learning. For example, students could be given a choice to find out the reasons for the  extinction of dinosaurs by reading about the topic in books, researching it over the  Internet, or by watching a documentary. They can demonstrate their understanding  of the concepts by writing an essay, doing a role-play, drawing an extinct jungle  or through an oral presentation. Students could also be given a choice of working  independently, with one other student or in small groups. While this requires a bit of  planning from the teacher, the rewards in terms of student participation are likely to  make it very worthwhile. The last consideration in making classrooms engaging requires us to relate  teaching to the real life events of our students. Activities that build around daily  routines at home and community provide students with an opportunity to apply their  learning to real life. Practicality is important for most of us. We do well to remember  that students are more motivated to learn about concepts that allow them to solve  day-to-day problems. 

CHAPTER 6 80 PRINCIPLE 2: NEED TO BELONG In taking over the school, Fred soon realised that the majority of students in school  were feeling disconnected from any sense of community, that is, they lacked a sense  of belonging. The students responses to a school survey indicated that they did  not like their teachers, had limited interest in attending the school, and found the  schoolwork boring. These are the classical signs of disconnection and disaffection  Klem  Connell, 2004; Monahan, Oesterle,  Hawkins, 2010. Research indicates  that around 40 to 60 of high school students report being disconnected from  school Klem  Connell, 2004. It also shows that students who feel well connected  to schools manifest fewer behavioural problems, have better academic outcomes,  are committed to learning, and complete their homework. Benefits from being  connected to school also include a reduced tendency to engage in violent and  delinquent behaviours, drug and alcohol abuse, and a reduced likelihood to engage  in inappropriate sexual activity at an early age Klem  Connell, 2004; Monahan,  Oesterle,  Hawkins, 2010.  A feedback loop exists between school connectedness and disruptive behaviour  Monahan et al., 2010, p. 4: Low school connectedness increases the chance  that students develop conduct problems, which further lowers a sense of school  connectedness, which in turn leads to more conduct problems. This gives Fred  a clear perspective on understanding what is driving problems related to pupil  behaviour at his school, and why an authoritarian system is unlikely to offer a longterm constructive solution. The question is, what can Fred do to enhance student  connectedness to his school? Looking at the attributes and learning of schools with high degrees of connectedness  provided invaluable directions for Fred. These included the following attributes  Klem  Connell, 2004; Monahan et al., 2010 against which we encourage you to  rate your school on a scale of 1not at all  10 always: these include  high academic standards for all students,   a relationship between educators and students which is positive and respectful,  an environment that is safe both emotionally and physically,   positive and proactive classroom management strategies are used,   tolerant discipline policies are used,  co-operative learning activities are used prominently.  When translating this research into practice in his school, Fred knew he would  need to ensure that all students be set appropriate academic standards National  Research Council and Institute of Medicine, 2004. He instigated a policy where  students with similar abilities were not grouped together, but rather distributed  heterogeneously across small groups. Students who are not doing well academically  were thus provided with support to enhance their academic achievement, while  brighter students consolidated their understanding from teaching, something  we as teachers all regularly experience. Learning activities focused on students 

POSITIVE LEARNING 81 working co-operatively in their small groups foster mutual respect, and social  responsibility.  Fred went on to ensure that the school promoted learning activities closely tied to  the lives of students, with practical opportunities for hands-on activities associated  with learning new and different concepts. Most importantly, each student was  given an adviser with whom they were encouraged to talk over any problems or  frustrations in or out of school. These pastoral carers were selected on the basis of  being good listeners, supported by training level 1 counselling skills that include  effective listening and problem solving. It was recognised as essential for these to  have a capacity to build ethically responsible relationships of unconditional positive  regard, and trust, so students could safely share personal stories and frustrations and  where confidentiality was assured. Students who are well accepted by their peers and have close friends in school are  less likely to get disconnected from school. On other hand, students who are harassed  and bullied by their peers would find it difficult to connect to school. Having parents  who value education and are actively involved in their education, and close friends  in the school cumulatively act as strong buffers against school disconnectedness.  In order to translate this research into practice, Fred decided to organize informal  monthly meetings with parents. This was an important step toward re-instigating  new life into the organization of the school as a learning community. Fred saw this as an effective way of also helping parents to feel connected to the  school. He knew that students generally do not form a connection to a school to  which parents remained disconnected. Teachers, including Cynthia, collected email  contacts of all parents in the school. All teachers agreed that frequent interactions  with parents about general class activities were necessary. Some teachers agreed to  send out fortnightly emails to parents of all the children enrolled in their classes,  keeping them informed about what and how their children were doing well in the  school.  PRINCIPLE 3: CHOICE THEORY IN THE CLASSROOM How often are we teachers frustrated by students who will not do the work we would  like them to do in the way we would like them to do it? This was a huge problem in  Freds school. Teachers complained that when a student was asked to comply, he or  she inevitably became a discipline problem. Understanding and implementing choice  theory as a basis for structured intervention Glasser, 2007 was an important facet  Fred introduced to deal with these issues and became a more generalised approach  to school behaviour. Choice theory gives a constructive framework and techniques  for dealing with such behaviours, thus avoiding significant discipline issues.  School communities are typically made up of disparate groups of people thrown  together by geography and common needs: having the best environment to allow  their children to learn to live well. However, a large number of people dont always  naturally get along with one another to the extent they would really like. It requires 

CHAPTER 6 82 some time and effort to build a coherent social community. But fundamental to such  an effort is the need for a substantive well-validated theoretical framework to guide  the building of a positive culture.  Choice theory offers just such a basis for understanding why we get along better  with some and not with others. People have a tendency to want to see others conform  to their own particular way of thinking. We cope with others who are different by  exercising what Glasser calls, seven deadly habits: these are, criticizing, blaming,  complaining, nagging, threatening, punishing, bribing, in order to control. While  such strategies might give us a sense that we win in the long term, Glasser suggests  they can all be quite destructive of relationships and wellbeing.  If we want to build a constructive community around ourselves, we need to stop  using the deadly self defeating habits and replace them with what Glasser tells us are  the seven positive and caring habits: supporting, encouraging, listening, accepting,  trusting, respecting, and negotiating differences. The act of choosing appropriate  ways of dealing with a conflicting situation is the key to choice theory. It is important  to understand that the seven deadly habits are not communicated only by the words  that we use, but also by actions and non-verbal modes of communication e.g.,  frowning, ignoring.  Choice theory applies to all people, including teachers and students. Teachers can  benefit considerably by becoming aware of the seven deadly habits when interacting  with their students and colleagues. Students also do well if they learn to treat other  peers with respect by using caring habits when interacting with them. The golden rule  of choice theory is that I am going to treat you the way I would want to be treated,  whether you treat me this way or not. Teachers can make significant changes if they  model and encourage the alternatives throughout each school day.   Another direct application of choice theory in the classroom is to introduce a  competence-based approach to the curriculum for all students. Students come to  dislike school if they expect they are going to fail in a subject or get very poor  grades. Choice theory suggests how this situation must change. If we know that a  student will either fail in the subject or get very poor grades, then this is something  that needs to be addressed early. Sometimes the task is too difficult for the student  or he or she may not have mastered it before an exam. Scores in the exam would be  poor. This typically results in alienation from and rejection of the school including  peers and the teacher by the student. Such rejection is likely to be displayed through  unacceptable behaviours.  In a school that uses choice theory, students are challenged by asking them to do  a task that is neither too easy nor too difficult; they are also supported to meet the  challenge. Students try their best to achieve beyond mere competence. Some teachers  would argue that not all students can do competent work. Glasser, however, would  argue that all students can do competent work or even better, if they are told that  nothing less will be accepted. Most importantly, students are told that they will be  provided with all the necessary support for them to be successful at performing a  challenging task. The extra support could mean extra time in completing the task 

POSITIVE LEARNING 83 or remedial support on an academic task. It could also mean moreover, setting up a  modified curriculum that is based on thinking skills rather than on rote memorization,  and constructive notions of deep learning. The theory and the implications of this approach for schools can be seen clearly  in Glassers 2007 p.? own words:  I realize that many teachers do not believe such a school where choice theory  could be used would be possible with the students they are asked to teach,  many of whom seem to have given up trying. They do not realize that low  grades and external control have, over a long period of time, caused many  dropouts. But when these obstacles are removed and all the students begin to  do competent work, this positive effort can lead beyond school to raising the  expectations and the effort of the whole community. Fred decided to apply choice theory school wide. All teachers in his school were  provided with professional development and subsequent consultancy support on  choice theory, with special assistance for implementing it at the classroom level.  Students were also given sessions and workshops on choice theory, encouraging  them to apply it in their day-to-day interactions with their peers and teachers. The  golden rule I will treat you the way I would like to be treated is not just something  written on the school walls: it was taught through modelling top down, by the  Principal, teachers, class activities and role plays.  PRINCIPLE 4: RESILIENCE IN THE CLASSROOM Children will often face situations and experiences they will find difficult to cope  with and many but not all survive. Such situations might include parental abuse  or peer abuse. An example of such a situation within a school could be bullying  in the playground by one or more students. These incidents may not come to the  notice of schoolteachers and a student may continue to suffer. Most schools have  anti bullying policies to protect children. However, such situations in and outside the  class cannot be completely eradicated. One personal quality that enables students  to deal effectively with such situations is by developing resilience. Resilience is  defined as the ability to bounce back. It is the process of, capacity for, or outcome  of successful adaptation despite challenging or threatening circumstances Masten   Coatsworth, 1998.  Harvey and Delfabbro 2004 stress that significant risk factors within schools  and outside schools will continue to exist and it is nave to expect that children can be  shielded completely from the pressure and situations previously described. In order  for resilience to develop, a person must first be exposed to an adverse situation and  risk, rather than being protected from the adverse situation. Resilience is considered  an active process and people who are successful in being resilient are those who  can manipulate their environments and thus become insulated against the negative  effects of the adverse events Harvey  Delfabro, 2004.

CHAPTER 6 84 An examination of research Harvey  Delfabro, 2004; Masten  Coatsworth,  1998; NCH, 2007 suggests that there are a wide variety of factors within child,  family and the community that contribute to a person becoming resilient. The factors  range from strong social networks, a committed mentor or other person from outside  the family, positive school experiences, a sense of mastery and a belief that ones  own efforts can make a difference, the ability, or opportunity, to make a difference  by helping others. In addition, being aware that to be excessively sheltered from  challenging situations will not provide opportunities to develop coping skills. One  factor that is paramount in making a person resilient, is the presence of at least one  unconditionally supportive person parent, teacher or a mentor.  Other researchers e.g., Daniel  Wassell, 2002 have provided a slightly  different but related framework, in describing what factors may contribute to a  person becoming resilient. They describe intrinsic and extrinsic factors in building  resilience. The intrinsic factors are: a secure base having a sense of belonging and  safety, high self-esteem a sense of self worth and competence, and a sense of  self-efficacy an understanding of personal strengths and limitations. The extrinsic  factors include positive school experiences, access to at least one supportive person,  and access to wider supports network such as family and friends.  The research above provides a useful framework that schools can adopt and share  to help students become more resilient. Schools must make sure that there is at least  one supportive person each child can go to in time of crisis. That person must be  someone the student trusts, and who will maintain the confidentiality of information  shared, but will also assist them by teaching skills or providing additional resources  to face the situation. Schools must also ensure that each student develops a high,  but true sense of efficacy in his or her abilities in general, but most importantly  in dealing with the particular situation. All students can benefit substantially from  learning specific strategies to deal with difficult situations, through which they gain  a stronger sense of self-efficacy.  Research has identified that families and peers can play a significant role in  promoting resilience in students Harvey  Delfabro, 2004; Masten  Coatsworth,  1998; NCH, 2007. A close partnership between families and schools effectively  facilitates families in understanding what skills each child requires to deal with  difficult situations. Families need to be assured that schools will do whatever possible  to prevent adverse events e.g., bullying. They need to be adequately informed to  deal competently with the situation, and consider it necessary to enlist the familys  carers or significant others support for the student. Similarly peers could also work  in supporting each other to face adverse situations.  In terms of turning around the failing school, Fred decided to translate the research  on resilience into practice by ensuring that each student had an opportunity for  resilience training. The local department of education provided funding to conduct  the training at the school. Fred also employed a full time social worker Sue. Her  main responsibility was to ensure that students feel safe in the school and could  contact her if there are any issues that bother them. 

POSITIVE LEARNING 85 TEACHING STRATEGIES THAT WORK FOR EVERYONE! Freds school is slowly changing. The school work force has completed several  professional development activities. They now have a whole school policy based  on some of the fundamental principles of creating engaging classrooms. The  impact of renewed school policy has started showing some positive impact. The  number of discipline issues has significantly declined but there is still some way  to go.  Fred is aware that it will take some time before he can confidently say that the  school has changed. Sue, who also attended all of the PD activities, noted that in  almost all of the PD sessions the speakers talked about co-operation and co-operative  learning. Having spent time in many classrooms across the school, she noticed that  even though all staff valued co-operative learning, there is scope for developing this  further. She suggested to Fred that it would be of great value to the whole school if  a PD could be arranged on co-operative learning CL.  COOPERATIVE LEARNING During a full staff meeting Fred regularly asked whether staff would like to have  a PD on co-operative learning. Cynthia objected, We already have had many of  these, so why another one? Kate, who just started at this school a few months  ago, said that she learned about CL during her initial teacher training at university.  She said that she had found CL to be one of the best strategies to create engaging  classrooms. Sue went on to say that she had recently read an article claiming that cooperative learning is one of the most researched strategies and its impact on students  has always been positive Johnson, Johnson,  Stanne, 2000. Students taught using  co-operative learning methods typically like the subject material, the teacher, and the  school. Most importantly students academic achievement across different subjects  and grade levels is higher in co-operative learning classrooms many students can  get highest grades compared to students who are taught using competitive methods  where only one student can get the highest grade. Most importantly, students have less frequent disruptive behaviours and form  better friendship with their classmates working in co-operative groups compared  to traditional classrooms where either students work in small groups or work  individually Johnson, Johnson,  Stanne, 2000. Having heard so much about the  benefits of CL, most staff agreed that it would be worthwhile to organize a PD on  CL. This is what Fred wanted to hear and he agreed to organize it.  There is some misconception in the education community about what CL is. Some  educators believe that when children work in small groups they learn co-operatively.  In reality, co-operative learning is much more than working in small groups: there  are five key principles to determine if someone is using co-operative learning or  not Johnson  Johnson, 1999. A useful acronym we can use to remember the five  principles PIGSF Pigs Fly D. F. Brown 1992 is:

CHAPTER 6 86 P  Positive interdependence I  Individual accountability G  Group and individual reflection S  Small group skills F  Face to face interaction Positive interdependence is one of the fundamental characteristics of co-operative  learning. It maintains that the group cannot be successful unless each member of  the group contributes toward the success of the group. In other words, each member  needs to do his or her part for the group to be successful. In a traditional group  activity, some members of the group will complete the task while others may not  have contributed anything. If a member of the group is finding it hard to do the  activity, it is the responsibility of the rest of the group members to ensure that the  person completes the task assigned to him or her. If the person fails in the task, the  whole group fails in the task. Teachers can promote interdependence by providing  resources that need to be shared to complete the task or by assigning the group to a  task that cannot be completed unless each group member contributes. Individual accountability  is assigned to each member of the group as individual  tasks are assigned to the group. Each person must do something related to the  group task. A person should also ideally receive recognition for the work he or she  completed. Teachers could do this by asking each person to identify the individual  contribution of each member. Another way this can be managed is by asking all  members of the group to do a composite test. While each member will get an  individual score for how well he or she does in the test, the groups overall score  will be a total of all of its group members scores on the test. The group has a vested  interest in ensuring that each member gets as high a score as possible on the test,  because a poor group score reduces the overall ranking of the group. Group and individual reflection  after completing a task, group members must  spend time in evaluating the performance of the group and of each member. This  phase is critical. Working in close collaboration, the group decides what they did  well as a group and how each member contributed to their overall success. If the  group does not perform well? Then they need to decide what are future means  available to improve their groups performance. This may also be the time to find  out ways a member of the group could be assisted to do well in forthcoming group  activities. It is absolutely vital that the group does not engage in criticizing one  person or ascribing to an individual responsibility for the groups poor performance.  The reason any one person has not done well on the task may not only be because  of his or her poor contribution, but also because of the limited support provided by  the group members.  Small group skills  success in co-operative learning depends on how well  group members work in small groups. They need to learn to resolve their conflicts  effectively, manage their time so that they can complete the task on time, provide 

POSITIVE LEARNING 87 feedback to each other respectfully and decide how the group will complete the task.  Many of these skills are not taught in traditional group activities. Effective teaching  through co-operative learning requires teachers to explicitly teach necessary small  group skills to each member of the class. Each group should be provided feedback  on how well it used small group skills. Teachers can also grade students based on  how best the groups use small group skills.  Face-to-face interaction  co-operative learning requires students to interact  frequently with each other. Such interactions cannot take place if students cant see  each other face to face contrast this to a traditional classroom where students are  seated in rows. Eye to eye and knee to knee EEKK is a common phrase used to  describe how the group should be organised. The EEKK arrangement allows students  to pay close attention to what each member has to say. Also, in this arrangement it is  very unlikely that a student will be left out of group discussion.  Sues comment that a majority of teachers in the school were now using CL was  music to Freds ears. He also noted that the majority of students was more engaged  with formal learning in the classroom and generally seemed more co-operative. Fred  acknowledged noise levels in some classrooms as an issue, but he also pointed out  that co-operative learning does require students interaction and he argued that the  rise in this kind of noise that he and others had noticed was productive noise.  This was in sharp contrast to what was happening when Fred started at the school.  A majority of students were mostly off task. Few, if any students had enjoyed class  activities, many disturbed other students, and some teachers resorted to yelling for  attention andor shouting from frustration. Now, clearly, classes were becoming  more interesting and motivating for most students  a welcome change that many  teachers admitted they had been waiting for a long time.  The teachers agreed as the meeting came to an end. They were less stressed.  Sue insisted that she for one, felt very happy that the classroom culture was slowly  changing and most students were now enjoying school. Sue knew that there were  some other teaching strategies that could further improve the classroom environment  and students academic and social outcomes. The two strategies that she wanted to  mention, as she had recently heard about them from a colleague in another school,  were called differentiated instruction and peer tutoring. She proposed that the  school could benefit immensely by looking at these and other strategies related to an  inclusive approach to education.  Sue regularly shared her enthusiasm about the strategies with colleagues and  asked Fred if more PDs could be arranged. He agreed that these strategies would  be good for the school but decided to give his staff a break from any more PDs in  the current year as he wanted to see a consolidation of what the school had already  learned through the recent PD sessions. Professional development on differentiated  instruction and peer tutoring it was agreed, would form part of the planned PD  programme for the next year.

CHAPTER 6 88  A REFLECTION: CHOICE, CHANGE AND COMMITMENT Liam came to this school one year ago when his son had verbally abused a teacher.  Many things have now changed. School seems to be a much better place, where  teachers care about each student and are trying their best to see that that discipline  issues do not arise. Members of staff understand the value of prevention and the  value of having a whole school policy to deal with school behaviour. Liams son  told him that he now enjoys coming to school. Liam doesnt avoid other parents any  more, like he had in the past when hed felt embarrassed about his sons behaviour.  Liams son recently completed a survey about the school, and his responses are in  stark contrast to what they were a year ago. He likes his teachers and the school! He  is no longer bullied or singled out any more. Three things that Liams son felt had  made the huge difference in the school were:  1.	to have a person like Sue that all students can trust in the sharing of personal  stories; 2.	teachers who treat all students with respect and make learning fun; and,  3.	the principal, Fred, who is very supportive of teachers and students. He even  plays volley ball with Liams son.  When asked, Liam confessed the school was far from perfect, but he believed  that levels of commitment and change had been profound. He mentioned how most  of the factors we have described in this chapter had driven a turnaround and started  a journey towards school improvement that he was certain would continue in the  following academic year.  Questions for reflection A number of research based strategies  were presented in this chapter. If used  on a regular basis, they should reduce  or eliminate disruptive behaviours in  schools. However, such strategies are  not widely used. In your view  why  is this not done and what could be  done so that such strategies are used  more commonly?
CHAPTER 7 LEADING A POSITIVE LEARNING APPROACH IN  THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY OVERVIEW AND KEY CONSTRUCTS  Intelligent inclusion  Positive learning behaviour   Learning leadership  Integrative management  Transformative Leadership  Leaders leading: Affirmation, Aspiration, Inspiration and Realisation AAIR.  Meet the Cast Major Characters: Fred  the School Principal Cynthia  the sceptical Vice Principal Eleanor  a new English teacher at Freds school Minor Characters: Ben  A parent member at the school staff meeting Jenna  Another active parent involved in the school project Tim, Sam and Anna  Three students from Freds school, participants in the  school project. Fred, a school Principal strongly committed to serious conceptual thinking whilst  also concerned that his understanding is translated into good practice. Short answers  are not found here, but if you want a thorough exploration of the basis of best  educational theory and practice, read on and be encouraged!  MAKING A START The first day: Fred entered his new place of work as the boss and really did wonder  what he had signed up for and how he was going to manage this school. The weather  had made the commute to work a dream. It had been a clear azure sky marking the  high point of an early Indian summer. A typical start for the new school year, and  just as typically, it followed what had been a damp and disappointing vacation. Was 

CHAPTER 7 90 this a sign? The need to stay positive seemed to ripple across the windscreen of the  car as he drove down to the town, passing one of many visions of an alternative life  opportunity, some framed in a smorgasbord of impressions, others in what seemed  a concept-board running segments of scenic beauty and pastoral idyll. The ocean  sparkled deep blue in the middle distance. He stepped through the main entrance door following the sign to his new office  while ruminating on what it was school leaders do? Lead? Manage? Teach? Inspire?  Judge? Orchestrate? Was he a servant? Tyrant? Dictator? Demagogue? Bureaucrat?  Educator? Should a leader spend most of his time mediating between staff? Running  a committee  bound collegiate democracy? What about timetabling? He chuckled  to himself: that was one task usually delegated to a Deputy  as timetabling was a  sure fire guaranteed case of trying to please everyone and always pleasing no-one  at all.  So: we must use delegation. It was after all a leaders prerogative. Or on the  other hand, was it a necessity for survival, as insisted upon by the Professional  Development Trainer at the leadership course he had attended last month.? Delegate  or go under, he had been told, and make sure you use distributed leadership; it will  serve to unite the school in the process of managing organizational learning. Know  your people. Staff. Students. Governors. This idea of leadership had been described  as the essential ingredient in leading a successful learning community read school  for the current buzz term, a learning community. Fred wondered. So far to travel,  he mused, from theory to practice. He turned past his new desk and sat down heavily  on what was a very comfortable, rather plush leather bound chair. Managerial perk.  Yes, all to play for in what was clearly going to be an interesting but long, eventful  first year. The main task: get going with the staff and students and involve everyone  in a collective learning endeavour. Fred thought of himself as a leader in learning,  exercising learning leadership. School was going to be a collective project about  learning  for everyone. It meant working with people, through people, and for  people. Fred was determined to make this happen. It would, if the well laid plans  of his version of the reflective practitioner, and the thinking professional, were  to come to fruition; it would mean working through a series of steps and activities  aimed at establishing the idea of learning leadership. He reflected: It would also mean  seeking and securing a consensual community sharing in the idea of education as  valuing and exercising forms of leadership, and holistically grounded in the work  of successful learning. No member of the school community should ever think they  had nothing more to learn. The work in a school was a life-long and often automated  process akin to breathing, that goes on until the last breath. This idea of learning leadership, Fred realised, is one in which an approach to  management and leadership is about building capability to deal with what, in his  experience, often seemed to be an increasing number of issues and decisions related  to the uncertain, complex, and sometimes the unsolvable dilemmas of day-to-day  practice. It was, he muttered to himself, really about resilience and adaptability,  about know-how and see-through. But ultimately, he thought, it was about ideas, 

LEADING A POSITIVE LEARNING APPROACH IN THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY 91 and a model of educational management concerned with the production, as well as  acquisition, of new knowledge; learning. Learning to learn and personal growth,  and overall, personal, intellectual, emotional and social development. Last but by  no means least, Fred mused, this also meant a need for the introduction of his own  brand of educational practice, and the something he had decided to call intelligent  inclusion. This final ingredient, he believed, was in every way the glue that held all  the other stuff together. Or maybe the lubricant that kept all of the other parts working  in synchronicity. It was, he concluded, all about an understanding of educational  management, an endeavour and a process that always remained concerned with  enabling positive learning behaviour. As the school principal, or rather Fred corrected himself, the leader of a school  community, he felt the acute need to mentally picture the school as an entity.  The Three-P mantra he had once composed came to mind; think and re-think  he reminded himself: people, place, practices. He stood up, walked over to the  window and stared at the scene. The thought was followed by another mantra he  kept in mind: the Triple-E for successful management, think: equity, efficiency  and effectiveness. But not always, he then paused to emphasise, and repeated to  himself, not always in that order.  School: a place and an experience, as well as a series of systems and practice,  and any number of different groups of people; but most importantly, it was bound  together by its own character or ethos that reflected a particular culture and ways  of working as an organization. It was, he mused, in the end, a picture that seemed  to be much more than just the sum of its parts. And this would and should change  shape, depending upon points of view, present perspective and current trajectory of  development. Fred felt the need to take ownership of this entity: he needed to believe that the  school would be recognized and known as the right kind of corporate identity. In  turn, it would in many ways be shaped by his decisions, using ,evaluation of school  behaviour, and his style of leadership rather than being abused by accountabilitydriven evidence-led measurement of school-based performance. But most of all, ,he  knew it would always reflect the soul of the school community. He needed to belong  and find meaning in being there as an educationist. And so of course did every other  member of the school community. It was this abstract and perhaps some would argue rather fanciful idea of soul, a  kind of human quality that Fred nonetheless associated with individuals as well as  a community. He believed it was this quality or human character above all else, that  mattered most for the work in hand. It was, Fred believed, his primary task to ensure  the work of each and every member of the school community was able to make a  useful contribution to nurturing and developing this corporate soul. If he succeeded  in this, then the school curriculum, construed both as a formal fare of academic  knowledge, and fed by an informal diet of social and personal experience, yes he  believed, the curriculum would ideally flow in a balanced and consistent way. The  school would thrive in ways that reflected a belief in the potential for education: this 

CHAPTER 7 92 approach would foster affiliation with the school identity, and generate a sense of  well-being, belonging, meaning, and purpose from being part of, and giving back to,  something larger and more permanent than themselves. He wished, above all else,  to be successful in this endeavour. If his work as Principal was to be remembered,  Fred would ideally like to be known for having taken a lead role in creating a caring  and sharing approach to educational excellence, in a school determined to reach  the hard to teach and so to succeed in teaching the hard to reach, marking out his  school as special, and even perhaps positively unique in its own right. THE NEED FOR A WHOLE SCHOOL POLICY ON POSITIVE BEHAVIOUR  Fred was standing at the end of the staffroom. The staff had not met him before, and  this was their first full school meeting. It was the first time the staff were together  in what was going to be a long road ahead, ending in the Christmas Break. The  atmosphere in the staffroom at that moment was charged with a tangible crackle of  expectancy. The question thrown out by Cynthia, the deputy principal, was in regard  to the serious and pressing issue of student misbehaviour. Well, Fred opined, thinking aloud. It goes without saying that Id like to build  on the caring I sense around the place, with a positive approach to school behaviour.  The last thing some staff wanted was an approach to bad behaviour that was soft,  without sanctions that would let too many troublemakers get away with it. Fred  continued speaking, referring to Bill Rogers work and the idea of clearly stating  a list of rights, roles, relationships and responsibility Rogers, 1998, 2000, 2003.  The main aim, Fred continued, is to work together to ensure an intelligent  inclusiveness with collaborative leadership that embraces shared problem-solving,  solution-focused, with decision-making method in our work. The whole area of  strategic management and policy-making at this time, Fred thought to himself,  should reflect the model described by Rayner 2009, as a sharing practice of  learning leadership. This model had been presented as part of a wider approach  to managing equity, diversity and differences in education, and was built upon the  idea of educational management as a particular form of integrative management,  requiring leadership of learning and the practical blending of inclusive and  transformative leadership, to realize a positive approach to managing personal and  social diversity in education see Rayner, 2007.  Fred switched on the Computer and moved quickly to a slide of the interactive  model he had been thinking about and started his prepared presentation Figure 1.  Talking through the various aspects identified in this model, in turn he emphasized  the collective work required in contributing to the development and management  of inclusive policy and provision. He argued, rather than announced, that there was  a ready-made case example for one such activity: a project managed by a working  group aimed at meeting a present need to re-build the approach to behaviour  management. 

LEADING A POSITIVE LEARNING APPROACH IN THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY 93 This, Fred went on to state, would be the first of several policy groups; it should  seek to identify and play to individual strengths institutional andor individual,  and aim to build upon current success to better deal with systemic weaknesses and  operational difficulty. This approach is positive but it does not belie any difficulty;  it is consensual but does not deny diversity, or differences, and lastly, it is about  consistency that acknowledges complexity. Most importantly, this approach should  also emphasize the need for effective communication. None of this means insisting  upon uniformity. It does not, for example, mean implementing or operating to a  senior management teams corporate diktat. But it does mean signing up to and  subscribing to a school ethic that embodies our shared common approach to valuing  parity of esteem for every individual, and re-emphasizing the need for sustained  educational endeavour. A school at the end of the day is dealing in education. This  means working with complexity, uncertainty and change. But, Fred insisted, citing Stacey 1992, 1993, an effective organization is one  in which all members of the organization:  adapt to and help create their situated environments;   recognise that organisational success flows from contradiction as well as  consistency in the work-place;  STRATEGIC LEADERSHIP STRATEGIC LEADERSHIP OPERATIONAL  MANAGEMENT OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT  staff students Governing parents  Figure 1. A learning leadership process

CHAPTER 7 94  try to ensure opportunities for success in a self-reinforcing cycle of learning,  rather than from explicit vision; and  realize that transforming, as well as incremental, changes may lie on the route to  organisational success. The work in a school should always be empowering and enabling: it should  therefore always return to extolling effective learning, good teaching and positive  personal growth. Fred remembered for the first time being introduced to Bill Rogers work on  behavioural literacy. The idea of behavioural snot still stuck in his mind. Rogers  had amusingly struck a chord of empathy in the audience with his caricature. The  whiny reluctant learner triggered a vivid image in Freds mind. Nikki, a precocious  13 years old loomed large to fit with the Rogers description. Nikki had been a  learning experience from his first year in teaching. She had learned to skilfully weave  attention seeking into evasive and invasive destructive mis-behaviour. Difficulties at  home in an extended family were the frequent explanation. Dad had been in prison  and Mum kept on struggling to keep life and family together. There was, nonetheless,  a lot of useful stuff in Rogers practical idea of behavioural literacy Rogers, 1998.  It was worth re-reading a high compliment from Fred who rarely re-visited a text  given the issues of time, work and family.  Fred mused quietly as he glanced over the heads of the group: it was vital to him  that members of staff realize they must see through a raft of surface behaviours that  typically create disruption, and that impede the growth of positive learning. A range  of tactics for managing surface behaviour could be usefully employed: deflection,  distraction, and his favourite, the stuck needle in a record technique that required  slow repetition of the assertions of an angry and disruptive individual. Then, in a  calmer setting, there was the empty chair routine and a version of the counselling  technique of projecting inner dialogue and what he thought of as the there but by the  grace of God go I routine. It was more or less an appeal to empathy and fair play. Fred turned away from the screen. He thought about the work of Fritz Redl, the  American Psychiatrist who devised the term surface behaviour and a series of  techniques for the antiseptic treatment of surface misbehaviour when working  with disturbed adolescents in New York Redl, 1957. A lot of good stuff to think  about in Redls work, particularly his idea of beneath the surface behaviour.  But Fred had realized that the need to develop shared approaches to behaviour  management didnt just stop there.  Fred wanted more; he wished to secure a shared belief in positive learning  behaviour throughout the school community that stretches over and beyond the  classroom. It was necessarily personal, but it was social too, and it meant engagement  with a range of attitudes, with personal feelings, and with what people perceived and  believed was their part in the school community. He sighed inwardly as he again  glanced around the full room. The school should ideally function as a whole, as  a learning community; its aim as an organization would be to nurture a life-long 

LEADING A POSITIVE LEARNING APPROACH IN THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY 95 commitment to learning in its members, as well as a shared notion of human dignity,  social identity and a positive sense of self. If this were to ever work in practice,  members of the school community, including the student body, needed to share in  an opportunity to lead and contribute to the educational community. It was Freds  belief that educational management was a specific professional practice. It reflected  in turn the particular nature of purposes in schooling as distinctive and different in  quality to the many models of business management now dominating the educational  establishment. School leadership was first and foremost about the management of  learning. Questions for reflection Fred is moving towards a whole  school policy to create positive  learning environments for all.  Does your school have a whole school  policy? If yes  Is everyone in your  school aware of this policy and its  practical implication for students and  staff? If not  do you think a whole  school policy is needed in your  school? What should be included in  this policy? DISTRIBUTING LEADERSHIP Eleanor jumped involuntarily. It was her turn to speak to the staff. She had agreed  to lead a working group charged with review and reform of the school behaviour  management policy and provision. This was something of a surprise to her as she  was only two years in to working as a Teacher of English. But she had a plan. After  a brief discussion with Fred, she had decided to propose a project that looked at  producing a more clearly stated set of collaborative protocols and practices for  managing behaviour. The group was to be organized in such a way that she would  convene a meeting twice a week for a term. The group was made up of four members  of the school workforce, three students and a school council member, as well as two  parents.  Eleanor began, We have some really great ways of doing things; we have  excellent examples of good will and cooperation, but there are always ways in which  we can make a good place even better. I have been doing a lot of thinking. Id  like to facilitate some strategic thinking that involves problematizing existing  policy. We can then try to create consensus around a series of proposed actions  aimed at improving and re-establishing a shared purpose and approach to school 

CHAPTER 7 96 behaviour codes, rights, rules and responsibilities. This would involve looking at  ways in which the official values system in the school community might be better  communicated across the school organization and embedded in school life.  The group, she continued to explain, should ideally aim to move through three  stages of what amounts to a project. The first entails the examination of policy,  and how the policy might be developed to encourage better learning behaviour. The  second is when we should be working to ensure and enable take up of a wholeschool code of practice in the wider community. This will involve taking on the  challenge presented by the need for consensus building in the community. Thirdly,  the group will spend more time looking at issues of fair play, access and opportunity  for all students, irrespective of disability or difficulty experienced during the school  day. This is a perfect example of an aspect of school leadership that demonstrates  how important it is to sustain an inclusive whole school approach to learning, as both  an expression of institutional behaviour as a school and as learning performance  across school as an organisation. The New Working Group: Learning about School Behaviour Eleanor surveyed the group sitting around the table. She held the sheet of paper  with a list of questions, or were they in fact issues, with which to begin the group  discussion? The long ensuing discussion had identified several very good aspects  of current practice in school. A particular area of success was felt to be the antibullying initiative that had been running for three years. Jim, a deputy principal, had  introduced the idea of an academic researching bullying Rigby, 2001. The school  had introduced a range of provisions across the curriculum, including peer-based  counselling, countering bullying as a theme in the curriculum, and the creation of  opt-in nurture groups for younger students who self-presented as struggling with one  or more aspects of school life. The group quickly agreed there was a great deal that  existed in terms of existing school systems; that practice and provision should be  affirmed and further reinforced. Mike, a Physics teacher, was quick to pick up on how this discussion reflected  the traditional notion of group formation. There had been some storming, followed  by a movement toward norming of ideas, perspective and opinion. Eleanor replied  that she believed that they would continue to move from identifying strengths in the  present system involving what she thought was a process of affirmation, toward a  consideration of aspirations andor goals for further developing the policy. In fact,  she argued, she felt that these two stages of activity were continuing to recur in the  group discussion, but that this in turn, was paving the way to realizing a need for  some inspiration, as problem-posing had begun to encourage an awareness of need  for some solutions-led action planning. Ben, a parent member, suggested he play the  role of secretary and started to jot down key ideas on the white-board. The group  quickly became engaged in the work of searching creatively for ideas and ways  forward for developing a better behaviour management policy for the school. 

LEADING A POSITIVE LEARNING APPROACH IN THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY 97 A few months later, Eleanor reflected on how this group had worked so far.  Leadership had become a shared responsibility. Each member of the group, in turn,  had convened a meeting, having prepared the agenda and chaired the session. This  was an invaluable learning experience for all, but especially for the three students  involved. It was as if the group had grown its own identity and way of working. Not  so different, as Mike had pointed out, to the model of team development devised by  Tuckman, that described the sequential forming of a group, followed by conflict,  leading to consensus.  Moreover, Eleanor realised, the experience of this group had been more positive  than might have been the case if she had used contrived icebreakers and warm  fuzzies to manipulate feelings of affiliation, engagement and identity with its  membership. It was as if they all shared in an opportunity to make a difference,  while at the same time they were all engaged in a meaningful and empowering  activity. Eleanor felt sure that the group had in fact experienced the coming up  for AAIR process she had been loosely following as a leaders plan. This had  involved working and re-working four aspects of group activity: managing a mix  of affiliation, aspiration, inspiration and realization. She was not really sure if this  had been because of her own leadership or in spite of it. But what did it matter? The  group was working with a buzz and a purpose, and it looked as if they really were  going to make a difference in moving school policy forward!  The Working Group: Learning, Belonging and Leadership Tim, Sam and Anna were all pleased to be involved in this group. They were in their  final two years at school and parents had at first been anxious that this involvement  would detract from study and the preparation for the all-important final exams.  But it had not worked out like that as they all shared in work tasks, and from time  to time actually led the group. They expressed how much they had each come to  value it as a really good learning experience. A buzz grew for them as the work  proceeded. They had all learned something about learning behaviour and learning to  lead. Their contribution had included the collection of some very useful testimony  about the increase in cyber-bullying and bullying beyond the school gates. Issues  had then surfaced about how the school should manage problems associated with  alienation and harassment. It was a salutary reminder for all that some members  of the community, including parents as well as students and even on occasion,  other members of the school workforce were indeed responsible for dangerous and  harmful attitudes, behaviours and activity.  At one level, for example, there were clearly articulated problems around sexuality  and ethnic identity that despite being so well identified, still required answers to  ensure and sustain notions of tolerance, right and wrong. There were no easy options  for influencing much of what spilled over in terms of negative attitudes, prejudices,  and behaviour from beyond school. A serious issue, for example, was gang culture,  but the principle agreed by group members was, start with what can be managed 

CHAPTER 7 98 that is, located within school. The focus should remain on how these influences  might be countered within the school community.  All three students assured the group that what happened in school really mattered  to them, but it was often what happened after school that caused the greatest effect.  One of the students referred to several instances last year of peers caught up in a  sex-texting social network closed down by the Police. They all agreed, and argued  for, a sense of community that involved more than just a parents evening, open day,  or occasional communications linking school with home and neighbourhood. But  everyone agreed: the school in the first instance and for most of the time should be  focused upon the behaviour of members of the community in school; and the priority  for a behaviour management policy was to foster an attitude to school that would  enable excellence in learning. It was Jenna, one of the two parents in the project group who finally declared  the need for some clearly framed statements on how learning behaviour might be  defined and in turn how this might be applied throughout school and classroom.  What is it exactly we think the group is chasing? Eleanor repeatedly asked this  question, realizing that it was in fact a pivotal point in the work of the group. They  had reached a first tipping point for re-direction and momentum; there now needed  to be a blending of inspiration with aspiration, and this need was reinforced by a  shared realization of purpose, and a re-focusing upon direction and outcome.  The Working Group: Decisions, Choice and Change Jenna seized the moment and asked if she could record the groups agreed statements  on the whiteboard. The group agreed to share a set of tasks built around their newly  agreed description of learning behaviour. Their work was to target embedding and  reinforcing learning positive learning behaviour in an inclusive way across the  following areas of school life and community: 1.	School behaviour ethosclimateculture.  2.	Professional behaviour attitudesvaluesknowledge.  3.	Student behaviour attitudesvaluesself-perception.  4.	Pastoral systems proceduresprotocolspractices. The group discussions raised insights that outcomes of this work should be ideally  incorporated into the schools behaviour management policy. The group agreed that  the challenge presented was how to use this policy to foster wider and continuing  commitment to and affiliation with the school community? Above all else it should,  they reasoned, be used to re-orientate school behaviour management protocols and  practice.  The group decided, after reading some of the literature on learning to learn and  positive behaviour, that they wanted to integrate the three aspects of behaviour  defined by Grimley et al. 2004 to include conduct, emotion and learning. The model  was more firmly grounded in class-based learning, and behaviours associated with 

LEADING A POSITIVE LEARNING APPROACH IN THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY 99 formal instruction and classroom activity. However, everyone agreed that their very  own developing idea of positive learning behaviour was wider and in a sense bigger  than this, and while the Grimley et al. model served to help focus upon one important  part of positive learning behaviour, there was much more involved. Nonetheless, the  group had agreed, the idea of positive learning behaviour should be introduced as  an idea, and ideally would lead to further nurturing an important value or ethic to be  adopted in the school community. The following list of key aspects of positive learning behaviour emerged from the  groups discussion: 1.	The definition of positive learning behaviour included three key sets of personal  behaviour comprising emotional behaviour, social conduct, and, learning to learn. 2.	The definition of positive learning behaviour included both the personal behaviour  associated with learning how to learn, and social behaviours and attitudes  associated with involvement in the community. 3.	A belief that positive learning behaviour is participatory and reliant upon personal  capability potential for growth and adaptability key attributes of resilience and  style; 4.	An appreciation that activity characterized by a clearly developed action-bound  focus, in terms of agreed goals essential for the learner and others involved  in the learning activity, was necessary to cultivate and grow positive learning  behaviour; 5.	A positive learning approach required a carefully orchestrated balance between  capability personal resources and challenge learning task or demands; 6.	A positive emphasis was crucial in the management of behaviour; and,  in terms of behaviour schemes, systems and protocols, a response to failure,  intervention, support, and a practical policy of no blame, thereby moving away  from a pathology-based causality and deficit-bound culture; 7.	An attitude to be encouraged in the school workforce as part of an  acculturation of positive behaviour in terms of encouraging personal subscription  to a professional ethic that aims to offer encouragement for learners in taking  appropriate risk-taking responsibility, whilst also adopting an expectation for a  positive individual engagement and participation in community life; 8.	The idea of locating every individual in a school-wide conception of a learning  zone, integrating both the personal level attention, concentration, raised  awareness of autotelic activity or flow with a corresponding emphasis upon  positive, appropriate kinds of social interaction expression, articulation,  communication, place, time andor media to produce positive learning  behaviour. The next step agreed to by the group was to begin mapping out the work  specifically required to introduce and reinforce positive learning behaviour in the  school. The list included a set of ways and means as well as key indicators for use in  orienteering change and mapping out a way forward. 

CHAPTER 7 100 The group issued the following operational statement and agreed that Eleanor  should present this to the senior leadership team. The key issue to be raised at this  time was how to secure some additional resource to operationalize the policy after it  was presented. The group felt it essential that some time and support should now be  extended to help make change happen. The work it was agreed should: 1.	From the outset involve a whole-school approach, meant for implementing  an inclusive policy for managing pupil behaviour and sustaining an inclusive  organizational culture. 2.	Reflect inclusive levels of engagement and participation in the operation of  change management and the re-affirmation of collective beliefs, values and  attitudes toward behaviour on the part of all members of the school community  this importantly should involve staff, students, parents, governors and other  stakeholders in the school community. 3.	Contain and enshrine a key reference point rule book code of conduct to be  adopted by the community, supported by a reinforced working set of systems and  structures in the organization a knowledge network framing pastoral care; access  points for advice, resource and intervention embedded within the community; and  most importantly, a series of supports for learning structures across the academic  and professional development curriculum. 4.	Ensure that all members of staff have another member of staff peer who can  actively support and advise them in matters of behaviour management. 5.	Link this work to the review and maintenance of knowledge networks and  continuing support for professional learning in the school community. 6.	Seek to explore ways in which to develop pupil involvement in learning positive  learning behaviour and for sustaining positive behaviour management peer  support schemes, anti-bullying work, community decision-making. 7.	Target and co-ordinate an extending programme of community participation  events such as school-home networking and support groups, mentoring provision,  and fund raising involving parents, voluntary agencies, community groups. 8.	Further develop outreach, inter-agency collaboration, and contribute to interschool partnership and knowledge networking. So the group was moving forward in what Eleanor felt was the best way possible  and the process had ensured everyone was on the same page and on board. They  agreed that the approach of positive learning was the way to go, ensuring activity  that was useful, relevant and meaningful. It included addressing the issue of criteria  for assessing emotional and behavioural development as part of a new approach  to learning behaviour. This was to replace the existing emphasis on sanctions,  penalties and a three strikes and you are out scheme that worked as a sliding scale  ladder to exclusion: a new approach agreed to as might prove more effective in an  inclusive approach to managing behaviour in the school setting. One example of  such assessment, Eleanor suggested, could be found by re-visiting the assessment  piloted by Grimley et al. 2004. 

LEADING A POSITIVE LEARNING APPROACH IN THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY 101 This approach had been publicized by the Qualifications and Curriculum  Authority 2001 in the UK and used in a wide range of school settings as part of an  approach to improving classroom behaviour Grimley et al., 2004. It might, if used  carefully, serve to provide a firm basis for developing some wider ranging forms of  assessment, and link to subject-based curricula in reinforcing a proposed approach  to learning positive behaviour. The next step was to wait and see what the response  was from the senior leadership team. Questions for reflection You notice that Freds school is not  only moving towards designing a  new policy  it also considers the way  the policy needs to be implemented.  In your school, what attempts are  made so that a policy is successfully  implemented? What lessons can  we learn from the scenario above  that would lead to the successful  implementation of a policy? DEALING IN DIVERSITY: CONSENSUAL COMMUNITY AND  INTELLIGENT INCLUSION The introduction of change management, targeting the school behaviour policy, was  the first in a two-step affair. Fred believed he had to follow this up quickly. He saw  a need to set up a second project targeting educational inclusion and diversity in  the school community. It was this part of his first years work at the school which  in his own mind had the farthest-reaching implications for the school community.  Fred want to stay true to his first principles, which included a deeply held belief in  leadership integrity, and an equally deep seated opinion that charismatic examples  of transformational leadership, what Fred perceived to be an exaggerated valuing of  the lone leader were ultimately damaging to an educational community; and thirdly,  that he wished to pursue a form of leadership described by some as transformative.  It was this approach which included the ideas associated with learning leadership  and inclusive leadership proposed by Rayner 2007, 2009, 2011.  Fred turned to face his Deputy, a sanguine but sometimes cynical long serving  colleague, Cynthia. Fred had been trying to convince Cynthia for over a half an  hour that the ideas previously mentioned had worth and intrinsic value. Fred wanted  her to consider dipping into the related literature. He cited, for instance, the recent  Handbook edited by Shields 2011, entitled Transformative Leadership: A Reader. 

CHAPTER 7 102 He continued to argue with Cynthia, explaining that he thought the way forward  should involve emphasizing a blending of theory and practice in a pragmatic,  knowledge-led approach to educational pedagogy and continuing professional  development. More importantly, such an approach would help encourage people to  engage with and involve everyone across the school community in creating, what he  called a consensual community. Cynthia challenged him, asking pointedly, What  on earth does that phrase really mean? Consensual community presumes, Fred grinned, picking up on his first words  to continue, the social and psychological coalescence, and co-construction of a  new set of shared beliefs and values will mark out the school ethos, organizational  culture, and form the basis of a school community. This should ideally include  opportunities for everyone involved in the school to experience and nurture a positive  sense of belonging, to develop a pride in theirour work, and, theirour individual  contribution to this work. It also would ideally imply a sense of certainty, security  and safety associated with the ways and means adopted in the day-to-day running of  the teaching, learning and human relations taking place in the school curriculum. In  such a school, everyone without exception has a part to play!  This idea then means taking the traditional notion of a learning organization and  converting it into an educational endeavour that produces something I like to call the  learning game. It means exchanging some of the business and commercial values  that I understand reside at the heart of much of the literature theorizing organizational  learning, and translates it into an educational model, with an appropriate focus  on pedagogic practice, learning as a process, and knowledge as a co-constructed  product. The end game is to make meaning and exercise knowledge management;  that is, we are engaged in the creation, mobilization and transfer of different kinds of  knowledge in order to facilitate learning and understanding.  Creating a consensual community is a crucial means to this end: it is about  realizing the management of knowledge creation, the development of the lifelong learner and the delivery of inclusive education. This adds up to an education  that must offer opportunity in an environment that facilitates personal growth and  nurtures education as an empowering enhancement. For me, education is the process  intended to secure personal growth, enable social justice, and, help to facilitate wellbeing as a potential resource for everyone involved with the school community. Nice speech, Cynthia said laughing, but so much of this is, quite frankly, just  utopian. What I want to see are tangible signs of success, simple and straightforward  things like good exam results. Fred winced. He started again, pointing out that  much of what he had described made good sense, positively impacted on educational  achievements including exam results, and actually in one way or another was and  is a regular and integral feature in education -and is already happening in schools.  Fred paused: the idea of transformative leadership was one he wanted Cynthia and  the rest of the senior leadership team to seriously consider. It involved revisiting  first principles and asking why and what the team was doing as a leadership group  rather than only as a management force aka management farce. Secondly, what did 

LEADING A POSITIVE LEARNING APPROACH IN THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY 103 answering the question why? mean for how they worked? Fred, persistently and,  he realised, perhaps somewhat doggedly stuck to his point.  Fred faced the small group of senior leaders and hit the pause button. The  PowerPoint slide dominated the far wall, summing up the idea of transformative  leadership see Figure 2, as a process of bottom-up-led growth rather than top-down  management, accounting driven alchemy or instant transformation.  Figure 2. Explaining transformative leaderhsip

CHAPTER 7 104 The idea of managing inclusive leadership as this next slide illustrates see  Figure 3, is a balanced mix of theory and practice in a continuing series of dynamic  learning activities, literally represented as the inclusion of various parts of the school  organization and community required to work together to sustain a live learning  community.  Figure 3. Intelligent inclusion in a consensual community

LEADING A POSITIVE LEARNING APPROACH IN THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY 105 The approach, Fred paused before he continued, requires a pragmatic, applied  and integrative method to management that involves working at different levels of  the school structure in a related and joined up way. Ultimately, it means ensuring the  realisation of outcomes in what is identified on this powerpoint slide as the surface  level of impact zones or areas of inclusion in the school organization. Fred paused and then pointed at the diagram on the screen, and explained, From  beginning with a base level of strategic management, leadership is required in a  distributed and focused approach, exemplified in the positive behaviour group being  led by Eleanor. We want this to lead to movement, to expand and extend to other  aspects and levels of inclusive management as described in the slide Figure 3,  ultimately helping us reach and shape the areas of most visible impact. This occurs in  day to day work and the systems we set up to assist this work. For example, networks  aimed at the support of learning for students experiencing learning difficulties. Similarly, the next slide describes how this approach to inclusion involves  seeking to build and work with the idea of a consensual community. Fred turned  away to press the switch for the projector. He then carried on with the talk, explaining,  This requires deliberately cultivating an intelligent approach to inclusion that  should be embedded in accepting individual differences in people, but emphasizing  accommodation of these differences whenever possible, and yet always working  and moving towards opportunities for the assimilation of a learning identity with  membership of the school learning community. This means careful use of a range  of artefacts social media and forms of expression and assents agreed viewpoints  in the design and delivery of the curriculum. Similarly, re-clarification of a collective  set of values and an acceptance of deeply held beliefs will need to be included in this  approach to formal and informal learning. With this in mind, for example, I think we  need to carefully re-consider the place and function of school assemblies. Fred was aware that this approach raised very difficult issues that contradicted  some popular approaches considered politically correct, such as, for example multiculturalism. Nonetheless, he continued by arguing that the process of accommodation  required for multi-cultural settings should actually form part of the process aiming at  an assimilation of organizational culture and new levels of becoming, belonging and  being a member of the school community. An essential action as part of this activity  aimed at belonging to the school community, should also lead to an affirmation of  a co-constructed, inter-active culture and social identity. Fred almost whispered as  he said, This approach to schooling involves a recurrent thinking about education  as dealing in knowledge, personal and social diversity, organizational complexity,  social inclusion, and ultimately, equity.  He paused and again pointed to the slide illustrating the inclusive leadership  model see Figure 4. It resembled a mobile chime and he imagined it constantly  turning, with the many parts forming and re-forming aspects and perspectives for  those both within and beyond the structure. The question of including everyone in  appropriate ways and ensuring engagement, involvement, participation, commitment  and understanding as the basic work of this inclusive model of leadership. It deals 

CHAPTER 7 106 with the many different systems, groups and people in the school, and requires an  integrative management of educational diversity in the contemporary school setting.  It was also the necessary work required for realising organizational learning in a  consensual community.  This does not mean everyone sharing perfectly shaped and proportional  perspectives in perfect harmony, in a state of constant agreement. Fred carried on,  almost remorselessly, as staff stared at the diagram. In fact, the approach should be  Figure 4. Exercizing intelligent inclusion

LEADING A POSITIVE LEARNING APPROACH IN THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY 107 clearly characterised by an acknowledgement of individual differences, interests and  the viewpoints of others, yet integrates these differences in the formation of a new  social entity for the individual as a member of the learning community.  Figure 5. Intelligent inclusion in a consensual community  Moreover, this means ensuring the staff engage with the work required in  making the various parts of this model see Figure 4 combine in what at the heart 

CHAPTER 7 108 of the schools organizational structure, and so community is the mix of these ideas,  values, issues and ethics in the churn of day to day activity. Fred pressed on, declaring that an imperative for educational management  involving every member of staff was to facilitate access, engagement, and a widening  participation in a full and active learning community. Fred recalled reading Rayner  2007. The model, he recalled, required the blending of two kinds of leadership:  transformative and inclusive leadership. Success, he knew, would depend upon  an integrated management of this leadership within the community. The focal point  was learning. And for Fred this was so much more than the obligatory model of an  evidence-led accounting approach that relied on a list of data-smart performance  indicators and standards frameworks used to hold the school to account. The latter  was not unimportant, and the school bursars role and school administrative office  should not be held cheaply or disregarded, but it represented only one set of tools and  associated tasks for an educational management of the school learning community.  Nonetheless, Fred proceeded to summarize the point with renewed emphasis; he  wished to re-visit the question of what was the prime function of the school, and  in turn, school management: Fred argued that the latter was a pragmatic challenge  concerned with means and ends, as well as process and equity; it required that  educational leadership and management remain an integral part of the civic or  socialas well as academicfunction of education. REFLECTIONS: LOOKING BACK  MOVING FORWARD Looking back, Fred was not surprised at the resistance to his new style of  management in school. He understood the logic of a medical paradigm influencing  so many aspects of education: there had always been a long-standing need for  remediation of learning difficulties based on a notion of restorative or palliative  intervention, which relied in turn on the fundamental act of a contrastive judgment.  School had always, it seemed, been largely about sorting out pears from apples  and sheep from the sheep dog in order to sort out what was missing.  Fred grunted: this need for labels and categorization, he reflected, clearly did  have its place in education, and in the construction of knowledge, understanding  and meaning. Categories provided the integral framework for the curriculum, for  knowledge and epistemic content. This much was evident, he thought: knowledge  was often structured as a set of contrasting binary concepts or elaborated taxonomy.  He did hope, however, that schooling was surely not simply and only about curricula  designed around this notion of knowledge and linked pedagogy, translated into  grading and labelling and setting or norming the learner. Such an approach almost  guaranteed a mind-set for deficit-based assessment and the need for winners and  losers, competition and league tables, with a basic recipe for failure. The approach  was, put simply, about forcing exclusivity via competition, and then seeking  accommodation via diagnosis and correction; it was all about putting right what was  deemed to be wrong so as to enable a good fit with a proscribed context. 

LEADING A POSITIVE LEARNING APPROACH IN THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY 109 The problem for Fred therefore was mostly one where traditional ideas of  education norming the standard approach aimed at re-establishing one size for all,  and the supply of necessary rejects identified as a kind of epidemiological evidence  base demonstrating normal distribution as a validation for the test. What Fred  wanted to cultivate was an idea of excellence embracing both this exclusivity and yet  something more, reflected in less well established ideas of measuring performance  and knowledge acquisition. In a sense this was Freds vision of an inclusive  education, acknowledging, respecting, and coping with individual differences at all  levels and areas, as providing a necessary basis for dealing in educational diversity.  It presumed for instance that capability might well be a better referencing point  than only ability. There was, he thought, a great deal of need for developing new  approaches to the measurement of learning in the curriculum, such as authentic  assessment.  Discrimination, it seemed, was the traditional and enduring basis of what again  was perhaps so often euphemistically called entrance criteria and yet for Fred  seemed to be about professional judgments on the fit with what we offer suitability  of the client. This was as true, Fred realized, for professionals working in Health,  Social Services and School sectors of community care, as it was for teachers in  schools. In some senses it was the easy direct way of ensuring a homogenous school  community. Differentiation was applied from the outset as a screening mechanism.  Fred sighed: the same set of labelling assessment and selective procedure was  widely used in student entry, and the structuring of ability based school classes in the  rest of the education system too, including the best fee-paying schools, independent  schools, and universities in the country. The irony did not escape Fred. The place of  such discriminatory practices existed as deeply embedded social and professional  cultures in Education, and were continually reflected in professional attitudes or  educational systems  very powerful and certainly deeply embedded!  Right! said Fred: again talking to himself, as he paced his office rehearsing  some loosely gathered thinking. So, there was an unfolding yet constant paradox at  work in managing educational provision. Education should empower and be socially  just, as well as offer routines for the reinforcement of social responsibility; like it or  not education is a process of socialization.  This meant that almost, if not entirely by definition, schooling would generate  a continuous set of dilemmas, contradictions and tensions in relation to the wider  community. It was this selfsame set of issues that re-surfaced when working with  social diversity and the challenges associated with equity in the school community  including questions not always asked, but that when addressed, triggered confronting,  conflicted values: such as the place and respect given to religious beliefs, or even  when at first glance these might seem to be more mundane issues, to do with forms  of etiquette, dress, or diet. Should students for example be allowed to wear the  hijab? Be granted in-between time in the school lesson for prayer?  Learning, knowing, and teaching; it sometimes seemed to Fred that he was  dealing in the delivery of some kind of mystic manna for the human soul. He wanted 

CHAPTER 7 110 to make a difference by ensuring the school was the place that made a difference. He  pondered the place and concept of school. Positive applied psychology: Fred should,  he reflected, deal in the right stuff for teaching and learning; the school ethic should  be used in turn to reflect and provide an environment conducive to personal growth  and learning to learn. It in turn also needed to be a part of the wider community at  large if it were to be successful. Never ending ripples within ripples of systemic  action moved through the minds eye as Fred contemplated the need for inter-agency  working and community-based support for learning networks and partnerships. New  goals for next years positive learning development loomed larger in his mind.  Fred got up and walked over to the office window. He stared out over the leisure  area toward the schools playing fields. He missed playing football. Motive and  motivation: well, the work was far from boring; it was stressful, sometimes very  difficult, and not without setback and disappointment. So now it was time to move  on and meet the senior leadership team, governing body and positive behaviour  group in a decision-taking session. Then there was the need to think beyond this  year to the next. Truth be told, Fred thought, he actually got an intense buzz from this  daily, weekly, term by term, continuing challenge and well, there it was, he realized,  he really did love this work, though in teacher circles somewhat perversely, it might  not be cool to admit it!  Questions for reflection Distributed leadership is a better way  to lead school change  Do you agree  or disagree with this statement?  Reflect on the current leadership  practices in your school and think of  the ways the school leadership team  can work with other members of the  school community to lead the school  to better outcomes for all.
CHAPTER 8 CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING  ENVIRONMENTS What Parents and Teacher Assistants Can Do OVERVIEW AND KEY CONCEPTS  Team teaching  Collaboration and partnership  Capacity building   Role of teacher aides Meet the Cast Main Characters: Cynthia  teacher Judy  parent of 10 year old Cameron Narelle  a new teacher aide for Cameron Kate  a fresh graduate teacher Nick  school psychologist  Minor Characters: James  a teacher at the school PD. This chapter takes another and different experience of the school community. We  explore here the perspectives of parents and teacher assistants, in an attempt to learn  a little more about how everyone plays a part in an inclusive approach to the learning  community.  Judy was very anxious. She had just received a phone call from Camerons school.  Cameron was Judys 10-year-old son, who had just had another bout of his usual  behaviour outburst at school. They want her to come and pick him up. This was the  4th time within last three months that Judy has been called to take her son home.  She was very stressed with the whole situation and didnt know what she could do  about it. While driving to school from work, Judy started asking herself a number  of questions: Should I enrol Cameron in another school? Can I lodge a complaint to  the Department of Education for the schools inability to handle Cameron properly? 

CHAPTER 8 112 After all, what has happened this year, all of a sudden, to make him start misbehaving  so frequently?  On her way to school, Judy had some time to think about the situation. Cameron  has got a new teacher, Cynthia, and a new teacher aide, Narelle. Could they somehow  be responsible for his disruptive behaviour? Even if they were, who would accept  it? She decided to discuss this with Fred, the Principal. Unfortunately Fred was on  study leave for two weeks so she had to wait before she could discuss it. He was  due back on the coming Monday.  Judy arrived at the school. The receptionist knew  that Judy would be coming to pick up her son. She told her that Cameron was in the  sickbay and she could take him home. Would you like to talk to Mr. Thomas?  asked the receptionist.  No, Thank you. But can I get an appointment to see the school principal  sometime? But I know he is not here this week. Judy waited. How about Monday at 12:30pm? asked the receptionist. Sorry, Monday doesnt suit me; I work full-time and my work doesnt finish  until 5PM. Any possibility I could see him on another day or after 5pm? asked Judy. After looking at Freds diary for few seconds the receptionist said, No, thats the  only time Fred is free. Or youll have to wait another week.     Ok,  well if thats the case, I will meet with him on Monday, confirmed Judy.  As she walked out of the school building, the same questions revolved in her head  again. Is this school really the best place for Cameron? The school doesnt care if I  have to take leave to see the Principal. Maybe they want to make it difficult for me to  meet with him? Maybe Fred has directed his office staff to keep parents like me away!  As usual Cameron was quiet in the car and acted as if nothing had happened.   Can you tell me something, Cameron? Whats happening this year? Why have you  been misbehaving so much this year? asked Judy. Camerons response was as usual, I dont know.  It was Monday morning! The rest of the week had gone incident free. Judy was  all prepared to talk to Fred about Cameron. She was not sure if she would be able to  control her anger.  Judy also knew if she wanted to keep Cameron in the same school  then she needed to be calm and understanding.  Judy arrived at the school. As she walked towards reception, she could hear her  heart thumping. It was not the best feeling.  It felt as if she was going to have a war  with the Principal. The receptionist knew that Judy had a meeting with the principal  and asked her to wait for few minutes as he was on the phone.  Freds initial gesture calmed Judy down.  I am going to make coffee for myself,  Judy. What would you like, tea, coffee or I can offer you chilled water? Fred had just  come back from a Professional Development PD program on Positive Behaviour  Support PBS. He made a conscious effort to make Judy feel comfortable. Fred  demonstrated two important skills of effective leaders  first he remembered the  name of the parent and second he made her feel welcome. Judy, I know the reason you are here. Can I say that I am really sorry for what  has happened this year with Cameron? We have had two other students who are 

CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 113 going through similar issues. You may not know it but I was away for the last two  weeks to undertake professional development in implementing a new whole school  policy of PBS. All of my school staff will be undergoing training in PBS. I am  keen that it is implemented throughout the school so that students like Cameron are  engaged. Our focus within that will be the prevention of behavioural issues. Fred  spoke enthusiastically.  He continued, We will need strong support and the involvement of parents in  making PBS a success in our school.  We do want all parents to be informed of this  new initiative and want to ensure that we work in close partnership with them.    Judy was a little more relaxed but was still keen to know why her son has  been behaving so badly this year and asked why school had not been able to do  anything about it. Fred said that it could have been a number of things, including  that Cameron had been working with a new teacher and also with a new teacher  aide. Judy was pleased to hear that Fred did seem to realise what she was suspecting:  Perhaps, Cynthia and the teacher aide have not understood Cameron really well.  There could be a significant mismatch between the way Cameron is taught and the  way he prefers to be taught. Or there could be another reason that we dont even  know yet. Judy could hardly believe that Fred identified issues with the way the  school was working with Cameron as the source of some of the problems. She had  not expected to hear this in their meeting. Fred re-assured her that things could only  improve from here. He told Judy that the school would be organizing professional  development for all the school staff, including the teacher aides. He apologized for  the lack of understanding that Cameron had received until now. But he then asked  for her patience while sorting things out. Next morning, Fred, informed the staff how excited he was after completing the  PD on positive behaviour support. He also told the staff he was keen to insure that  PBS was implemented in the school. To assist the school in implementation of the  plan, Fred revealed he had asked Nick staff already knew him to conduct PD on  the coming Friday.  This will not be a one off PD, as we know that short term training has very  limited impact, so I have asked Nick to work with us on an ongoing basis for the  next six months. Nick will be running workshops for us on PBS.  He will also be  working one on one with some of us if needed to ensure that students like Cameron  are fully included in our school. Cynthia sceptically commented: I would really be  interested to know what Nick can tell us that we dont already know about working  with students like Cameron. I dont think our school is the best place for Cameron   he should go to the special school across the road.  Fred was quick to respond.  No, Cameron is not going anywhere. He will stay in  our school and the litmus test for the success of our school is for Cameron and his  mother to tell us how our school has been the best option for them. I know it is not  easy, but I really want all of us to see that if we can do this for Cameron, not only  will our school be a better place for Cameron, but for many other Camerons we  have not yet talked about. I can assure you, you will get all the necessary support 

CHAPTER 8 114 for this to happen. Fred was all fired up. The staff could see a change in him since  returning from the PD.  Nick arrived at the school on the curriculum day. The school was quiet with no  students. Fred had already spoken to Nick about the level of some staff members  scepticism. This was nothing new for Nick. He knew that some educators would  continue to offer instinctive resistance to change, but as the school started  implementing the new policy, and as the rest of staff began to feel the impact of it,  he really believed things would improve. Nick prepared well and always aimed at  having something in his workshops that helped everyone feel relaxed. This day was  no different. He began with a fun activity. Everyone was fully engaged in the activity  and ready for the rest of the day.  Nick began, As you know, I am here to talk about PBS. Today I will focus  on two topics: working effectively with parents, and what teacher aides can do to  implement PBS. I am sure you will agree that parents are important stakeholders in  their childrens education. If we can work at making sure parents are our partners  in implementing any new policy, then the chances of its success can be increased  manifold. I am not going to bombard you with lots of information. I will keep  the session very simple. What I will do is identify the key principles of working  effectively with parents, and then we will work in our small groups to find out how  the principles can be translated into real life practice. He showed the slide with four principles:  Principle 1: Parents as partners  Principle 2: Positive interaction  Principle 3: Informed parents  Principle 4: Capacity building for parents Nick provided some examples to explain each of the four principles.  Parents as partners means that we treat parents as equal partners in everything  that we do in our school, rather than treating them as if they dont know anything.  This will require a fundamental shift in the way we have worked with parents in the  past. We may even think about what we can learn from them to improve the way  we teach. Yes, I do mean it  we have to start treating them as if they too may have  strategies we can use to work effectively with their child. We need to spend time  with parents to find out about those strategies. Positive interaction will also mean a significant shift in the way we interact with  parents. The current tendency has been that we contact parents only when their child  misbehaves or breaks a rule. I am suggesting that we need to change this. We need to  find ways that our interactions with parents are positive. We also need to make sure  that we use modes of communication with parents that allow them to stay in close  touch with us like emails.  We need to think of ways we can welcome them into our  classrooms and schools. Knowing and remembering the names of the parents is a  very powerful strategy  not many parents expect us to remember their names, but  when we do, they feel personally important, valued, and welcomed.

CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 115 Informed parents are those who know about various things that we are doing in  our classrooms and in the school. For example, we would like our parents to know  that our school is implementing whole school PBS. So wed also like to give them  opportunities to discuss what they could do to make it effective for their child. I  have created a one-page summary about PBS in laymans terms that you may like  to provide to parents. The summary  provides basic information that parents need  to know so that they are not overwhelmed with the information but at the same  time they can see how it may affect their child in our school. I must say that there is  strong evidence Brough  Irvin, 2001; Henderson  Mapp, 2002; Presidents Commission  on Excellent in Special Education, 2002 in support of keeping parents informed of  schooling practices. Parents who are well informed of school practices connect  well to the school. This also has the direct effect of their child feeling connected  to the school. You can use the same principle of keeping parents informed of your  curricular focus and teaching strategies, using different modes of communication  with them. Fred has suggested that he will be very happy to organize parent meetings  on a monthly basis so as to allow parents to come to school to have an informal chat  with you about school activities most relevant to their child. The last principle is an important one. We want to work closely with parents  to ensure that they acquire skills to interact positively with their children. We have  identified two areas for parent training this term. These are resilience training and  preventative discipline. The timing of the workshops in this term will coincide with  the workshops that I will be running with school staff and students on both these  topics. We are anticipating that this approach will allow us to see the impact at the  whole school level, rather than just targeting one student and his or her family, or  worse still, potentially just one teacher!   What we want to do for the next few hours is to come up with practical ways to  make these principles part of our practice. We are expecting to have at least three  to four practical ideas for translating the principle into practice. Well thought and  practical ideas that you come up with will become part of the school policy. Fred  has told me that he will find extra resources if there is such a need for the practices  to be implemented. Kate was enthusiastic to work on the task straightway. She collected some butcher  paper for her group and they each started writing their ideas. Cynthia, who was also  in Kates group, came up with some great ideas. She said: I am going to draft a letter  for all parents of children in my class so that they know what I have been doing in  my class. I will also be collecting emails from all my parents and making a list of  parents to send an email to on a monthly basis. What I am thinking for parents like  Judy everyone in her group knew Judy is that I might be writing an individual  email to her on a more regular basis. I hope this will show her that I am keen to work  with Cameron, and do want to see that he enjoys my class and is less disruptive in  future. All the groups presented their ideas. Nick compiled a list of possible practices  that could be adopted to implement each of the four principles. Fred was pleased to 

CHAPTER 8 116 see really useful strategies identified by his staff. He knew that now he had to find  extra resources to enable certain necessary changes become possible. It was time for  lunch break. Questions for reflection Think of the parent of a child with  whom you have had most difficult  interactions. Do you think you have  used all four principles working with  the parents? Would you like to add  another principle to this list? What  and why?  Once you have done this,  reconsider  yourself as the parent of the most  difficult student you have taught so  far. What do you expect from the  teachers? As soon as lunch was over, Nick was keen to make a start. The focus of the next  session was on teacher aides. Nick put up a slide of a shoe and asked the participants  to share something unique about the picture. Kate said that it was a big shoe and it  wouldnt fit a child. Cynthia said that the colour of the shoe was unique dark green.  Nick has not yet got the answer for which he was searching! Kate suddenly said, It  has Velcro.  Nick replied, Yes, spot on. This is what I wanted to hear. I will come back to  it later but lets make a start. This morning we talked about what we need to do to  work effectively with parents using the whole school PBS approach. What I want  to do now is talk about how teacher aides should be working and how should we all  be working with them within this approach. I am pleased to see that we have some  teacher aides pointing towards Narelle in our session today. By the way, the focus  of my presentation is not just teacher aides but everyone in the school workforce  including teaching staff. We will do it the same way as we did this morning. I will  identify the key principles of how teacher aides should be working within this  framework, and we will then work in our small groups to come up with the practices  for each principle.  Nick put up the next slide of the following principles:  Principle 1:  Team teaching   Principle 2:  Team player and partnership  Principle 3:  Capacity building Before moving into small groups, lets look at this slide again shoe with a Velcro  to make sense of the Team teaching principle. Historically, and even now, this is how 

CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 117 a teacher aide has worked with a student: We have a child who might have some  behavioural issues or a disability, we then get funding from the department and we  employ a teacher or integration aide. The main role of the teacher aide is to work  solely with that student. This approach is sometimes known as a Velcro approach to  integration. In fact there are parents who would refuse to allow the teacher aide to be  used for anything other than assisting their child,  always and only with their child.  If a child goes to the playground, the teacher aide is with him; when the child goes to  toilet, the aide is with him.  In many schools, teacher aides are employed to support  inclusion of a student with a disability. In reality, this approach effectively slips into the social exclusion of a student.  This happens because in order to receive support from a teacher aide, a student must  first be labelled as having a disability otherwise there is no funding. So what we  have done for the student is to demonstrate something is wrong with himher and  thats why heshe needs the support of another person. Also, because the teacher  aide is always with the student, peers tend to stay away from that student. This leads  to reduced interaction between the student and important social networking with  peers, and undermines the philosophy of inclusion, unnecessarily building barriers  to social learning.  What I am suggesting is that we move away from this old approach where the  teacher aide is tied to working with one student, to one that allows the teacher aide  to work alongside a small group of students. When the student who is funded to  receive support needs any assistance, then the teacher aide can assist him or her. But  there is no need for a teacher aide to be velcroed to a student! There are clearly two  benefits of this approach. First, we have an extra person in our class to assist with  our teaching. Second, the student is not stigmatized as the one who needs constant  assistance. I would like to share with you a research  study that would further explain the  points I just made. A group of researchers Young, Simpson, Miles,  Kamps,  1997 undertook an observational study of three primary grade children who were  attending inclusive classrooms. They found that teacher interactions with those  students whose aides were not in close proximity to the students were more frequent  compared to the students whose aides were in close proximity to them. Giangreco  et al. 2005, p. 31 has also recorded similar observations: . busy teachers tend to work with other students when they know the student  with a disability already has individual attention. The assignment of an  individual para-professional to a student with a disability often co-occurs  with lower levels of teacher engagement, whereas the use of a classroom  paraprofessional, under the direction of the teacher, more often occurs with  higher levels of teacher engagement  The second principle is one that requires all of us to think differently about  teacher aides. In my many years of experience in working in schools, I have noted  that the teacher aides are treated as second-class citizens in our education system. 

CHAPTER 8 118 There is a tendency to regard teacher aides, being paid lower salaries to work with  the most difficult, and sadly with less academic students in our schools, as not really  teachers, and so often not receiving the same respect deserved and given to other  members of our schooling community. There is also an implied belief that by providing a teacher aide for a student  with disability in the classroom reduces a teachers responsibility for that student.  By the way, this is not a problem of one school or a school district; it is the problem  of the whole educational system. We expect teacher aides to make instructional and  curricular decisions about a student. The teacher aide becomes the main educator for  the student and displaces the qualified teacher. It needs to change. And changing  it cannot happen unless we start believing that teacher aides are equal members of  our educational. The education of a student with a disability should not be seen as  the sole responsibility of the teacher aide but it is a joint responsibility of both the  teacher aide and the teacher.   The need to improve the status of support staff is not easy. There are many  occasions when a teacher aide may not have adequate skills and qualifications to  work with students presenting a range of behavioural issues. The teacher aides are  often asked to take a prominent role teaching students who are most difficult to  teach. They take responsibility for roles for which they are often not well prepared  Giangreco et al., 2005. Building their capacity to be effective team members requires  us to provide them with opportunities to undertake professional development. They  should not just be learning about how to work with a student, but should also learn  about the whole school policy. This is one of the reasons Fred has asked all teacher  aides to be part of all PD activities. In many ways we are in a fortunate position as Narelle is perhaps one of the wellqualified professionals with a Graduate Diploma in Special Education. We cannot  ask for better-qualified teacher aides. However, we know that not all integrationaides will be as well qualified as Narelle. What I suggest we should do is to find out  from people like Narelle what kind of PD activities would be good for them as well  as for the rest of the school staff. What I would also like to suggest is, that rather than teacher aides to be on  the receiving side of capacity building exercise, they take up an important role  of delivering PDs for the staff. I know Narelle just completed a short course on  Motivation and engagement for difficult to teach students. It would be great if  you are ok with it jf you could run a short session for us on how best we can apply  what you learnt in the course.  Narelles reaction was No. Thats ok we can talk about this later, said Nick.  Any questions before we work in our small groups to operationalize the principles  in our schools practices?  Kate raised her hand and then commented, It was a great session, Nick. There  was a serious point of conflict for me until you raised the point about considering  teacher aides as team players. To be very honest, I have always thought of teacher  aides as helpers in our class. What you just told me requires us to think completely 

CREATING POSITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 119 differently about them, and I can clearly see the value of working with teacher aides  as partners in our classrooms, rather than just as velcroed helpers.  Thats great feedback, Kate, said Nick. Can we work on the activity now? The participants then started working in their small groups. Many suggestions  that came from the groups  were quite impressive.  For example James suggested,  we must talk to parents when they ask that a teacher aide should be assigned to  their child only. If we know about parents motivation then we can do something  about it. My suspicion is that parents feel their son or daughter needs to be protected.  However, they may not realize that such overprotection could alienate and isolate  their child. Our group also thinks that we must speak to individual students who are  allocated a teacher aide. We should find out from a student how he or she feels about  having a teacher aide assigned to work with him or her solely, or if he or she would  have better suggestions of how a teacher aide should be working in the school.  Great suggestions, James Nick commented. Others also shared some wonderful  insights.  Fred agreed, Yes these are indeed great suggestions. I have to say I am  impressed with everyones active participation in the workshops today. I am looking  forward to the action list compiled by Nick and will work on it as early as next  week. Questions for reflection Think of a student with a severe  behaviour problem in your class school. The student is assigned a full  time aide.  Having understood that the Velcro  approach may not be very useful,  how would you use the teacher aide?  What other resources do you consider  necessary to support this student? 
CHAPTER 9 LOOKING BACK Teaching Learning on the Road OVERVIEW AND KEY CONCEPTS  Conclusion: implications for the ongoing journey  Reflecting upon experience: perspectives and practice  Putting Theory to work: sustaining positive learning   Staying positive: including, involving,  innovating CONCLUSION: IMPLICATIONS FOR THE ONGOING JOURNEY? At the beginning of this book we talked about learning teaching on the road. The idea  of the road trip has been used as a structuring device to organize a series of accounts,  perspectives and events describing the journey of working in education. In a sense  we have tried to teach teaching as part of the journey, learning on the road. We hope  that by meeting several characters on this journey you have recognized a great deal  through being able to identify in a practical and applied sense with the characters  while also sporting a healthy sense of critical evaluation where you have found  yourself occasionally disagreeing with some of the ideas and opinions expressed.  We have not introduced a radical theory or new ways of thinking about the work of  learning and success in teaching. What we do hope is to have presented several different  approaches which are practical as well as underpinned by validated theory. At the same  time, we hope we have demonstrated that the role of the practitioner developing ones  praxis requires both critical reflection and problem-solving thinking in an applied mix  of theory and practice. To this end, we do claim that positive approaches to the work  of learning and teaching will ultimately and simultaneously benefit teachers, students,  parents, and the full range of other members that make up the school community.  Furthermore, we think there is in the detail recounted in these stories signposts  to discovering yet more to reflect upon, including some key principles, ideas or  values you have witnessed while on the road trip. We hope these will serve to  help you reflect and think about your own practice, develop praxis as knowledge  and expertise, and encourage you to talk with peers about these ideas, beliefs and  underlying values. For the most part, you will doubtlessly seek to do this in order to  confirm better ways of working, facilitated by clearer ideas of learning and teaching,  and so find fresh ways and means for educating our individual students. In all of this  we expect that the theories of humanistic and positive psychology will illuminate the 

CHAPTER 9 122 places, people and contexts described on the road trip. We do claim, too, and ask that  you reflect upon this claim, that this account brings a new practical and significant  meaning to being positive about contributing to the learning environment. All in all, however, while the use of reflection is central to our approach, we  suggest that adopting at the same time a parallel hard-headed problem-posing  critical evaluation is crucial to maintaining momentum and making headway along  the road. It is, as we stated at the end of the first chapter, very much like learning how  to drive, or to drive better, which quite critically means using the rear vision mirror.  The driver makes full use of the running reflection in the mirror, checking on what  has passed, in order to take running decisions about the present, so that the journey  may continue and a destination at some point in the near future be safely reached.  And the good news here is that while you may reach more than one stop-over, you  will not reach the final destination. While this chapter concludes with a specific part  of the journey, there is more to come. So it is now timely to re-emphasize another  opinion, closely related to the belief that as a professional, a practitioner, andor an  expert teacher, none of us ever stop learning!  The truth is, and we use this word deliberately, looking back on the account in this  book, characters learn and rehearse the skills, attitudes and understandings that make  up successful teaching and learning. Kate, Fred, Cynthia, and Nick, all at differing  points in their career, share similar professional needs in terms of seeking clarity in  purpose and intention for their school community. And crucially, they individually  feel some ownership of that community. Eleanor takes on a huge task, at the start of  a new post, and she manages to both facilitate as well as experience a seismic shift  in personal learning. Confidence grows and so too does success. And what is equally  important to understand, this kind of learning is just as relevant for students engaged  in classroom activity as it is for their teachers.  Many colleagues and students, however, who feel alienated or displaced, often  struggle to find a personal affiliation or identification with the corporate enterprise that  is embodied in belonging to a learning community. They need to be further supported  in developing and continuously using new knowledge in a way that fosters positive  behavior. The learning can be formal and informal, is both personal and social, and so  inevitably includes others in the school community. In this sense, learning leadership  for the professional involves a range of actions and activities which make up far  more than instructional leadership; it embodies a range of various contributions to  the learning organization which are actually about leadership, leading and enabling  change that will inevitably shape and or structure the successful school community  see, for example, the leadership for learning centre at Cambridge University in the  UK at http:www.educ.cam.ac.ukresearchacademicgroupsleadinglearning. REFLECTING UPON EXPERIENCE: PERSPECTIVES AND PRACTICE Perhaps at this late point in this book there is a need to focus a little more closely  on the benefits claimed as outcomes at various points covered in this book. If we 

LOOKING BACK 123 imagine, for a moment or three, an EducationalSchool Psychologist EP called Nick,  a TeacherEducator called Kate, and a PD Consultant in Educational Management  called Sam, sitting around the coffee table. The question of positive learning and  using psychology in education has been raised. The discussion reflects in turn many  of the accounts presented in the central part of this book. Nick, the EP, takes a lead in the discussion, as he regards himself as a bit of an  expert on learning and the psychology most relevant to success and reward in the  work place as well as for life more generally. What Nick insists is that positive  psychology can teach all of us how to opt out of a series of transactional games  we have learned to play that get in the way of learning and personal development.  There is a need, Nick argues, for deliberately encouraging grown up adult skills  in assertiveness rather than a child-like negative use of aggression or destructive  expression of anger. The latter can so easily create dysfunctional victim-perpetrator  interactions between people. Instead of sustaining negative attributions for our  weaknesses and disappointments, often involving the blaming of others and harsh  criticism of perceived failure or poor performance, we need to look more deeply at  what is going on in the inter-personal relations being played out in the classroom,  and beyond in other areas of the school community. Nick maintains we need to opt  in by taking more self-orientated responsibility for our own person, while accepting  others in their search for self-actualization. We need to play the ball, not the person.  We need to work harder at listening attentively.  The benefits of adopting this theory, Nick argues, makes for better, more grounded  individuals and a clearer more open exchange between peers; teachers with parents, and  students with teachers, in the classroom. In terms of an inclusive and authentic approach  to educational diversity, this philosophy will yield a number of benefits reflecting mutual  respect and at its best, unconditional regard that facilitates a parity or equality of esteem  for minority groups, students with differences associated with learning difficulties or  problems with mental health. All of this, Nick argues, is in turn reinforced by the benefit  of nurturing positive attitudes toward perceptions of self-efficacy, and the range of selfmonitoring tactics we can learn in engendering emotional resilience, affirmation, wellbeing and serial fulfillment. In fact, in many respects, this is about learning how to be  OK with being happy! Nick concludes by emphasizing the view point that the greater  the levels of engagement and affiliation experienced by everyone involved in the school  community, the more healthy and vibrant the learning experience. Kate speaks up next, accepting all that had been stated but wishing to represent  it as part of a differing perspective on the work of the teacher associated with  professional learning and teacher education. This, she seems to argue, is and always  should be, regarded as an essential part of the learning game. It is vital, she adds,  that teachers continue while on the road, that is, throughout their career, to be  reflective, thinking practitioners  asking from time to time basic soul-searching  questions like why am I a teacher? and how do I know that what I am doing is the  best for the student?. She cites Dewey as a must read Dewey, 1933, and Loughran  2010 as a more recent catch-up read. 

CHAPTER 9 124 What is more, Kate continues, teachers need to translate this approach into  practical strategies for the classroom. In terms of constructing positive learning  environments, she stresses the important place of prevention, particularly in learning  and using new teaching strategies for creating a classroom environment where a  student will not need to be disruptive. This for Kate practically speaking, meant  putting the theory into application and answering the age-old 64k question of  theory, that is, so what? Developing approaches such as cooperative learning, peerbased learning groups, and opportunities for personal styles-based differentiation  were perhaps three of several useful methods to be applied and developed in what  she hoped might be called the inclusive classroom.  Then next is the task of re-applying Nicks psychology, added Kate. The key  concerns always addressed by effective teachers are an awareness of student interest  and motivation,, and the trick of using both to nurture emotional resilience and or perseverance as key traits in their learning behaviour. A truly effective teacher  also works at combining this with a readiness to learn, to take emotional risks, to  engage in the tasks designed by the teacher. For those children experiencing social,  emotional and behavioural difficulties, this approach is reinforced by a third special  pedagogic tactic, aimed at providing restorative experiences in the design of learning  tasks, as well as a more proscribed skills-based development. It is, Kate suggests, the kind of approach embodied in the recent provision typified  by the nurture group in primary education see http:www.nurturegroups.org.  Again, the emphasis for Kate was not only one of accepting individual  differences across the school student population in terms of personality, capability  and performance, but also the different expression and need for seeking affiliation,  engagement and enhancement through the work of personal and social connections.  This also needed especially to be considered in any relationships with significant  others, linked to membership of the school community. Ideally, it is cool to  belong to the class, to the school, and to turn up for the start of the school week. It is  a good place to be, even if teenagers  peers at any point do not always easily admit it  in the same working week! But here is the thing  one day it MIGHT VERY WELL  be cool even to admit it! Sam, the consultant nodded his head. Nothing wrong with all of this except it has to  be woven into an organized and managed form of educational provision. Absolutely  crucial was the realization, for Sam, that the learning wasnt simply thought to  be located in the classroom. It embraced every aspect of the school community.  Secondly, Sam wanted to confront the whole idea of educational inclusion. He was  searching for a better way of tackling this issue that was not simply an idealistic  imperative that inevitably failed in the learning context. This failure seemed to  him to occur in several different ways but especially when the going got tough.  Educating students, all students, needed to involve more for Sam than the idea of an  inclusive ideal that amounted to saying here is a straightforward offer of access to  the watering hole, drink if you wish or just go away. 

LOOKING BACK 125 This appropriate and desired drinking learning at the water-hole formal school  setting inevitably and very often in a dramatic manner, simply did not happen when  for example a disruptive or harmful behaviour occurred in the school day. Sam used  to call serious misbehavior or the disturbed and dangerous double-D student, the  Achilles Heel of the school inclusion lobby. At its most extreme, this behaviour  involved risk to life, at its most irritating, risk to property. A school principal needed  to be able to exclude a student for reasons of protection and clearly stated regard for  health and safety.  Nevertheless, Sam concluded, a positive approach to leadership distributed  throughout the school community is a second level rejoinder for what Kate had  described as positive behavior management. Distributing leadership opportunities and opportunities for individuals to take up  the chance to manage and adapt, added Sam, are crucial ingredients in an approach  embodying positive behavior management.  At the same time, Sam exclaimed, it also seems to be a mechanism for facilitating  community member engagement within any organization in decision-making,  strategic planning and change management. It is about maximizing the ideas that  could be found in Glassers choice theory e.g., at http:www.choicetheory.com.  Equally importantly, it offers ideas, tactics, and a method for a psycho educational  model of pedagogy that carries with it the potential benefits of cognitive behaviour  processes that relate to spoken therapies and restorative education.  Sam remembered reading how Cynthia had introduced choice theory into her  classroom. Great! But it needs to ripple outwards beyond the classroom. The  first golden principle in educational leadership, Sam claimed, should remain  implementing a whole-school approach to learning, teaching and development.  Think school community, better still, think learning community. What is more, Sam added, the use of a transforming model of leadership  necessarily involves issues of social justice, moral values, and more reinforcing  work aimed at developing an institutional resilience equivalent to, and perhaps a  reflection of, individual resilience, in the members of its community. This required a form of inclusive leadership concerned with growing what Sam  liked to call the aspirational dream of a consensual community. For Sam, there was  a desperate need to develop a new and perhaps more intelligent, smart, even savvy  and pragmatic approach to educational diversity, perhaps moving away from the past  in terms of a reliance upon labeling categories such as special educational needs,  disability, ethnic discrimination or disadvantage, to begin re-thinking an approach  that more decisively reflects universal design in the curriculum, and the meeting of  individual and personal learning needs in one or more new ways. Sam anticipated  these developments as using new contextualized authentic or dynamic forms  of assessment, as well as other established tests for individual differences in the  psychologists toolbox, but with increasing acknowledgement and acceptance of  personal and social diversity. 

CHAPTER 9 126 Most importantly, Sam said, Id want to see pedagogic and curricular  developments reflecting something I would suggest might be called intelligent  inclusion. He wanted to introduce a renewed emphasis upon a comprehensive  approach to education that did not select students from the outset but rather did  consider individual differences throughout the cradle to grave educational  experience.  This might, Sam continued, be provided for in the idea of a learning village  or community that integrates several forms of social, health and educational  provision. Creating joined-up services was one way to plan provision intelligently  or even just sensibly, albeit for Sam, this most certainly did not mean re-instating a  comprehensive ideal in which one size will fit all as the approach to inclusion. It  also meant developing fresh approaches to ensure new required ways of inter-agency  working could be successfully managed. After all, Sam opined, we are all learners engaged in learning even though we  are teachers! The three ended by agreeing they should write a book! PUTTING THEORY TO WORK: SUSTAINING POSITIVE LEARNING  Taking this discussion a little further brings us around to looking back again at the  various voices used within the different narratives in this book. We can see that all of  the issues raised in the previous cameo are to be found being played out at various  points in the careers of the main characters. Their story is one of putting theory to  work.  The long game, however, is one of creating and sustaining positive learning in  every aspect of the school organization. We see, for example, positive behaviour  support in Tracys account of managing Tom in the classroom. In a similar way, full  accounts of adopting reflective teaching and using positive psychology are visible in  Cynthias story, and involves maximizing choice in her teaching and learning.  The classroom is the main context for this activity, and the scene of action, but the  work also involves moving beyond the classroom. It involves parents as well as the  teacher aide, and arguably may well involve others such as an educational  school  psychologist, a social worker, and potentially even a baker who has successfully  run a business for forty years. At some point perhaps, Tom will gain valuable work  experience in such a bakery as part of his on-going education. Further examples of putting this theory into practice and sustaining positive  learning occur throughout the book. It is perhaps worth mentioning how similar  is Kates story of a new stage in her career at the beginning of the book, to Freds  start as the principal in a failing city school later in the book. One character is  very new to the learning game and the road trip, the other much more experienced.  Yet their feelings, thoughts and anticipation are not immediately or obviously  that different. Both share the same kinds of challenges. Maintaining a positive  approach to the task in hand for Kate is managing the sassy feedback of three  students at the school gates in her first week at work; for Fred, it is resisting 

LOOKING BACK 127 the urge to disappear into the distance instead of turning right in to the school  driveway on his first day in the new job.  Finally, people like Eleanor and Fred display examples of what we might call  intelligent inclusion and transformative leadership; in turn, they mobilize and  engage the various members of the leadership groups to facilitate strategic growth  in the school community see Rayner, 2007, Shields, 2011 for more on these kinds  of approaches to educational leadership. Eleanor takes up a lead role in facilitating  policy development. She is new to this responsibility but sustains a shared approach  to owning the work. The leadership group represents an example of how distributive  leadership can work. The idea that a group representing a community of practice can  form and re-form, and informally take up change is helpfully detailed by Wenger  2002, but the implications of situated cognition that form part of an organizational  structure and shaping leadership is perhaps better described by Gronn 2000, 2002  and Spillane and Diamond 2007.  Furthermore, Fred in turn demonstrates how, as the school principal, applying  this notion of distributed leadership can be blended with the idea of transformative  leadership, and used to construct a way of growing andor re-growing  organizational culture for an educational enterprise. The benefits of this approach  are that it offers ways of assuring medium term development. It prevents a short term  win-win, use it and lose it, approach to change and work, which for Fred, is  anathema to learning and educational development. It also has the added advantage  of linking directly with the educationists concern for inclusion. This in turn connects  with social justice, access, empowerment, and equity issues; stuff that matters when  we hope that education will be an opportunity for all, and serves the public good as  well as facilitates personal development. STAYING POSITIVE: INCLUDING, INVOLVING AND INNOVATING  Sometimes life is difficult and work as an educationist can appear tiring, thankless,  and quite frankly so bad you feel like giving it all up. This is likely how Rob was  feeling in chapter 2 after receiving supportive help from the school principal. The  first thing to remember is like it or not, you are one of many feeling this way and it  is a fairly safe bet that someone else is feeling the same way right now. Furthermore,  we have all experienced times like this when success is not so obvious, and failure  seems all-enveloping.  A colleague school psychologist once said to us in conversation that he worked  tirelessly at being a pathological optimist. I am not sure if he succeeded, but  what he did believe in were many of the ideas and values associated with positive  psychology. The trick is to take perspective, if possible share the perspective with  a friend, a trusted other, and reflect and evaluate together. It is useful too if at all  possible to refer to and manage Seligmans three Ps of pessimism Seligman, 1975;  1998, and, to perhaps put this list up on a mental whiteboard so as to reflect upon its  role in learning and teaching our own and others. These Ps are:

CHAPTER 9 128  Personalization  that is  typical and persistent forms of internal dialogue which  can often firstly go something like, I am responsible, totally to blame, for all the  bad things that happen to me. Or secondly, if something ever goes right, it is  then simply a matter of good luck and nothing at all to do with me or my effort;  and, thirdly, I always suspect that any negative comment is immediately about  me rather than the situation. I am always to blame.  Permanence  that is, a tendency for you to generalize, usually in a way that says  something like Ill never be able to do this. Or Mr Smith is always annoying  me. The key give away words in this internal dialogue are always andor never  which undermine a positive attitude to difficulty andor challenge.  Pervasiveness  that is  when a setback happens, it is an opening of the floodgate  and our whole world is threatened with disaster. Everything is going to fail or fall,  just like a row of dominos collapsing in a line. If one thing goes wrong, then it  impacts every other aspect of your life. A good example is how we react to small  things that suddenly loom large, like burning the toast for breakfast. From then  on you are in a pessimistic, everything is going to run badly mood for the rest  of the day, that impacts your work, your relationships and your overall sense of  wellbeing. The colleague just mentioned did stay positive most of the time while tackling  some very difficult and challenging tasks. There is a distinct probability he had read  quite a lot of Seligmans work. His enthusiasm for a task in hand was infectious, just  as were his levels of commitment and perseverance. What he needed, sometimes,  however, was a steer and a reminder that not everyone possessed his well-established  optimism or his levels of personal drive. He needed to work at taking people with  him. The same principles hold true for managing positive behavior in the school  context or classroom. Much as we may at times feel otherwise, student behavior is  rarely a singularly ring-fenced, once only, dedicated mission to disrupt or destroy  a teachers lesson or status, or outlook on the profession. A students behavior  will carry across contexts, places and even with very different people. The issue of  difficult or problem behaviour is one best met and managed as a group where there  is a common and agreed understanding of approach. School policy works best if  it energizes practices that are largely preventive andor restorative. This requires  professional trust, as colleagues acknowledge difficulties and build ways of working  together for a resolution. Nonetheless, often the problem can become an intense one  to which an individual teacher needs to respond; yet the same principles stand. Share  the problem, if not immediately, soon after, and hopefully, a team can work together  to support and share in mediating the problem. Sharing a problem is not the same as  not owning it. Indeed it invariably reflects the very opposite: sharing is facilitative  of problem ownership.  It is important to recognize that it is easier to fail or fall as a lone teacher than  it is when you work as a member of a larger group, especially where that group 

LOOKING BACK 129 has developed trust and coherence and established good team-work. Including and  enabling the problem student is more often than not best dealt with by recognizing  that the problem is not only, or very often not at all, simply about the student. As  Nick, the School Psych stated earlier in this chapter, we do need to play the ball.  But while we play as an individual, we remain and play as part of a team. It is  often the case that when a pupil has reacted inappropriately to the situation, and has  triggered a series of actions or events that climax in a serious problem, the issue  will finally be tackled by a number of professionals. The hope is that this group  of practitioners will form part of a team. It is not always the case. An emphasis  upon collaborative method, however, is not meant to understate the importance and  impact of the individual working well or remaining a firm and fair teacher, and the  importance of working to develop personal skills as part of the team-based approach  of positive management.  Remember how Kate realized this shortly after negotiating an early encounter  of the negative kind with her young niece and struggling to attentively listen? We  all need to improve our skill in personal relations and use this in our professional  practice. Nevertheless, while much of what we do as an educationist is about how  we do it as an individual, united, working as a team, we will more often and more  easily stand firm, get better results, and all in all have a better chance of sustaining  a worthwhile and inclusive learning environment. Managing positive behavior in  school is ultimately a team game. Finally, we want to say that we each hope you will continue to enjoy journeying  along the road trip learning to teach. It may well be that we decide there is more  of the journey we can share with you in the future. We hope you will share some  of your own experiences, reflections, insights and new knowledge with colleagues,  peers and students in your own place of work.  
REFERENCES Argyris, C. 1990. Overcoming organisational defences. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon. Bandura, A. 1994. Self-efficacy. In V. S. Ramachaudran Ed., Encyclopedia of human behavior Vol. 4,  pp. 7181. New York, NY: Academic Press. Retrieved from http:des.emory.edumfpBanEncy.html Bannigan, K.,  Moores, A. 2009. A model of professional thinking: Integrating reflective practice and  evidence based practice. Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy, 765, 342350. Baud, D.,  Walker, D. 1998. Promoting reflection in professional courses: The challenge of context.  Studies in Higher Education, 23, 191206. Baxter Magolda, M. B. 2004. Evolution of a constructivist conceptualization of epistemological  reflection. Educational Psychologist, 39, 3142. Bernstein, R. J. 1983. Beyond objectivism and relativism. Oxford, England: Blackwell. Boody, R. M. 2008. Teacher reflection as teacher change, and teacher change as moral response.  Education, 1283, 498506. Brooks, S. R., Freiburger, S. M.,  Grotheer, D. R. 1998. Improving elementary student engagement in  the learning process through integrated thematic instruction Unpublished masters thesis. Chicago,  IL: Saint Xavier University. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 421 274 Brough, J. A.,  Irvin, J. L. 2001. Parental involvement supports academic improvement among middle  schoolers. Middle School Journal, 325, 5661. Brown, D. F, 1992. The development of strategic classrooms in two secondary schools. Waikanae, New  Zealand: Wordsmiths. Christensen, L. 2004. Through the looking glass: Reflection or refraction? Do you see what I see.  Journal of Social Studies Research, 281, 3346. Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1990. Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York, NY: Harper  Collins Publishers. Daniel, B.,  Wassell, S. 2002. The school years: Assessing and promoting resilience in vulnerable  children 2. London, England: Jessica Kingsley Publishers. Daniels, H.,  Cole, T. 2010. Exclusion from school: Short-term setback or a long term of difficulties?  European Journal of Special Needs Education, 252, 115130. Dev, P. C. 1997. Intrinsic motivation and academic achievement: What does their relationship imply for  classroom teacher? Remedial and Special Education, 181, 1219. Dewey, J. 1933. How we think: A restatement of the relation of reflective thinking to education process.  Boston, MA: Heath. Dinkmeyer, D.,  Dreikurs, R. 2000. Encouraging children to learn Reprint ed. Sussex, England:  Brunner-Routledge. Galton, F. 1865. Hereditary talent and character. Macmillans Magazine, 12, 157166. Garmon, M. A. 2005. Six key factors changing preservice teachers attitudesbeliefs about diversity.  Educational Studies, 383, 275286. Giangreco, M. F., Yuan, S., McKenzie, B., Cameron, P.,  Fialka, J. 2005. Be careful what you wish  for: Five reasons to be concerned about the assignment of individual paraprofessional. Teaching  Exceptional Children, 375, 2834. Glasser, W. 2007. The Glasser quality school: A combination of choice theory and the competencebased classroom. Journal of Adventist Education, 693, 49. Grant, C. A.,  Zeichner, K. M. 1984. On becoming a reflective teacher. In C. A. Grant Ed., Preparing  for reflective teaching. Boston, MA: Allyn  Bacon. Grimley, M., Morris, S., Rayner, S.,  Riding, R. 2004. Supporting school improvement: The  development of a scale for assessing pupils emotional and behavioural development. Assessment in  Education, 113, 273300. Gronn, P. 2000. Distributed properties: A new architecture for leadership. Educational Management and  Administration, 28, 317338.

REFERENCES 132 Gronn, P. 2002. Distributed leadership as a unit of analysis. The Leadership Quarterly, 13, 423451. Guay, F., Chanal, J., Ratelle, C. F., Marsh, H. W., Larose, S.,  Boivin, M. 2010. Intrinsic, identified,  and controlled types of motivation for school subjects in young elementary school children. British  Journal of Educational Psychology, 804, 711735. Harvey, J.,  Delfabbro, P. H. 2004. Psychological resilience in disadvantaged youth: A critical review.  Australian Psychologist, 391, 313. Henderson, A. T.,  Mapp, K. L. 2002. A new wave of evidence: The impact of school, family, and  community connections on student achievement. Austin, TX: Southwest Educational Development  Laboratory, National Center for Family  Community Connections with Schools. Retrieved May 25,  2005, from http:www.sedl.orgconnectionsresourcesevidence.pdf Jacobson, P. 2002, Winter. What it takes to be an effective leader. Canadian Manager.  Jay, J. K.,  Johnson, K. L. 2002. Capturing complexity: A typology of reflective practice for teacher  education. Teaching and Teacher Education, 18, 7385. Johnson, D. W.,  Johnson, R. T. 1999. Learning together and alone: Cooperative, competitive, and  individualistic learning. Boston, MA: Allyn  Bacon. Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T.,  Stanne, M. B. 2000. Cooperative learning methods: A meta-analysis.  Retrieved May 23, 2011, from http:www.cooperation.orgpagescl-methods.html Klem, A. M.,  Connell, J. P. 2004. Relationships matter: Linking teacher support to student engagement  and achievement. Journal of School Health, 74, 262273. Lai, E. R. 2011. Motivation: A literature review. Always Learning Pearson, pp. 144. Larrivee, B. 2000. Transforming training practice: Becoming the critically reflective teacher. Reflective  Practice, 13, 293307. Loughran, J. J. 2002. Effective reflective practice: In search of meaning in learning about teaching.  Journal of Teacher Education, 531, 3343. Loughran, J. J. 2010. What expert teachers do: Teachers professional knowledge of classroom practice.  Sydney, Australia  London, England: Allen  Unwin, Routledge. Lumsden, L. S. 1994. Student motivation to learn ERIC Digest No. 92. Eugene, OR: ERIC  Clearinghouse on Educational Management. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 370  200 Maslow, A. 1954. Motivation and personality. New York, NY: Harper and Row. Masten, A. S.,  Coatsworth, J. D. 1998. The development of competence in favourable and unfavourable  environments: Lessons from research on successful children. American Psychologist, 53, 205220. Mastropieri, M. A.,  Scruggs, T. E. 2010. The inclusive classroom: Strategies for effective instruction  4th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. McGrew, K. S. 2009. CHC theory and the human cognitive abilities project: Standing on the shoulders  of the giants of psychometric intelligence research. Intelligence, 37, 110. Mezirow, J. 1997. Transformative learning: Theory to practice. New Directions for Adult and Continuing  Education, 74, 512. Mezirow, J., Taylor, E.,  Associates. Eds. 2009. Transforming learning into practice. San Francisco,  CA: Jossey-Bass. Monahan, K. C., Oesterle, S.,  Hawkins, J. D. 2010. Predictors and consequences of school  connectedness: The case for prevention. The Prevention Researcher, 173, 36. Muis, K. R. 2007. The role of epistemic beliefs in self-regulated learning. Educational Psychologist,  423, 173190. NCH. 2007. Literature review: Resilience in children and young people. London, England: Childrens  Charity. Peterson, C.,  Seligman, M. E. P. 2004. Character strengths and virtues: A handbook and classification.  Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. Pirsig, R. 2006. Zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance. New York, NY: HarperTorch. Poutiatine, M. I. 2009. What is transformation? Nine principles toward an understanding transformational  process for transformational leadership. Journal of Transformative Education, 73, 189208.

REFERENCES 133 Presidents Commission on Excellence in Special Education. 2002. A new era: Revitalizing special  education for children and their families. Retrieved May 26, 2005, from http:www.ed.govinits commissionsboardswhspecialeducationreportsindex.html Qualifications and Curriculum Authority. 2001. Supporting school improvement: Emotional and  behavioural development. London, England: Qualifications and Curriculum Authority. Rayner, S. 2007. Managing special and inclusive education. London, England: Sage. Rayner, S. 2009. Educational diversity and learning leadership: A proposition, some principles and a  model of inclusive leadership? Educational Review, 614, 433447. Rayner, S. 2011. Managing educational diversity: Developing transformative leadership and  professional praxis in the 21st Century learning community. In C. Shields Ed., Transformative  leadership reader. New York, NY: Peter Lang Publishing. Redl, F.,  Wineman, D. 1957. The aggressive child. Glencoe, IL: Free Press. Rigby, K. 2001. Stop the bullying: A handbook for schools. Melbourne, Australia: Australian Council  for Educational Research. Robbins, B. D 2008. What is the good life? Positive psychology and the renaissance of humanistic  psychology. The Humanistic Psychologist, 362, 96112. Rogers, B. 1998. You know the fair rule 2nd ed. London, England: Pitman Publishing. Rogers, B. 2000. Classroom behaviour: A practical guide to effective teaching behaviour management  and colleague support. London, England: Pitman Publishing. Rogers, B. 2003. Cracking the hard class: Strategies for managing the harder than average class.  London, England: Pitman Publishing. Rogers, C. 1969. Freedom to learn: A view of what education might become 1st ed. Columbus, OH:  Charles Merill. Scheffler, I. 1968. University scholarship and the education of teachers. Teacher College Record, 701,  112. Seligman, M. E. P. 1975. Helplessness: On depression, development, and death. San Francisco, CA:  W.H. Freeman. Seligman, M. E. P. 1998. Learned optimism. New York, NY: Simon  Schuster Inc. Seligman, M. E. P. 2002. Authentic happiness: Using the new positive psychology to realize your  potential for lasting fulfilment. New York, NY: Free Press. Sharma, U.,  Loreman, T. 2014. Teacher educator perspectives on systemic barriers to inclusive  education: An international conversation. In P. Jones Ed., Insider perspective on inclusive education  pp. 168177. New York, NY: Routledge. Sharma, U.,  Nuttal, A. 2015. The impact of training on pre-service teacher attitudes, concerns and efficacy  toward inclusion. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education. doi:10.10801359866X.2015.1081672 Sharma, U., Simi, J.,  Forlin, C. 2015. Preparedness of pre-service teachers for inclusive education in  the Solomon Islands. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 405, 103116. Shields, C. M. 2010. Leadership: Transformative. In P. Peterson, E. Baker,  B. McGraw Eds.,  International encyclopaedia of education Vol. 5, pp. 2633. Oxford, England: Elsevier. Shields, C. M. Ed. 2011. Transformative leadership: A reader. New York, NY: Peter Lang Publishing. Slavin, R. E. 1995. Cooperative learning: Theory, research, and practice. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn   Bacon. Sparks-Langer, G. M., Simmons, J. M., Pasch, M., Colton, A.,  Starko, A. 1990. Reflective pedagogical  thinking: How can we promote it and measure it. Journal of Teacher Education, 414, 2332. Spillane, J.,  Diamond, J. B. 2007. Eds. Distributed leadership in practice. New York, NY: Teachers  College Press. Stacey, R. D. 1992. Managing the unknowable: Strategic boundaries between order and chaos in  organizations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Stacey, R. D. 1993. Strategic management and organizational dynamics. London, England: Pitman. Tuckman, B. 1965. Developmental sequence in small groups. Psychological Bulletin, 36, 384399. Valli, L. 1997. Listening to other voices: A description of teacher reflection in the United States.  Peabody Journal of Education, 721, 6788.

REFERENCES 134 Wenger, E., McDermott, R.,  Snyder, W. 2002. Cultivating communities of practice. Boston, MA:  Harvard Business School. Young, B., Simpson, R., Myles, B. S.,  Kamps, D. M. 1997. An examination of paraprofessional  involvement in supporting students with autism. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental  Disabilities, 121, 3138, 48. Zeichner, K. M.,  Liston, D. P. 1996. Reflective teaching: An introduction. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence  Erlbaum Associates.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS Umesh Sharma, PhD Melb, MAPS, born in India is a special educator and  educational psychologist. He has taught in special and regular schools in India and  Australia. He joined Monash University in 2002 as a lecturer. He is now an Associate  Professor and leads programs in special education within the faculty. He is leading  a number of research projects in over 20 countries including China, Bangladesh,  India, Fiji, Solomon Islands that target inclusion of children with diversities into  mainstream schools and communities. His research interests include inclusive  teaching strategies, measuring attitude and teaching efficacy, and positive behaviour  support. He continues to enjoy cricket on field and on screen. John Roodenburg, PhD Melb FAPS MCEDP, born in The Netherlands, is an  Australian Teacher, and Psychologist. Married to another teacher and psychologist  Esther, and with five adult children, he spent over thirty years as a practitioner before  coming to the Faculty of Education at Monash University where he is now a Senior  Lecturer and Course Leader for Postgraduate Educational and Developmental  Psychology. He is currently National Chair of the Australian Psychological Society  College of Educational and Developmental Psychologists. His passions include  thinking styles, grandchildren, roasting coffee, and Christian spirituality.  Stephen Rayner, PhD Birmingham University, is Dean of Education, Newman  University, UK. He was formerly Head teacher of Penwithen School Dorset LEA  and had previously taught in secondary and special education before this and moving  to the School of Education at the University of Birmingham. He more recently  worked as a Professor of Education, firstly at the University of Gloucestershire, and  then, Oxford Brookes University, UK. He led both PGR and Research as Director of  Studies in schools of education at these Universities over the last twenty years. He  is now also Director of the Newman Institute of Leadership in Education NILE.  Interests and scholarship still lie with understanding individuality and the self in  learning, teaching, leadership and managing education, as well as drinking coffee.